Thursday, 27 August 2009

Parliament met at 10.30 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are most welcome.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2009/2010

THE SPEAKER: House suspended for five minutes.

(The House rose at 10.33 a.m.)
(On resumption at 10.35 a.m., the Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2009/10

10.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to apologise for having caused the House to be suspended for a few minutes. I am sorry. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to present the report of the Committee on Social Services on the ministerial policy statement for Financial Year 2009/10. 

The committee considered the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education and Sports for the Financial Year 2009/10 in accordance with Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure, and Section 9 of the Budget Act, 2001. 

Honourable members, we have indicated the methodology - how the committee considered the policy statement. I would also like to inform the House that our votes are as follows: 

Under Ministry of Education and Sports: 
1. 	Ministry of Education and Sports headquarters, vote 013. 
2. 	The Education Service Commission, vote 132; 
3. 	Makerere University, vote 136; 
4. Mbarara University of Science and Technology, vote 137; 
5. 	Makerere University Business School, vote 138; 
6. 	Kyambogo University, vote 139; 
7. 	Gulu University, vote 149; 
8. 	Busitema University, vote 111; and 
9. 	Uganda Management Institute, vote 140. 

Under the Ministry of Health, we have the following votes: 
1. 	Vote 014, Ministry of Health; 
2. 	Vote 114, Uganda Cancer Institute; 
3. 	Vote 115, Uganda Heart Institute; 
4. 	Vote 116, National Medical Stores; 
5. 	Vote 134, Health Service Commission; 
6. 	Vote 151, Uganda Blood Transfusion Service; 
7. 	Vote 161, Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital; 
8. 	Vote 162, Mulago National Referral Hospital; and 
9. 	Vote 162 to 175, regional referral hospitals - Gulu, Arua, Fort Portal, Hoima, Jinja, Kabale, Masaka, Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Mbarara, Mubende and Moroto. 

During the Financial Year 2008/09, Parliament appropriated a total of Shs 347.32 billion to the education sector exclusive of funds under district local governments, of which Shs 186.41 billion was recurrent budget resources while Shs 16.19 billion was development budget. The table below shows the utilisation of these funds or the performance of the education sector. 

The financial performance of the sector was measured using the projected release outturn for the Financial Year 2008/09, which amounted to Shs 220.9 billion, representing a performance of 64 percent. The recurrent non-wage budget performed at 97 percent and for Financial Year 2009/10, an increment of 80 percent has been provided against the overall sector increase of 40 percent. 

The table indicated on page 3 - Table 2 - shows the key priority areas for implementation under the non-wage component for the year 2009/10. This being important, I would like to read it out.

THE SPEAKER: You can leave out the table.

MRS SENINDE: Okay. In view of the table above, the committee observed that whereas support to private institutions is vital, the Shs 4 billion donated to Kampala International University compared to the Shs 0.5 billion to other institutions was irrational. However, the Minister of Education and Sports informed the committee that this was a presidential pledge and the ministry had to implement it. 

The education sector is in the process of preparing technical designs for sports stadiums. In addition to this, Shs 500 million from the primary education and Shs 500 million from the secondary education sub-sectors has been allocated for procurement of physical education and sports equipment, and instructional materials. This is on top of funds for sports provided for under the capitalisation grants.

The committee noted that a sum of Shs 9.1 billion was provided as operational support for private universities including the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID). The programme was included following a presidential directive to provide a hostel for research fellows. 

The committee recommends that:

1. 	Funds to the programme be channelled through the designated institutions such as NARO, Industrial Research Institute or Kawanda Agricultural Research Centre. 

2. 	Presidential pledges be catered for under the President’s Office as they have diverse implications on the sector budgeting and ceilings, and that the principle of equity should also be observed.

Donor Funding

On the issue of donor funding, the committee observed that there was a 35 percent increment in the donor budget funding for the Financial Year 2009/2010. The ministry reported that this was to accommodate the new projects namely, the World Bank support for expansion of secondary education at Shs 77.62 billion, and the ADB IV Project of Shs 15.43 billion for the rehabilitation of the 42 traditional secondary schools in the country.

The Ministry of Education and Sports informed the committee that past performance on donor funds was not reported on as the system designed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could not capture the information during the preparation of the ministerial policy statement. The sector cannot establish the status of the programme performance and where need arises, cannot be certain on the likely requirements.

The committee recommends that all sector funds should be reported on as appropriated by Parliament, and that no funds should be approved without a record of past performance.

Students Loan Scheme

The committee noted that the Ministry of Education and Sports plans to formulate the student legal and institutional loan scheme framework, and establish a loan board secretariat. Of course, as a committee, we commend the ministry for taking this initiative to explore ways and means of making university education accessible to all Ugandans. 

We recommend that the ministry should expedite the process and ensure participation and involvement of relevant stakeholders in the feasibility study and policy formulation.

Universal Secondary Education (USE)

The committee was informed that to support the progress of Universal Secondary Education (USE) as a priority area for Government, in Financial Year 2008/2009 Shs 13 billion was provided as supplementary resources for the USE budget. For Financial Year 2009/2010, an additional Shs 23.2 billion has been provided for USE capitalisation. 

The committee recommends that thorough monitoring of the programme be strengthened and carried out at all levels, to ensure proper utilisation of funds and realisation of the USE targets and objectives.

Universal Primary Education

As far as UPE is concerned, the committee observed that the UPE capitation grant has dwindled. There are also delayed releases of funds to the extent that some schools close with huge debts.

The quality of UPE graduates has remained a challenge despite the interventions made, such as the quality assurance programme.

The committee further noted that the poor quality of UPE has been due to a number of things, which include automatic promotion through primary level, poor teacher remuneration and lack of feeding of pupils.

The committee, therefore, recommends that:

1. 	The Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure timely release of funds to schools.

2. 	The ministry should strengthen the quality assurance programme and boost the inspectorate directorate to carry out routine monitoring and inspections.

3. 	We also recommend that the ministry should carry out a thorough study on the school feeding policy.   

Recruitment of Teachers and Accessing the Payroll

The committee observed that a number of district service commissions failed to recruit the required teachers according to the allocated district staff quota ceilings. There are also various cases of slow access to the payroll by the newly recruited teachers for some schools.

The Ministry of Education informed us that the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Ministry of Public Service and of course the Ministry of Local Government, will meet to review and sort out issues of teachers’ recruitment and access to the payroll. The committee recommends that:

1. 	The recruitment exercise be decentralised to regional and district levels.

2. 	Priority should be given to teachers within the locality to encourage and attract staff deployment at minimal costs.

Hardship Allowances in Hard-to-Reach Areas

The committee noted that the ministry plans to facilitate 1,405 teachers in the hard-to-reach areas with a hardship allowance. These teachers are from the districts of Moroto, Kotido, Nakapiripirit, Abim, Kaabong and Kalangala. The committee finds the listed areas lacking in national character. 

The committee recommends that:

1. 	The ministry designs a clear criterion for identifying what a hard-to-reach area is.

2. 	The list of hard-to-reach areas should be revised to at least include regionally known hardship areas.

Special Needs Education (SNE)

The committee noted that the procurement of instructional materials for basic education will include materials for special needs education. Instructional materials have a budget of Shs 15.319 billion for Financial Year 2009/2010. 

The committee observed that the SNE and guidance and counselling being under the same vote function disadvantages SNE. The committee recommends that provisions for SNE be separated from guidance and counselling so that activities and funding for SNE can specifically be monitored.

Patriotism Clubs

There are funds earmarked for patriotism clubs in 5,000 secondary schools in the country. The funds are located in the security, governance and public administration sector though the programme is to be implemented in schools under the education sector.

For this matter, the committee recommends that:

1. 	Government should put in place a policy framework for the patriotism clubs.

2. 	A curriculum for this activity should be developed.

3. 	Activities for patriotism should be compulsory for all students so that the programme takes on a national service character.

4. 	To ensure the success of the programme, leaders in the country should be role models that others can emulate.

Vote 132 – Education Service Commission

The committee established that the Education Service Commission’s budget for the Financial Year 2008/2009 performed at 95 percent. Resources were used to recruit teachers but the Education Service Commission received a once-off budget support of Euros 220,000 to finance some crucial activities which had remained unfunded for long, as indicated in Table 3. Colleagues, if you look at Table 3 we indicate what the support has done.

Implementation of the Scheme of Service (SOS) 

This scheme was launched, and phased implementation at the primary level started in 2008/2009 with a budgetary wage provision of Shs 1 billion. However, the budget for this financial year does not provide for this activity. 

The Education Service Commission informed the committee that with funding from Irish Aid, the commission will complete the revision of the regulations and code of conduct, and that printing, dissemination and enforcing of the revised regulations and the code would commence. The committee, therefore, recommends that: 

1. 	There should be a provision for continuing and cascading to other cadres in post primary institutions. The commission should also be provided with resources annually to supervise, monitor and evaluate the implementation exercise.

2. 	We also recommend that enforcement of teachers’ SOS be undertaken by the most competent authority in the Ministry of Education and Sports.

Developing an Education and Training Policy 

The committee observed that the Education Service Commission is in the process of developing an education and training policy to guide teaching personnel in their upgrading and professional development programmes. The committee finds this a duplication of roles and therefore recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should prioritise its activities as this was its core mandate.

Development Budget 

The committee observed that the Education Service Commission needs vehicles for the entitled officers and for field trips for recruitment, supervision, monitoring and evaluation. The development budget has, however, stagnated at Shs 50 million out of the required Shs 900 million.

The Education Service Commission outlined major challenges, which include inadequate funding and a persistently low development budget as well as lack of office space. The committee recommends that the budget shortfall of Shs 850 million be provided in a phased manner or in a period of two years to facilitate the commission undertake its activities.

Higher Education - Universities

Our general observation was that all the universities reported that they are housed in old buildings that require regular maintenance. The space is inadequate for the ever increasing number of students. 

The committee observed that there are numerous cases of high staff turnover upon completion of doctorate programmes at the universities, due to of course low remuneration and poor working conditions.

We recommend that basic facilities, including lecture rooms and libraries, among others, at all public universities be prioritised and undertaken as a matter of policy. We also recommend that universities should put in place mechanisms to guard against staff leaving immediately after completing courses sponsored by the universities.

Vote 136 - Makerere University 

The committee observed that persistent strikes at the university and threats by the university staff to lay down their tools were caused by alleged irregularities in financial management. 

The university informed the committee that Makerere University has accordingly undertaken some measures to improve financial management. Even if I do not read them verbatim, those are the measures that Makerere University has taken. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Education and Sports, and the Quality Assurance Directorate strengthens their supervisory role to give the university appropriate guidance and the necessary support commensurate with the demands.

Course Accreditation 

The committee established that there were 28 courses that were not accredited by the National Council for Higher Education. Out of those, 15 are offered by MUBS while 13 are newly introduced at Makerere University for which admissions have been done for first year students.

The committee observed that it is mandatory that National Council for Higher Education accredits all the courses before the university admits students for the courses. However, for the affected courses offered by MUBS, some of the students are due to complete the courses to which they were admitted without accreditation. 

The National Council for Higher Education assured the committee that students in MUBS would be allowed to finish their courses following a once off accreditation. However, they ruled out a request by Makerere University to give a provisional accreditation to the new courses. 

For this, the committee recommends that: 

1. 	First year students who had been admitted by Makerere University to non-accredited courses be transferred to similar courses. 

2. 	The Quality Assurance Directorate should harmonise courses offered by MUBS and Makerere University to avoid duplication and competition between the two institutions.

I beg to lay on the Table the list of the courses in question. I lay the list of new programmes submitted to National Council for Higher Education by Makerere University that are in question.

Students’ Welfare 

Makerere University informed the committee that Council is going to outsource meals for students and pay them instead of cooking for them. To ensure the quality of meals provided, the university will employ qualified people to monitor what is provided.

For the year 2009/2010, only Shs 2,881 per student per day is provided for, amounting to Shs 3.1 billion. However, the University Council agreed to a rate of Shs 4000 for the students’ welfare. The budget shortfall amounts to Shs 2.6 billion.

The university has also made a provision of Shs 4.580 billion as severance package for employees who had been engaged in providing meals and security. However, only Shs 807,585,544 is available in this year’s budget. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the additional Shs 2.6 billion be provided to the university to ensure that students get the agreed Shs 4000 per student per day, and that the gap for severance package be provided.

Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School 

Makerere University Business School informed the committee that the university has an academic staff gap of up to 50 percent as a result of inadequate budgetary wage provisions. To fill up the vacant posts, Makerere University Business School has consequently hired lecturers on part-time basis as a mitigation measure.

The committee noted that there was need to further support the construction of the university library. The committee recommends that adequate budgetary wage provision be provided to enable the university recruit qualified staff on contract or permanent terms for the academic staff without any further delay.

Vote 111 - Busitema University 

The committee observed that the university’s wage component underperformed at 45 percent in Financial Year 2008/2009. The following reasons were given for the underperformance:

•	In the third quarter, recruitment was done for academic and non-teaching staff whose commencement came into effect in July 2009. Some of the planned recruitment could not be done because of the low student enrolment.  

•	We further noted that recruitment of two DVCs, which was budgeted for in Financial Year 2008/2009, was not done. The search process is due to start and it is expected to be complete by close of the first quarter of Financial Year 2009/2010.

•	Due to the uniqueness of programmes, there has been difficulty in attracting the requisite staff. In Financial Year 2008/09, posts of professors, associate professors and senior lecturers totalling to 68 were not filled.

The university reported that their major challenges include inadequate staff to cater for the unique courses, and also old buildings that are costly to maintain. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports supports the university with all the necessary facilities, for the university to attract the required staff. 

Vote 137 - Mbarara University of Science and Technology (MUST)

Mbarara University of Science and Technology informed the committee that the university acquired the land title for Kihumuro Campus and the University Master Plan has also been completed. The committee, however, observed that despite the developed master plan and the huge investment made by the university, it has continued to sink large sums of money for renovations at the old campus.  

The committee recommends that the university focuses more on developing the Kihumuro Campus. 

Vote 139 -Kyambogo University

The committee was informed that the university appointments board received a report on the implementation of the Validation Report from management on 29 April 2009. Implementation of the recommendations started as you can see from the report, honourable members.

The committee recommends expeditious implementation of the Validation Report to give the university the much and urgently required facelift. 

Vote 149 - Gulu University

The university made the following achievements in Financial Year 2008/09. I will not read them verbatim, but those are the achievements listed. 

The inadequately funded priorities for 2009/10 are indicated on Table 4. We see start-up for land valuation and property compensation requires Shs 2 billion, which has not been provided for. Recruitment of additional staff has a gap of Shs 0.355 billion. You can see the others in the table. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports informed the committee that the President directed that Arua and Lira Constituent Colleges of Gulu University be established and provided for under the budget for Financial Year 2009/10. Gulu University accordingly submitted a budget request of Shs 5.27 billion. However, only Shs 0.9 billion has been provided for the start-up activities for the Financial Year 2009/10 under the presidential pledges in the sector.

The committee observed that the provision of only Shs 0.9 billion is inadequate and may delay the operationalisation of the colleges. The committee, therefore, recommends that sufficient funds be provided for the operationalisation of the constituent colleges since the university covers the whole northern region, and will address challenges associated with the congested campus.

Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute (UMI)

The committee was informed that UMI specialises in three areas: Public Administration; Centre for Productivity; and the Global Distance Learning Centre. However, the maintenance of the Global Distance Learning Centre was very expensive compared to the realised revenue. Listed below are the many achievements by UMI in the last financial year.

The committee established that the institute faced major financial challenges, which are likely to affect the following: Investments in facilities and retaining staff; maintenance of physical facilities like the library and computer laboratories; maintenance of the Global Distance Learning Centre and IT equipment.

The committee further recognises that UMI is categorised under the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act as “other award-giving institution”. The institute, therefore, requires doctorate holders among its teaching staff, whose programme the institute is expected to fund.  

The institute also requires funding for modern infrastructure and staff development to be able to meet the expectations of its stakeholders and clients. 

The committee recommends that: 

1. 	UMI’s development budget be reviewed to be commensurate with the status of the institute. 

2. 	The recurrent budget of UMI be provided to a level where it can maintain the acquired facilities including the Global Distance Learning facility.


Mr Speaker and honourable members, we have given a summary of sectoral performance for the Financial Year 2008/09 and allocation for the Financial Year 2009/10 in the table indicated on page 14. 

The committee recommends that the following be approved for the education sector for the Financial Year 2009/10:
 
Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports: The recurrent expenditure is Shs 178.074 billion and development expenditure Shs 173.141 billion, giving a total of Shs 351.215 billion.

Vote 111 - Busitema University: Recurrent expenditure of Shs 4.873 billion and development expenditure of Shs 1.68 billion, giving a total of Shs 6.553 billion. 

Vote 132 - Education Service Commission: Recurrent expenditure of Shs 3.639 billion and development expenditure of Shs 0.053, giving a total of Shs 3.692 billion. 

Vote 136 - Makerere University: Recurrent expenditure of Shs 43.798 billion and development expenditure of Shs 17.443 billion, giving a total of Shs 61.241 billion. 

Vote 137 - Mbarara University of Science and Technology: The recurrent expenditure is Shs 7.402 billion and development expenditure is Shs 4.789, giving a total of Shs 12.191 billion.

Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School: The recurrent expenditure is Shs 5.175 billion and development expenditure is Shs 1 billion, giving a total of Shs 6.175 billion.

Vote 139 - Kyambogo University: Recurrent expenditure of Shs 18.24 billion and development expenditure of Shs 0.223 billion, giving a total of Shs18.463 billion.  

Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute: The recurrent expenditure is Shs 0.425 and there is no development expenditure. This gives a total of Shs 0.425 billion.

Vote 149 – Gulu University: Recurrent expenditure of Shs 8.946 billion and development expenditure of Shs 2.009 billion, giving a total of Shs 10.955 billion.

Vote 014 – Ministry of Health 

The sector mandate is equitable delivery of good quality health services to all Ugandans. The mission is to provide policies, guidance and standards, facilitate district health services and manage nationally based health services.

In the Financial Year 2008/2009, Parliament appropriated a total of Shs 628.4 billion to the health sector. Out of this, Shs 375.38 billion was from government resources while Shs 253.08 billion was externally provided. The utilisation of the above money is detailed below. I would like to ask members to look at the financial performance table for the sector, which is indicated on that page.

Let us move on to page 18. Over performance of releases to regional referral hospitals, standing at 102.2 percent, came about as a result of more than programmed wage releases, which performed at 108.9 percent.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the non-tax revenue performance collections are indicated in Table 1. That table shows the performance for Financial Year 2008/2009, the outturn as at March 2009 and their percentages. From the table, it is noticeable that the non-tax revenue collections in the sector performed below their respective pro-rata targets with the exception of Uganda Aids Commission, which collected more than the budgeted amount during Financial Year 2008/2009.

The Ministry of Health has had a lot of achievements. If I read the list, I may not finish them. So, allow me go straight to the challenges. The challenges as established by the committee include: 

1. 	Inadequate funds, medicines and health supplies, human resource, infrastructure. 
2. 	Dilapidated infrastructure. 
3. 	Changing disease patterns and their resistance to drugs. 
4. 	Increasing emergencies of epidemics. 
5. 	HIV and its effects.

I would like to report that we made a number of general observations. The committee would like to inform this House that all public health institutions reported understaffing, that grossly affects service delivery. To address the situation, the committee recommends the following: 

•	Government should increase the wage ceiling for local government health services. 
•	Ministry of Health should put in place mechanisms to attract and retain personnel. These may include increased remuneration, good working environment, and provision of staff housing. 
•	Government should enhance the capacities of district and health service commissions.

Utilities for all hospitals 

The committee would like to inform the House that all hospitals reported inadequate provision of utilities. When the committee was carrying out its oversight roles in the field, members noted this. This inadequacy consumes a large proportion of their budgets, especially for water and electricity. The inadequate funding has also led to accumulated arrears. The committee recommends that Government provides adequate funds to cover utilities for hospitals.

Public-Private Partnership for Health (PPPH)
 
The Ministry of Health informed the committee that this policy was prepared and is ready for presentation to Parliament. The committee urges Government to present the policy to Parliament without further delay.

Remuneration of health workers 

The Minister of Health reported that in the region, Uganda pays the lowest remuneration to its health workers. The principle to increase salaries was passed in Cabinet and its implementation proposals are contained in a paper which Ministry of Health is due to present to Cabinet for discussion.

The committee recommends that the process should be expedited to minimise the loss of health workers to neighbouring countries.

Special Needs 

The ministry reported that in the specifications to the construction of labour wards, procurement of maternity beds for mothers with disabilities is a requirement. Creation of ramps is part of the policy on medical equipment, and the new designs for the wards include access ramps. As a committee, we recommend that Ministry of Health implements the policy on special needs.

Vote 116 – National Medical Stores 

The committee would like to report that National Medical Stores has been granted a vote status. It is, therefore, expected to play a more proactive role in the procurement, embossment, storage and distribution of medicines and health supplies.

It is reflected that Shs 7.68 billion worth of medicines and medical supplies will be procured and distributed nationwide. However, with the increase in credit line for National Medical Stores moving from 30 percent to 70 percent, while that under PHC will reduce from 70 percent to 30 percent, the Ministry of Finance has been requested to reallocate funds that had been budgeted under hospitals. The committee was informed that this was to be effected in a corrigendum to the Budget estimates of 20009/2010. We have not seen this, Mr Speaker.

The National Medical Stores reported that in various cases, drugs are delivered to districts in a timely manner. The problem, however, erupts during distribution of drugs to the beneficiary health facilities. However, with increased funding, the tracking of medicines should be strengthened. The national and regional referral hospitals also raised concerns about the capacity of National Medical Stores to avail specialised drugs.

The committee recommends that: 

1. 	National Medical Stores puts in place measures to ensure drugs requested for are availed to the health facilities in a timely manner.

2. 	We also recommend that the process of embossment of drugs should be consolidated and expanded. 

3. 	Health units should also place the orders – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Does National Medical Stores just distribute the drugs for free and the units must buy them?

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, it is true that the National Medical Stores has to get payments before it releases drugs, but as the committee was moving in the field, we noted a number of problems which we indicated in the report I read to this august House in the last sitting. That is why we have captured this and it is the very reason why the committee even came up with a recommendation that money for the credit line be changed accordingly.

Vote 134: The Health Service Commission

The Health Service Commission handles recruitment of health workers for the Ministry of Health, the national and regional referral hospitals and specialised institutions under the Ministry of Health, that is, UBTS, UVRI, NCRL and the Uganda Vector Control. It is also handling recruitment for prisons health services. 

For the performance outputs for the last financial year, it received a release of 100 percent of the non-wage recurrent budget, and 91.6 percent of the development budget. The overall budget performance was 96.9 percent. 

It also made a number of achievements and we have indicated them. We have also indicated the challenges. The Health Service Commission did not realise some of the targeted outputs because of the budget ceilings and constricted labour market for the specialised clinical areas. 

Also, unpredictable releases hampered the smooth procurement processes. 

The committee also noted, on the issue of medical superintendents, that only Lira Hospital has the established post of Medical Superintendent. And even in Lira Hospital, the current medical superintendent has not been appointed under the structure.

The Ministry of Health reported that it is considering the matter with the Ministry of Public Service, and it should be resolved by January 2010. The committee recommends that the process be expeditiously handled to meet the targeted dates. 

On recentralisation of recruitment of health workers, the committee observed that recentralisation will lead to realisation of the following merits:

•	Improved deployment of health workers across the country by Ministry of Health;
•	Increased motivation of health workers, created by flexible mobility controlled centrally;
•	Increased capacity of local government health services institutions to attract health workers;
•	More rational distribution of health workers across health institutions both at the Centre and Local Government levels.

The MOH reported that it had written a position paper on the matter and is due to submit it to Cabinet for consideration.

We want to recommend that the process of recentralisation be expedited in order to improve health service delivery.

Vote 151:	Uganda Blood Transfusion Services (UBTS)

Regional blood banks were completed in Mbarara and Mbale referral hospitals.  In FY 2009/2010, Gulu and Fort Portal are to be completed and expansion works for Nakasero Blood Bank will be commenced. 

The non-wage budget for UBTS over-performed at 104.6 percent, which enabled the collection of 175,000 units of blood out of the programmed 187,500 units during the FY 2008/09. This represents an achievement rate of 93 percent. This has to improve to deal with the rising number of patients who need blood. 

The committee recommends that:
•	Government should revamp logistics of UBTS.
•	UBTS should be adequately funded to enable it to make blood banks available in all regional referral hospitals.

Vote 161:	Butabika Hospital

In the FY 2008/2009, the hospital resettled 1,094 patients in their homes, while 1,445 patients were attended to at the community outreach clinics of Nansana, Kitetika, Nkokonjeru and Kawempe.  

Under implementation of the Support to the Health Sector Strategic Plan Project II, the design work for the re-development of Mbarara Referral Hospital was completed.  The construction and rehabilitation of six mental health units, 13 health centre IVs and 26 health centre IIIs is in progress.  

Plans for 2009/2010
•	Develop and accelerate growth of new sub-specialities of psycho-trauma, alcohol and drug abuse, as well as child and adolescent psychiatric patients.
•	Provide mental heath care to both in and out-patients, and resettlement and integration of discharged patients to communities.
•	Continue conducting community outreach clinics in the peri-urban areas.
•	Provide mental health training to both Government and non-government schools.

The hospital was concerned that specialised drugs for psychotherapy may not be readily available at National Medical Stores.

The committee recommends that the hospital puts in place mechanisms to order specialised drugs in time in order to avoid interrupting rehabilitation of their patients.

Vote 162 - Mulago Hospital

Mulago Hospital collected Shs 0.2 billion out of the budgeted Shs 2.3 billion for FY 2008/09. 
 
The hospital reported increased congestion of patients and inadequate funding.

Observations

•	Maternity and labour wards are congested and have inadequate facilities.
•	During its visit to Mulago Hospital, the committee established that the equipment at the Radiotherapy Unit is obsolete.
•	Mulago was concerned that the NMS may not be able to avail some of the specialised drugs required by the hospital.

We made a lot more observations, but the Committee recommends that: 

•	Government should prioritise adequate funding for Mulago given its status as a National Referral Hospital.
•	Government should facilitate construction of new maternity structures and requisite facilities.
•	Government should fund acquisition of Radiotherapy equipment.
•	Mulago should make timely requisitions for drugs from NMS.

Votes 163 – 175: Regional Referral Hospitals

Of course I pointed out the regional referral hospitals but I want to note that Mubende and Moroto Hospitals have started operating as regional referral hospitals in the financial year 2009/2010.

The design of the Mubende and Moroto Hospitals is being handled by the engineering sections and relevant personnel are being sought for the hospitals.

The regional referral hospitals are faced with the following challenges:

•	Increase in number of patients due to famine, presenting cases of malnutrition and ulcers in the famine-stricken areas.
•	Increase in the cost of delivering health care services due to the rising cost of inputs, inflation and population growth.
•	Increasing number of patients due to a poor referral system and non-functionality of health centre IVs.

Under-funding, resulting into poor quality services characterised by stock-out of medicines, supplies and poor maintenance of equipment and buildings. There is need to overhaul sewerage systems which breakdown frequently. 

There is also need for support supervision in the regions. There is lack of accommodation for the staff, and some of the staff either do not take up appointments of leave after short service, due to failure to access suitable accommodation. Over congestion of patients in most of the hospitals is another big problem. This is due to increase in the number of patients due to population growth. 

Mr Speaker, the hospitals reported inadequate health equipment and supplies. For example, they require modern x-rays other than the mobile x-rays which are limited. There is also a low staffing level. There is lack of incinerators which use pits to burn hospital waste. 

For this matter, the committee recommends that:

1.	Given that most of the challenges are a result of inadequate funding, Government should review financial contributions to regional referral hospitals if we are to do a good job. 
2.	The Health Service Commission should also recruit to fill all the vacant positions, including that of medical superintendents. 

Mr Speaker, I want to take you to Vote 114, and this is the Uganda Cancer Institute. The institute has now obtained a vote status. However, a legal framework to facilitate the institute’s operations has not yet been put in place. It has a number of planned activities for 2009/10. Ten thousand patients will be treated in this Financial Year. Cancer awareness programmes will be established, and out reach centres set in every region. The cancer ward will be remodelled and renovated and requisite equipment procured. The cancer prevention and control strategy will be finalised. 

The Uganda Cancer Institute’s major challenge is that it does not have an appropriate structure to cater for the specialised services. Now, the committee recommends that:

1.	Government should consider setting up a complete new structure as a major centre for handling cancers of various types. 
2.	Specialised personnel should be recruited for the institute.
3.	Ministry of Health should expedite the processing of a legal frame work for the institute.

Vote 115 - the Uganda Heart institute 

This has now obtained a vote status too, and it is an autonomous institution offering highly specialised cardiovascular and thoracic medical services. The institute, therefore, requires specialised staff. Current appointments include: Interns, paediatricians, general surgeons, general anaesthesiologist and general nurses.  

However, the recommended and proposed new establishment includes: Cardiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons, cardiac anaesthesiologist, cardiac nurses, cardiac theatre nurses, respiratory physiotherapist and perfusionists.  

The Heart Institute has got a number of challenges. I would like to point out these challenges because it is a very important institute. It needs an appropriate structure for the highly specialised unit. It requires high grade and specialised sundries and drugs that are very expensive. For the current service delivery needs, working space is limited, Government procurement procedure is too slow, and exemptions for poor patients and staff pose a financial challenge.

The institute informed the committee that some of the services will still be offered by Mulago Hospital such as support supervision, utilities, infrastructure and space. 

Multi-disciplinary support from Mulago Hospital is needed to address other health needs of the patients at the Uganda Heart Institute. The committee, therefore, recommends that Mulago and the Uganda Heart Institute formalise their relationship to ensure that the activities of the Uganda Heart Institute that are dependent on Mulago Hospital are not interrupted.

The Ministry of Public Service should expeditiously work on the personnel structure of the Uganda Heart Institute to enable the recruitment of the relevant staff. Government should also put in place ultra-modern structures for the Uganda Heart Institute. 

We finally recommend that Government should put in place a legal framework for the establishment of the Uganda Heart Institute. 

For that matter, we have made a summary of the sectoral performance for the Financial Year 2008/09 and the allocation for the Financial Year 2009/10. But I would like to make a comment on Vote 116 of the National Medical Stores. The figure you see on that table gives a total amount of the proposed allocations for 2009/10 as Shs 35.474 billion. 

The committee was given this figure and we were informed that a corrigenda will be brought in order to help the committee to have the actual figure in relation to the recommendation of the committee, because the committee had recommended that the National Medical Stores’ credit line be increased from 30 percent to 70 percent, while the PHC reduces from 70 percent to 30 percent. 

The committee made this recommendation basing on a number of factors that we observed in the field. We came to this floor and Parliament approved that recommendation. But when we calculated, we realised that the 35.474 billion is at 33 percent; so it does not reflect the recommendation.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to report to this House that I have now got another corrigenda indicating what we recommended as this House – this House recommended that 70 percent be taken on. The reason I did not want to read this figure is because we do not agree with it as a committee. Nevertheless, we had indicated, because it is what was given to us with the promise that a corrigenda would come. I am glad it has come. I would like to lay this on Table. 

For this matter, I would like to present the committee recommendation that funds be approved for the health sector as indicated below:

For vote 014, Ministry of Health, the recurrent expenditure is Shs 72,173,000,000, the development expenditure is Shs 275,190,000,000 giving a total - I am making a correction honourable colleagues - a total of Shs 347,363,000,000.

For vote 114, the Uganda Cancer Institute; the recurrent expenditure is Shs 948,000,000 and the development expenditure is Shs 2,095,000,000 giving a total of 3,043,000,000.

For vote 115, the Uganda Heart Institute; the recurrent expenditure is 89,000,000 and the development expenditure is Shs 1,500,000,000 giving a total of Shs 1,589,000,000.

I hope the honourable members have got a copy of this, which is a corrigenda. I am skipping the National Medical Stores because I have to also thoroughly study this before I present it on the floor.

Let us go to vote 134 of the Health Service Commission. The recurrent expenditure is Shs 2,212,000,000 and the development expenditure is Shs 347,000,000 giving a total of Shs 2,559,000,000.

For vote 151, Uganda Blood Transfusion Services; the recurrent expenditure is Shs 3,130,000,000 and there is no development expenditure which gives a total of Shs 3,130,000,000.

For vote 161, Mulago Hospital complex; the recurrent expenditure is Shs 31,524,000,000 and the development expenditure is Shs 5,120,000,000 giving a total of Shs 36,644,000,000.

For vote 162, Butabika Hospital; the recurrent expenditure is Shs 4,223,000,000 and the development expenditure is Shs 44,609,000,000 giving a total of Shs 48,832,000,000.

For vote 163 to 175, that is the regional referral hospitals; the recurrent expenditure is Shs 31,536,000,000 and the development expenditure is Shs 17,000,000,000 giving a total of Shs 48,536,000,000.

I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

11.33
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, NGORA COUNTY, KUMI): Thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to thank our chairperson for the good presentation. I am just rising on a point of procedure regarding the corrigenda for the National Medical Stores. The Minister of Health has just passed that corrigenda to the chairperson of the committee and I thought it was not the responsibility of the chairperson to table the corrigenda.

I would like to suggest that at this stage, since the chairperson omitted figures for National Medical Stores, let us have the corrigendum officially tabled and then the chairperson considers those figures and we move along to give the detailed discussions.

THE SPEAKER: Make your case. We shall correct this, because this has happened in all votes. As we are moving, things come here. Just proceed with your case.

MR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am going to present the Opposition’s response to the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Health, and I hope members have got copies, because there were a number of copies on the table.

The Ministry of Health this financial year requested -

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, what I have here is for the Shadow Minster for Education. The one for Health is not here, and I would beg that she moves and then - excuse me, this is what we have. We cannot follow without really having something. We have clerks in this place; let’s have them -(Interjection)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker I still confirm that there are copies of the report on the table which I expected members to have picked as they were coming in. A number of colleagues have them.

THE SPEAKER: Would you proceed with your business.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  This financial year, Ministry of Health has requested for a sum of Shs 734,670,000,000. Compared to the previous years, there has been a slight improvement in the health sector budgeting. We greatly appreciate the continued budget support from our development partners and urge Government to step-up its contribution to the sector.

Since I became Shadow Minister of Health, I have been following up the health sector financing, and I would like to invite colleagues to the last page attached to that report to see for themselves how the sector has progressively been financed.

I have even given some charts to represent Government of Uganda contributions and the donor support to heath sector from 2006 to date. I have also included the projected financing for the next financial year.

Inspite of the improved budgetary allocations to the health sector over the years, the overall performance has remained wanting. 

Challenges of drug stock-outs and other medical supplies; gross understaffing and poor remuneration of health workers; poor infrastructure; and logistical handicaps continued to be reported. All the above challenges point to the choking MTEF ceilings that have been imposed on the health sector.

It was earlier argued that the Ministry of Health had not indicated its optimum budgetary requirements for consideration. However, in the last financial year, the Ministry of Health gladly informed Parliament that they had completed updating the health sector master plan that required six trillion shillings over the next six financial years.

Unfortunately, to date, Parliament has never seen the master plan. We reiterate that imposing strict budget ceilings for drugs is an attempt to prescribe half dose treatment for patients, with disastrous results. It has also been rather difficult for Parliament to monitor performance of donor support budgets, because in nearly all ministerial policy statements presented to Parliament, amounts of donor support are indicated, but the performance figures for the previous financial years are usually not available. There is dire need, therefore, for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to enforce availability of such figures so that the final analysis of a ministry’s performance is easily determined. 

I would like to tackle the issue of medicines and medical equipments. Many health facilities continue to experience acute stock-outs of essential drugs. These often cause the health workers to get rather frustrated, and also make patients to lose confidence in the delivery of healthcare. Whereas the budget for drugs was allotted at 70 percent, through primary healthcare, and 390 percent through the credit line, it turned out that most districts and health facilities were reluctant to use the credit line funds, and also avoided purchasing drugs from the National Medical Stores using their PHC funds. In addition, the National Medical Stores also had its capacity compromised by delayed settlement of bills owed to it by the Ministry of Health. 

It was reported that many districts delayed to submit drug requisitions from the National Medical Stores. This was partly responsible for the delayed processing and delivery of drugs by the National Medical Stores. This challenge was further complicated by the failure of some districts to deliver drugs to the lower health units, even after receiving them from the National Medical Stores, and we think that such delays should be dealt away with. 

We are concerned that the medical equipment in many health facilities as already alluded to by the chairperson of the committee are either lacking, obsolete and dangerous or non-functional. To address this, the Opposition suggests that for a start, at least 70 percent of the funds for drugs be remitted directly to the National Medical Stores as a credit line. Such a shift would be evaluated over time with a view of increasing the credit line allocations for medicines. Once a particular drug required by any district or health unit is out of stock at the National Medical Stores, the district or health unit can only purchase such a drug from other sources upon issuance of a certificate of non-availability of that drug by the National Medical Stores. That way, we want to check the tendency of districts and health units using their PHC funds anyhow for buying drugs from other sources yet such drugs may actually be available at the National Medical Stores. 

We also recommend that Government should ensure that the outstanding debt owed to the National Medical Stores now, amounting to Shs 2 billion, is cleared without further delay. We further suggest that consideration should be given for health sub-districts to submit their drug requirements directly to the National Medical Stores, who in turn should deliver the drugs to the health sub-districts in order to minimise the bureaucratic and logistical delays that many districts are faced with. 

On human resources for health, it has been a big challenge. Whereas the country is proud of having an adequate number of highly qualified medical workers of all categories, the sector has been unable to attract and retain staff. Remuneration of health workers is dismally unattractive. Just to cite a few examples, a senior consultant in Uganda is earning a gross salary of just about Shs 2 million while a nurse is earning a gross salary of Shs 197,000. They just cannot make ends meet with this dismal remuneration. Moreover, many health workers have either no accommodation at places of work, or are housed in squeezed dilapidated buildings. As a result, nearly all the health facilities in the country are operating at below 50 percent staffing levels. 

In some lower health units, it is not uncommon to find just a single nurse managing it for 24 hours a day from January to January. It is amazing that in this 21st century, some districts in Uganda have only one medical officer. Understaffing is partly responsible for the congestion in health facilities and staff attrition due to heavy work overloads. 

In last year’s policy statement, the Minister of Health had this to say, and I quote: “Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I sadly report that the health sector was unable to entirely utilise its allocated wage resources for the financial year 2007/2008 due to a number of reasons. There was a delay in undertaking the planned recruitment mainly as a result of a number of districts not having district service commissions, and others being unable to find resources to meet the cost of recruitment.” The challenge of recruitment of health workers for lower health units by district service commissions is still prevalent to date. 

Against the above background, the Opposition strongly recommends that:

i.	Government must review the remuneration and allowances of health workers. 
ii.	We propose a minimum pay rise of 100 percent to all heath workers of all categories, and in addition, Government should consider incentives likes accommodation and tax holidays for certain categories of health workers in order to attract them. 
iii.	Recruitment and management of health workers should be recentralised. 

We also urge all health workers in the country not to become despondent and develop temptations of abandoning the country for greener pastures. We really want to encourage them that there is a ray of hope at the end of the tunnel, and the people of Uganda nurtured the health workers that we have now and we dearly need their services. We should fight on.

On HIV/AIDS prevention and control, the recent surveys revealed that the prevalence rate has stagnated at a worrying 6.4 percent. New infections are on the increase, and discordance has further complicated control measures. We observe that more focus has been put on treatment, and very little on prevention. Whereas treatment is necessary to help prolong the lives of affected persons, in our opinion, laxity on prevention measures will certainly result into so many new infections that we may eventually fail to manage on account of high treatment costs. 

It is our considered view, therefore, that HIV prevention campaigns should be vigorously re-launched. We call upon all media houses - both electronic and print - to have HIV prevention campaign messages before and after reading news in any language. Having those drums, I think the prevention campaign messages have tended to wane off.

We call upon all political and civic leaders, religious and educational institutions, as well as cultural leaders, to make HIV/AIDS awareness campaigns a routine activity in the country, and in their activities.

In addition, provision of test kits at lower health units will help more persons have easy access to testing services and, therefore, enable us get accurate data for better planning.

We recognise and deeply appreciate the contribution of other development partners in financing the fight against HIV/AIDS in our country. The US Government through the Presidential Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) is contributing about 50 percent of the finances for HIV/AIDS. The Global Fund for TB, AIDS and Malaria contributes 44 percent, while the Government of Uganda contributes 6 percent.

We observe that local financing for HIV/AIDS fight should gradually be stepped up, since resources for development partners cannot be guaranteed and are, therefore, unsustainable.

We also recognise Government’s effort to implement the recommendations of the Ogola Commission, which investigated the Global Fund in Uganda. We continue to encourage all those who were found culpable by the Commission to voluntarily repay the funds they misappropriated. The Opposition is concerned that the ongoing prosecutions on Global Fund fraud are dragging for so long that the image of the country in the mismanagement of this fund still remains internationally dented.

We recommend that prosecutions should be expedited and that the Ministry of Finance should remit all the recovered monies to the Ministry of Health, and regularly update Parliament on the progress.

You recall that Parliament approved a sum of Shs 60 billion in the Financial Year 2007/2008 for purchase of anti retroviral drugs and artemisinin combination therapies from Quality Chemicals Limited. Unfortunately, not all the money was remitted to the company as envisaged by Parliament. Instead, it was reported that Shs 6 billion was diverted to enhance salaries of health workers, Shs 10 billion was diverted for Government to buy shares from the same company, Quality Chemicals, while Shs 15 billion is reported to have been lost due to a rise in foreign exchange rates.

Whereas the Shs 6 billion used for staff salaries enhancement was reportedly reimbursed, the Opposition wonders why Government diverted a whole Shs 10 billion for buying shares from the company, moreover at the expense of those in dire need of medicines for HIV/AIDS and Malaria.

The Opposition demands that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development immediately reimburses the Shs 10 billion to Ministry of Health, so that medicines can be procured for the intended beneficiaries.

We strongly advise that Government should learn to consult Parliament first before diverting any funds voted by Parliament for any purpose. We further demand that a special audit in Quality Chemicals be carried out specifically to verify how Shs 15 billion could have been lost on foreign exchange rates.

The Uganda Aids Commission, which coordinated the fight against HIV/AIDS across all sectors is under President’s Office, and we are all aware of this. However, it gets its budgetary allocations through Vote 014 under Ministry of Health. The Opposition has observed this irregularity and recommended corrective measures in vain. The small MTEF ceilings in the Ministry of Health are further chocked by the Uganda AIDS Commission budgets over whom the Ministry of Health after all has no control.

The Uganda AIDS Commission does not report to Ministry of Health or even appear to the Social Services Committee, but it is the Social Services Committee to do the voting of the money.

We unceasingly demand that the Uganda AIDS Commission should get its resources through Vote 001 under President’s Office. If that cannot be done, then let us give a consideration to create another Vote for the commission. We insist that Uganda AIDS Commission should not be getting appropriation through the Ministry of Health ceilings.

Maternal and reproductive health

According to the recent demographic health surveys, the maternal mortality rate in Uganda still stands at a worrying 437 deaths per 100,000 births. This translates to about 18 mothers dying every day. We are concerned that the road map to maternal health remains mythical and underfunded. Government ought to change gears in addressing maternal and reproductive health issues in this country, to avert death. Given the alarming number of maternal deaths, we recommend that maternal health should be considered as a priority in the ministry’s planning and budgeting process.

Mental health 

We observe that mental illness is on the increase in the country. This is partly attributed to limited control in the production and misuse or abuse of certain drugs. The drugs most commonly abused include cannabis certiva locally known as marijuana, mairunji or kat and inhalants like petrol and heroine, in addition to alcohol. Alcohol is greatly abused in this country.

Studies done in the sub-Saharan region indicate a high prevalence of alcohol abuse in the region. The major causes of alcohol and drug abuse are - I think let me not go into the details as there are a number of them like poor parenting and guidance, peer pressure, poverty, frustration. 

These have led to a number of effects, which can be either acute or chronic. The acute problems include accidents and spread of HIV/AIDS. Chronic problems resulting from chronic use of drugs include addiction, dependency and various crimes leading to over crowded prisons, poor performance at school, school fires, domestic violence, homicide, suicide, name them.

I have some data, which I got from Uganda Police regarding the rise in crime rates. I am not going to have all of them read here for want of time, but we appreciate that Government tabled the Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill about two years ago, but we are actually surprised that to date, the Bill has not been passed into law. For two years, that Narcotics Control Bill has been with us. I think we should accept this. One time I made a call here when we were passing the Trafficking in Persons Bill, reminding the committee to expedite its work on that Bill. 

We propose that without any further delay, stringent legislation be enacted and rigorously enforced in order to save lives and avert crimes committed due to misuse and abuse of drugs. 

In conclusion, it is only a healthy citizenry that can make the economy of a country healthy. The dismal per capita expenditure on health will forever retard our economic growth. We call upon Government to recognise the dire need to address the health needs of this country through increased funding.  

Mr Speaker, for want of time, it would be very difficult for me to touch on all matters, but I beg to move. Thank you.

11.55
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to present the response by the Opposition to the Ministry of Education and Sports policy statement for the financial year 2009/10. 

The Ministry of Education over the recent past has continued to enjoy substantial budgetary allocation relative to other sectors, which in our opinion is good. In the financial year 2008/09, the Ministry of Education and Sports got an allocation of Shs 899.34 billion. In the financial year 2009/10, the Ministry of Education is proposed to get Shs 1,079,710,000,000 representing 15 percent of the total national budget. 

From the onset it is important to emphasis that substantive budgetary allocation, especially to the UPE sector, devoid of quality and relevance, will not address the needs of Uganda. There is need for the Ministry of Education and Sports to fully map Ugandans’ human resource needs, and appropriately plan manpower development. 

The Opposition raises the following issues:

1.	Education for sustainable development

	Under this we are stating that the allocation of huge sums of money, again without quality and without relevance, in the primary sector, undermines sustainable development. The mismatch between educational policies and directives from the central government such as absence of feeding and automatic promotion, needs immediate review, as pupils who barely know how to read, write or have any numeracy abilities are being churned out of the Universal Primary Education programme.

2.	There continues to be a disharmony between the mode of assessment, which is exam-based and the professed motives of acquiring skills for livelihood. 

3.	UPE suffers from gross lack of enforcement of standards with executive directives on school feeding overriding any meaningful standards agreed on by the wider community involvement. 

4.	We as the Opposition recommend an immediate review of Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education programmes to ensure that there is quality, relevance, and that they provide education for sustainable development. 

The second issue, Mr Speaker, is on skills training. This received very little attention. The earlier proposal to provide one technical school per sub-county has been abandoned for unknown reasons. Government should focus on skills training and increase training for the BTVET sector. This will help reintegrate school drop outs. 

We argue that there are so many children dropping out of school before they complete a given cycle. And if we fund the BTVET sector adequately, we hope that this will provide an opportunity for them to be reintegrated. 

Thirdly, teacher motivation: Teachers in Uganda earn peanuts for the input they make to human resource building. Moreover their terms and conditions of service continue to be marginal. 

A salary increase, which has been recently proposed of 5 percent to all public servants means that a teacher in a primary school who currently earns a gross of Shs 200,000 and a net of Shs 193,000 will simply earn a gross of Shs  210,000 and a net of Shs 202,000, making a net benefit of Shs 9,000 from the increment. 

In the meantime the Minister of Finance is not afraid to say that the salary of Shs200,000 is the best pay available everywhere in Uganda, whether in public or in private schools. Surely, we think this is an insult to the teachers who toil to make our children what they are. 

Therefore, the Opposition proposes and we continue to insist that there should be a raise in salaries for primary school teachers to a minimum of Shs 400,000 per month. (Applause) 

We also propose the recruitment of additional teachers to meet the 1:40 teacher to pupil ratio in primary schools, and to fill the staffing gaps in secondary which currently stand at 12,000. 

We also propose the provision of adequate housing, especially for senior women teachers at both primary and secondary levels. The benefits of these proposals cannot be overemphasised and they were captured in our general response to the Budget. 

Mr Speaker, we would like to address ourselves fourthly to the issue of patriotism teaching in schools. It is our considered view that patriotism cannot be taught. It is an attitude that is inculcated unlike other subjects that are taught. Therefore, to attain this, schools need to teach religious education, civic education, political education, history, among others. Schools currently have other clubs that are not funded the way the patriotism clubs are proposed to be funded. These include the science clubs, debating, mathematics, young farmers clubs, among others. 

This move, that is, to teach patriotism in schools, to us in the Opposition is, therefore, suspect. It is bound to waste taxpayer’s money. It is an attempt by the unpatriotic elements in our society to force down love for them and not love for the country among our young people. 

We think that patriotism is sacrificial; we would like to demonstrate to you that in Uganda we are not making that sacrifice. It is only Uganda in Africa that has got two State houses funded by the taxpayer. It is only Uganda that has got two presidential jets funded by the taxpayer; two presidential country homes funded by the taxpayer – is this the patriotism we want to teach the young people?

Mr Speaker, the Opposition, therefore, totally opposes this view of teaching patriotism; we consider it an attempt to a one-party indoctrination. What makes it worse is the fact that it is not going to be the trained teachers, but the RDCs who are proposed to be in charge of this teaching. It is not the National Curriculum Development Centre to originate the training content; it is Ministry of Security; it is not the Ministry of Education and Sports to implement. That is why we totally are opposed to it.

On higher education, Mr Speaker, we would like to address ourselves to public universities. This financial year public universities have not received adequate funding for capital development, yet this should be the role of the Central Government. We think it is a very big burden for the private students to have tuition revised every year to provide for capital development. We urge Government to allocate adequate funding for capital development in public universities.

Two, the Opposition proposes a review of the sponsorships at public universities. The current arrangement discriminates against the poor. A child has to be coming from a rich family, go to a very good school and score highly in order to benefit from Government sponsorship. If you come from a poor family, you perform badly and you will not benefit from Government sponsorship. We think this is discriminatory. 

The Opposition proposes that all funding available to sponsor students at public universities should be pulled together and rationed to all who would be admitted both under the present Government and private arrangements. This should be to the extent that each university gets at least 50 percent Government sponsorship and the other balance is to be met by the parents. That will help. Currently, Government is only sponsoring the rich against the poor.

Thirdly, the Opposition thinks that the quota system should be reviewed to assess the extent to which it has addressed the marginalised, and discrepancies in the districts. Mr Speaker, you will recall that the quota system was meant to be an affirmative measure for districts that are dragging behind. We want to have it reviewed to see the extent to which it has addressed this situation – 

THE SPEAKER: Yeah! But if you say that any eligible student should benefit from Government funding, is there any need for the quota system? That system was put in place to help share the 2000 scholarships that are given by Government. Now, if you abolish it, then is there any need?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, we have not proposed the abolition; we are proposing a review because even with the present quota system, we have those that are sponsored directly by Government, but with a fraction that is parcelled out to districts. Our position is to do a review to get the extent this system has been able to –

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, my understanding is that in what you are proposing – if Government has money to sponsor 2000 students in public universities – there are also private students  - what it should do is to say, this is the money we have as Government, please share it. Isn’t it so?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I think this is going to be a subject for further discussion. But those are the two proposals we are making; we need a review to understand how far we have gone. But we also need a quick action to stop this discrimination against the poor, by sponsoring only those who can afford.

I would like to move to No.5 of our proposals. There is need to increase capitation grant to all public universities to make university education affordable to minimise institutional unrest. These days there is a lot of unrest with students striking over food and such related matters?

Mr Speaker, we also propose the establishment of an education fund for the advancement of education through things like loans or a bonding system for students.

Let me now talk about funding to private universities. We would like to say that this is a good development. However, we propose that this be rationalised. There is no justification this financial year, why only Kampala University should get an allocation of Shs 4 billion while other private universities like Nkozi, Mukono, Kumi, Mountain of the Moon universities and so on, all get 0.5 billion each. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports needs to establish credible criteria through which financial support to private universities is provided. We also want to note that for lack of money, Mbarara University of Science and Technology has not been able to develop its Kihumuro Campus. 

The Opposition proposes that Kampala International University be allocated 0.5bilion like all the other private universities. The other 3.5 billion that remains should be allocated to Mbarara University of Science and Technology to develop the Kihumuro Campus. (Applause)

Our sixth point is about special needs education. It is notable that faith organisations like the non-governmental organisations and individuals, bear nearly the whole bulk of educating Uganda’s children with special needs. We notice that so far, Government has done very poorly. To us, this is a disgraceful stance. 

The Opposition proposes increased funding for special needs education, which should go to capital development, tuition, scholastic materials like hearing aids, and so on, and deliberate training of special needs teachers.

Mr Speaker, the seventh point is about the safety of educational institutions in light of the recent arson incidents. The Ministry of Education and Sports Policy Statement was generally silent on the safety of institutions of learning. Following the many fire incidents, the Ministry of Education should have a policy on institutional safety, and we propose that it should include among others, routine safety enhancement, compulsory fire extinguishers, first aid kits, escape and collection points for students and staff, fire drills for all schools, and a review of design of classrooms and dormitories. The current status of installing burglar proof bars in dormitories is not desirable, as it denies the children the opportunity to escape in times of emergency.

The rural-urban, north-south disparity in education

The regional rural and urban disparities in education continue to increase. In 2008, the results of the Primary Leaving Examination, Uganda Certificate of Education and Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education clearly portrayed this divide with the rural schools doing badly with regions showing clear disparities. Unfortunately, Government has no clear policy to bridge the disparities in education.

The Opposition believes in demonstrable affirmative measures to bridge this gap. Unfortunately, Ministry of Education has failed to take note of this at policy level. 

Conclusion

The current funding to the Ministry of Education and Sports is adequate to deliver quality. There is, however, need to increase supervision, reduce leakages/wastage, and increase community and other stakeholder involvement.

There is also need to re-orient the curriculum to meet the skills requirements of this country. Educational priorities also need to be revisited. I thank you, Mr Speaker. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Those who contributed yesterday may not contribute now and so I will start with those who did not.

12.14
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report on the social services in this country. Much as we appreciate the effort that Government is putting in, there is a lot to be done. 

When you look at the education sector, for instance, the intention for UPE was and is still good, but when you look at how we are moving, it leaves a lot to be desired. For instance, when you look at the pupil-teacher ratio, the drop-out rate, sanitation, payment of teachers and lack of commitment on the part of parents - UPE is not only universal now, but it is also compulsory, and yet the enforcement of this is almost failing. Most of the parents are not taking their children to school, but we are not doing much to enforce this.

When you consider USE, the intentions are also good, but look at the classrooms, the laboratories and the laboratory equipment. When you visit these schools, you find that we may not get much because we are putting in little.

Therefore, I call upon Government to increase the funding and the seriousness on the inspection. I usually visit these schools in my constituency, but you find that the inspectors do not go there at all. So, you do not expect the schools to move on when they are not being inspected.

When you move on to higher institutions, like hon. Alaso has said, it is almost becoming a domain for the rich because these poor students have poor backgrounds, and they may not access Government sponsorship. Therefore, we are creating a situation of having classes in this country. The rich will continue becoming rich and the poor getting poorer, because what should have brought the poor out of the poverty cycle is education, but now it has become almost a monopoly for the rich, especially when we reach higher institutions.

The Opposition made another observation, and I would concur with them that the funding of the private universities is unfair, because whether something is a presidential pledge or not, this is Government money. So, it remains unfair when you say, “We implemented this issue of giving Shs 4 billion to KIU, and we gave these other universities less money because it was a presidential pledge.” It does not hold water because even the President uses public funds. So, it remains unfair to these other universities.

Coming to the hard-to-reach and stay areas, we really need to know the criteria, because I can see areas like Bundibugyo are not featuring. But when you go to Bundibugyo, it is a hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay area. Even parts of my -(Interjections)- she is talking of Bududa also. When you go to the mountain area parts of my constituency, that is, the Rwenzori areas - the other day I was there with Minister Kamanda Bataringaya at Mt Gessi Primary School, but it is a very difficult area to reach.  Actually, you have to walk so many kilometers; but these areas have not been pointed out.

When we move to patriotism, I think we need to include it on the school curriculum and all the stakeholders need to come on board. The way I see it now, it is almost a one-man show. I am sorry to mention this, but it is the President of this country leading it and the members of Parliament, for instance, are not involved -(Interjections)– she is asking me, who stops me? But at times we are not invited when these activities are carried out. So, I support it, but we need to integrate and get all involved, so that it moves on.

Vocational training has almost been abandoned because I remember we were told that each sub-county was going to get a vocational school, but I do not see it featuring.

On health, I am happy that the ministry is trying its level best. But when you go to these hospitals, particularly Mulago - when I had an accident, hon. Speaker, I was there; for us members of Parliament and other people in this category get all the treatment they need there. But it is a nightmare for the common man of this country. 

So, we need to increase the funding; the supervision, and we need to stop the brain-drain, most of our good doctors are running away because we are not paying them well (Member timed out_)

12.20
MR NOAH OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for a job well done. My first concern is on education, especially on recruitment of teachers and accessing the payroll. Whenever recruitment has been done, it takes about two years for the names to get on the payroll. Our schools are performing poorly because the teachers are demotivated. I am wondering why it takes so long for a teacher who has been recruited to be paid their salary. 

I call upon the Ministry of Education to take it as a matter of urgency to ensure that teachers who have been recruited are paid so that they can teach our pupils. This is why UPE is getting problems. The Ministry of Education should make sure it is rectified; we are now in the computer age, I do not see why entering a name of a teacher takes that long. I remember long ago, we used to have people recording the name, but now we have computers. So, what is the problem, is it corruption?

Mr Speaker, my next point is on the issue of the DEOs; the DEOs must be brought back to the centre because it seems the districts cannot manage them. They are working at their own pace; even if the rules are passed by the council they do not observe them. So, my opinion is that we let the DEOs be supervised by the Ministry of Education.

My other point is also on supervision. You find that these schools where funds are sent, the teachers sometimes do not even teach. You may find them playing Matatu on the compound. You wonder whether we have inspectors of schools in the districts. So, I call upon the Ministry of Education to ensure that supervision goes down to the regions to ensure that teaching is done. 

On Government sponsorship to universities, my view is that this should continue and the funds should be increased so that more people are covered – it is a good programme in my view. 

On the Ministry of Health, I wish to thank them for their work. But they also have challenges that need to be addressed. As I speak now, you find that the conditions are appalling; the women are delivering on the floor; and there are no beddings. The committee of this House went there last year, but nothing has so far happened since then. So what is the Minister of Health going to do about the hospitals? It is actually embarrassing to the whole Government. 

Mr Speaker, funding of hospitals must be controlled by the centre because now it appears the councils are using the money for other purposes. The funds are sent and the money is used for other purposes; equipment are not procured and yet the funding is there. Let the Ministry of Health Management at least visit the district hospitals and the referral hospitals. 

When you go down, the government is now unpopular because people are not getting drugs, and the opposition are laughing because they know they will use this in the next elections. Therefore, Mr Speaker, my view is that procurement of medicine should be done by the Ministry of Health, directly for the centre, so that we see what is happening on the ground. 

Let me also talk about health centres’ payments. I know that payments have been streamlined somehow, but the allowances are not reaching the staff, that is why some of them are reluctant to work. What can we do to ensure that the allowances get to the staff? At times this money is borrowed and it does not reach the right people. Yet these people have to rise up in the night to work; how do you expect them to work well without any payment? 

Lastly, I want to ask the Ministry of Education and Sports to give me the status of the school promised in Gulu. They are supposed to be established in Arua and in Lira. How far have you gone with that arrangement? We need that school very badly. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.25
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee chairperson and the entire committee for this good report, and I want to thank the two ministers of the Opposition for their responses. 

On a very sad note, I want to find out what happened to the money allocated to the Mountains of the Moon University. On page 345 of this draft estimate for the financial year 2009/10, Mountains of the Moon together with other universities was given Shs 0.5 billion, and Kampala International University was given 4 billion. I am wondering why this is not being reflected in this report! 

Students and stakeholders in Mountains of the Moon University have already accessed this book and we the politicians have already committed ourselves that Government is going to give you support to develop the department of horticultural sciences, geared towards employment creation. So, I want clarification from the minister on how that money disappeared.

Mr Speaker, I want to partly concur with hon. Alice Alaso that at least they remove the Shs 0.5 billion from Kampala International University and maybe –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members for giving way. Kampala International University, although I am associated with it as Chairman of Council –(Interjections)– I think it is okay because I am qualified to be a chairman of a university council. The university in the region teaches medicine. As a private university, Kampala International University has a medical school, the only one in the East African region as a private hospital. 

Given the numbers of doctors we have in this country, the contribution of a private university on the numbers of medical personnel we can train is a welcome effort. In fact, Kampala International University has the capacity of producing more doctors than all the public universities put together. Assisting that effort is not the same thing as assisting a university, that teaches ethics. (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, with due respect to the minister, the minister clearly stated that he has vested interests in that university and he has not declared those interests; and we are aware that in Uganda, there are three universities that are training doctors and they have done well over the years; and he knows the shortage of resources to these institutions, and above all, he sits on the front bench; is he, therefore, in order to come to this House and give us untrue explanations when in actual sense we know the deficits of resources for our public universities? 

THE SPEAKER: I thought his case was to justify giving them money, because this is the only private university teaching doctors. 

MR KALIBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought Prof. Kabwegyere should know that before I became a Member of Parliament, I worked at Makerere University for over 20 years, and I was better informed about universities in this country. 

But the point I am trying to make is that if you go to page 3 of this report and look at Table 2, if you add up that money, it does not come to Shs 9.1 billion. It actually comes to around Shs 8.1 billion. So, there is an excess of about Shs 0.9 billion and I would like to request that if this was an error, Government should correct that and give Shs 500 million to the Mountains of the Moon University, because it would not in any way offset that budget.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of accreditation, I would like to propose that these courses be accredited retrospectively because before these courses are initiated, they are tabled before Senate for approval, and I think the National Council for Higher Education can help these students accredit their courses. It is very difficult for a student, after completing the first year, to go back to first year and change the course as was recommended by the committee. So, I strongly move that the National Council for Higher Education should accredit these courses retrospectively. 

On funding of public universities, I also want to add my voice to that of other members, that if we cannot fulfil our obligation, then I think there is something we have to do. You will find that we appropriate money here to go to Makerere University, Mbarara University and Gulu University, but you find that by the end of the financial year, some portion of that money has not been remitted to these universities, and they are forced to get resources from the privately sponsored students to support the government-sponsored students. This has been a very big problem, and probably that is why these public universities are raising tuition, because we have not fulfilled our obligation as Government. 

So, I want to appeal to Government, especially the Ministry of Finance, that if we have appropriated funds, please make sure that this money is remitted to these universities. 

On the scheme of service, Mr Speaker, it is very good motivation for our teachers. But I am only disappointed that the Shs 1 billion which we budgeted for in the last financial year is not in the budget yet this has been a very good motivation tool. In my constituency, I have six teachers benefiting from the scheme, and in Kabarole, we have about 124 teachers benefiting from the scheme - (Member timed out_).

12.34 
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a few things to raise, and I will start with the Ministry of Education. I know the Ministry Of Education is doing a great job, but there are areas where I think they need to improve. 

I just want to bring to the attention of the minister, the committee and the members of Parliament the issue of the things we saw in Kalangala when we took the Speakers of the Commonwealth Parliaments (Africa Region) to Kalangala. We were surprised to find out that the speedboat that had been bought to help especially the education sector in Kalangala had been abandoned. To me, this is wasteful expenditure because it is not serving the purpose it was intended to. It has been left there to rot, and when I sounded this to the ministry officials, they were not aware that this speedboat had been ignored to a level of rotting on the shores of Kalangala Islands. 

I want to bring this to the attention of the minister; that please, can you address this issue and help the teachers and the education sector of Kalangala Islands. This is wasteful expenditure, and I think the people concerned should be held responsible for this matter. It was just a small fault that needed repairs, but it has been left there to rot. It is so embarrassing to the ministry - (Interruption)

MR BADDA: I thank you my colleague for raising the matter but I also want to remind the minister that a number of communications concerning that issue had already been made to the ministry, starting with its procurement. They procured a boat that could not work even for a single day. We have complained about this issue but nothing has been done about it. So, I urge the minister to take concern over this matter. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Hon. Minister, take note of that. We want to help the hard-to-reach areas with transport. Secondly, is the issue of the abuse of the USE and UPE funds. I think you need to take a very strong stand. You have seen headmasters and DEO’s connive and abuse these resources – and today or tomorrow it will be the minister, the President or the Government that is bashed. Can you take some measures to address these issues? 

I can give you an example of one school in Kasilo County; Kamod Secondary School. We raised this matter because the headmaster has now decided to connive with the DEO of Soroti - they bypassed the chairman of the board, the Archdeacon of Serere, the Rev. Okodu. When he raised the issue of inflated costs, they decided to bypass him. Now it is the headmaster and the DEO who sign the cheques and withdraw the money. 

We raised this matter and I called a meeting, but now the headmaster has taken off. Can you take action to arrest this headmaster? I hope he has not just been transferred. It is based on this that I think we need to recentralise some of these issues like the appointment of the DEOs - because they have become a problem - like the committee has recommended for the Ministry of Health. This is not only limited to the USE funds, but also the UPE funds. Can you help us on this matter?

On the issue of bursaries, I raised this issue with your ministry, but little or nothing has been done. The bursaries for the students from Kasilo County in Soroti District have not been paid from 2005 to 2008. When I wrote, I got a communication that the money was being paid. But the money is not reaching. I even have a letter I received yesterday from one of the guardians. So, the money disappears somewhere between here and Soroti. This is not affecting Soroti alone, but the whole of Teso. So, can you please address this matter?

In the communication, they only told me that the beneficiaries have not submitted accounts – but how is money remitted to the teachers and the schools? It is now done by EFT. So, that cannot be an excuse. Can you help us address that matter?

I also want to hear from you on the issue of tuition fees in the universities, because the students are planning strikes over the 40 per cent increment. What is the government’s position? Are we supporting it or not? 

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Science and Technology.

12.40
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong, Amuria): I have only four short issues to raise in support of the Committee on Social Services. 

I have an issue on hardship allowances and hard-to-reach areas. For the whole of my life in Parliament, this has been an issue that has been raised. My understanding is that the ministry has been non-committal in putting in place criteria for citing the areas that are hard to reach. I want to recommend that the minister gives us a timeframe, or else we do not approve their next budget. 

I had the opportunity to travel with the hon. Bitamazire during the floods in Teso. We went down to my village and she expressed how hard it was to reach my area – but it is not part of the hard-to-reach areas that have been listed here!

On patriotism clubs, Mr Speaker, patriotism is a value that is inculcated through a multiplicity of activities – you learn it from your parents, leaders, and peers in the classroom. I know next to our parents, the most important people who influence our lives are the teachers. To attempt to make RDCs the teachers of patriotism is like weaving a basket for holding water. Some people are digging a hole in which to hide money. 

I want to propose that we transfer or re-allocate the monies that have been identified for patriotism clubs to increase the teachers’ salaries, so that the teachers, who handle our children most of the time, will inculcate these values when they are happy and motivated.

I also want to propose that those of us, who really think that they should teach patriotism, to be role models. You cannot be an advocate of patriotism when you are an advocate of kickbacks. It will never work.

Mr Speaker, I want to comment on the teachers’ Scheme of Service –(Interruption)

MR DAUDI MIGEREKO: I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, and I rise on a point of order. Hon. Malinga has come up with a very serious assertion which he has decided not to substantiate; that the advocates of patriotism are the advocates of kickbacks. This statement needs to be substantiated, because it is malicious and cannot be allowed to remain on the record of Parliament, when the Committee of Social Services has come up with very strong recommendations in support of the programme of patriotism. 

Is it in order for hon. Malinga to make a statement he is not ready to substantiate?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Malinga, what did you exactly want to say?

MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I am very conversant with Teso issues and when you talk about involving RDCs in issues of patriotism, I think you are creating a bigger problem than you think you are solving. When you involve the ministers in issues of patriotism - some ministers in this country are known for not doing the right things. Recently, you had a debate here -

THE SPEAKER: No it is on the issue of kickbacks. I mean do you have any particular ministers who are involved in that?

MR MALINGA: I am coming. Recently, there was a debate here over the issues –

THE SPEAKER: Or your intention was to say, in recruitment people should give in their CVs?

MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I have made my point very clear; I have said the best people to teach patriotism are the teachers. It will never be RDCs or ministers. It cannot –

THE SPEAKER: No, the offensive was a kickback; do you have any particular minister or RDC –

MR MALINGA: Where did the posho that had been meant to go to Teso go? 

THE SPEAKER: Was it taken by the RDC?

MR MALINGA: Well, I don’t know. They are supposed to be the eye of the government and the president in the area.

THE SPEAKER: No, there could be people with kickbacks but do you have a particular RDC or a minister as you have said that is involved in this? Adjust your language.

MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, you are aware that I am a Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Local Government Accounts, and I am aware that the greatest problem in this country-

THE SPEAKER: Is it a blanket accusation or is it particular?

MR MALINGA: I am giving an explanation, Mr Speaker. The biggest problem that we have is in procurement and procurements involve ministries, permanent secretaries, RDCs. Some of them -

THE SPEAKER: It seems you cannot substantiate your use of kickbacks-

MR MALINGA: May I proceed, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: No, let us correct that.

MR MALINGA: I withdraw my statement.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, proceed.

MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I wanted to make a comment on Busitema University. Originally, this university was supposed to be a multi-campus university, and in the original plan, Arapai Agricultural College was supposed to be the next campus to be operationalised. Today, I hear the plan has changed. I would like to know from the minister, how far has he gone in operationalising our original plan that was agreed upon between the ministry and the Committee of Social Services, in which I was a member?

Secondly, if there is any deviation, when are you bringing Arapai on board as the next campus of this university?

I want to make a comment on teachers’ scheme of service. This is a very good programme, and we want to encourage Government to allocate more funds to support the teachers’ scheme of service, because it creates promotional ladders for the teachers in the classroom, and it is a very good motivational strategy for them.

Finally, I have a question here about this Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development. I am wondering whether this is a private institution or it is a Government one. My question is, what has happened to the established institutions that we have like NARO, such that we have to move away and create other institutions? Has the President lost faith in the government institutions that were established?

12.49
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the Committee of Social Services for this report. However, I have a few comments to make. When you read this report, you think that all is rosy in social services, especially in the health sector.

In my constituency, where I had a chance of taking the Chairperson and the Committee of Social Services to visit, a few health centres – Indeed, I would like to thank even the Minister for Health, hon. Dr Mallinga, who was in Masaka last week visiting various constituencies.

On page 20 of your report, all hospitals reported inadequate provision of utilities, which consume a large proportion of their budget, especially water and electricity. Most health centres are disconnected, and they don’t have electricity. You can imagine a health centre, which is storing medicine and has no power! For example, health centre IVs, which are carrying out operations and have no power. So, I think the minister or the ministry should devise some ways. 

We used to have what we call the private-public partnership where health centres can charge some money to cater for these expenses like water and electricity. Can you imagine a health centre, which has no running water because it has been disconnected, and has no power? Mr Minister, you saw this in Kinoni Health Centre III, where there is no power, no running water, and yet it is supposed to serve a large population of people in Kinoni.

Another point I would like to ask the ministry is about the embossment of drugs. Mr Minister, I can even challenge you, if you go to Mulago and you are given a prescription, you will hardly get any medicine, even Panadol; but the doctors will tell you about a certain pharmacy and advise you to go there. Even in Masaka it is the same scenario. They will tell you to go to such and such a pharmacy because they know where this medicine is going. This embossment of drugs is very good and we would like you to tell us when it is going to start so that we know. If somebody is found with these drugs then we can know what to do.

Another thing I would like to ask is about the money allocated to Butabika and Mulago hospitals. When you look on page 29, Mulago Hospital Complex has been allocated Shs 36.644 billion and Butabika Shs 48.832 billion. When you look at the number of people in Mulago and compare it with Butabika and you allocate Butabika Shs 48 billion yet you are talking about development because a big chunk is going for development - Mulago, as you all know, people come from all over the country. In fact, in this report we are told of how mothers are delivering children in corridors because of congestion. So, I need an explanation as to why the Butabika budget is very big compared to that of Mulago.

Lastly, regarding the Ministry of Education and this is about the quota system. I would like to thank the shadow minister for education for having brought it up. We need to know the criteria used in the quota system, where we send students on Government sponsorship. For example, when you look at Mpigi or Wakiso, or even Masaka District, which has got a population of one million people, we send only 11 students on Government sponsorship. And when you look at other districts that have smaller populations say, Kalangala where you have about 50,000 people, they send 11; Lyantonde has got about 74,000 people and they send 11 as well. So, what criteria do you use for districts that have bigger populations for you to say they should only send 11 students? Thank you very much. 

12.55
MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Chairperson and the Committee on Social Services for this report. However, I want to make some few comments. The first comment is on page 18 on the achievements. The committee lists rehabilitation works, which started in some districts, Budaka being one of them. I would like to inform the minister and this august House, that work at health centre IV in Budaka Constituency has stalled. I am sure that one of these days when the minister travels to his constituency, he could stop over for three or five minutes and he will see for himself that the building has stayed that way for quite some time now. 

Secondly, I would also note, just as hon. Dr Epetait noted, that there is an urgent need to recruit more health workers especially in the lower units. I can give an example where the Committee on Presidential Affairs while monitoring NUSAF projects, found only one midwife at a health centre II in Katakwi. So, you wonder when this midwife rests, because she is the only one in the health centre, and she receives pregnant women who have to deliver in the health centre. You can imagine that she has to work 24 hours, seven days a week, and maybe 30 days in a month. So, when does such a worker get to rest? And this is why you find that some women opt to go to traditional birth attendants. This is the scenario we have on the ground.

Thirdly, even the hygiene and cleanliness of some of these health workers is wanting. I always make courtesy calls at the health centres, and there is one particular health centre III where the in-charge cannot even keep his own shirt clean! And if I had the power to suspend that health worker, I would have done so. So, even the cleanliness of the health units also discourages some women and some patients from getting medical services there, and instead opt to go elsewhere.

The other issue is HIV/AIDS. I agree with hon. Dr Epetait regarding vigorously launching the campaign of sensitising our masses in Uganda and telling them that HIV/AIDS is still here with us in Uganda, and that it is rampant, especially among married couples. Statistics show that the prevalence rate among married couples is high. In men, the prevalence is 9.9 and in women it is 12.1. The prevalence rates are going up. People have relaxed and some people who are on ARVs are misusing them because they know that the drugs are available, they behave in any way they wish. All of us, the media, institutions, opinion leaders, religious leaders, should vigorously start the campaign of sensitising our masses by telling them that actually, HIV/AIDS is back and it is very rampant. I thank you.

1.00
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by thanking the chairperson and the committee for this good report, and I go against the ministry and the chairperson for refusing to honour the petition which I brought here concerning Sickle cell disease. 

It is about two months now since I presented that petition on behalf of the banakazadde and up to now nothing has taken place. I remember that I gave a remainder to the chairperson, and the ministers but nothing has been done at all.

Mr Speaker, sickle cell anaemia sufferers are all over the country and they only have Mulago Hospital to go to for proper treatment. I am surprised that we are not taking care of them and yet they had just asked for one building where the staff, the doctors, and the patients could be housed. They are currently housed in an old building, which cannot cater for their needs. 

We asked for a policy that at referral hospitals there should be clinics for sickle cell sufferers but that has not been given a hearing.

Mr Speaker, these people only have Mulago Hospital to look after them wherever they are – in the west, north, south and everywhere.

I would like to ask Ministry of Health and all those concerned to take care of these people who are dying silently without getting the right care. Why do I say right care? It is because some of them never reach the hospital, which is only one.

Mr Speaker, people need sensitisation about the sickle cell disease. Many have died of this disease with others saying they are dying of malaria; many of them do not know what they suffer from. Malaria can manifest itself into any form. 

Let me say something about hospitals. I have been to the hospital in my constituency and two others, and noticed that mortuary facilities are not enough. Hospitals which have small rooms that are supposed to accommodate only one dead body, are filled with 20 or more dead bodies. I would like to ask Ministry of Health to look into this issue. Some bodies are actually treated from the verandas.

In the same regard, let me say something about clinics at parish level. I noticed that those clinics do not receive drugs. To make matters worse, most of them do not have enough staff; others with no staff at all. What were those clinics built for? Why waste money to construct them when we cannot staff them? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let me first have Gomba, Bushenyi and then I move to this side.

1.04
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the presentation of the report. I also thank the two shadow ministers for their responses.

These two sectors, health and education, are very important in the development of any country. I must say that is why all of us now wish to say something. 

Let me start with universal primary education. This is our baby as Government; we conceived it and gave birth to it. Unfortunately, it is getting stunted – I have a number of reasons why I am saying that. I know that Government has done quite a good job in terms of infrastructure because there are classrooms that have been built. It has also done enough in terms of mobilizing parents to take children to school, and also payments for teachers’ salaries, although that money is still so little. It has also done well in terms of providing text books.

However, allow me say that unless we solve the issue of feeding, we might be wasting very valuable time. I know this is a very controversial issue, which has raised many issues, but if we want to get better grades, we must sort it out.

School inspection is another problem associated with UPE. There are schools you go to and find no teachers, including their head teachers, with children just playing because there is nobody to take care of them. This is coming about because the department of inspectorate of schools is not doing its work. I would like to ask Government to strengthen school inspections.

Mr Speaker, the other issue I have come across is about sanitation in these schools. Some of the schools do not have toilets that are worth the name. Children have nowhere to go. You find a UPE school with 500 pupils, but with no pit latrines! I am saying this with a lot of pain because I have clear examples. I have contributed to this cause; I know what I am talking about. I need to know what happened to the school health programme which the ministry used to have. I think you need to liaise with the Ministry of Education and Sports to sort out this issue.

Some members talked about hard-to-reach area allowances, but to me this can only be a short-term solution. I am saying this because most of our places are hard-to-reach. So, shall we all claim for this kind of allowance? My understanding is that there is no single place in Uganda that is hard-to-reach if the transport system is worked on; if the electricity is wired to all those places; and if water is extended to them. All these places are not hard to reach; it is not hard to stay there. I urge Government to sort out all these problems and no place will be hard to reach. I should remind you that those you have mentioned here are not the only places that are hard to reach; there are other places.

Mr Speaker, I was very disappointed to read the report –

THE SPEAKER: I think when they say, hard-to-reach, what they actually mean is hard to live in.

MS NAJJEMBA: Yes, but what I am saying is that there is no single place in Uganda that is hard to live in if the facilities – water, electricity and so on - are extended to those places.

I would like to say that I am a bit disappointed for not reading anything about vocational training schools in this report. Maybe the committee did not find it a priority; to me it is a big priority – that is why we continue to produce job seekers and not job makers! 

We need to prioritise vocational training. I know that Government is doing a great deal on this, with its policy of having a vocational training institute in every sub-county, though I know there are some districts that have none, for example, Bududa and others. Anyhow, let me thank the ministry for renovating Bukalagi Technical Institute. Thank you, Mr Minister. Bukalagi is in my constituency, Gomba.

On health, I would like to say that we can lament and mourn, but if we do not raise salaries of health workers, we are wasting time. If you count the members of Parliament, who are medical workers, you might find they are about five or even 10. The question is, why are they here? It is because there is better pay here? 

HON. MEMBERS: No!

MS NAJJEMBA: Yes! I urge Government to pay health workers to retain them. Brain drain in the medical field is too much; doctors are running away because they are not well paid. Let us pay our doctors and teachers very well and we shall have good service delivery.

On maternal health, I do not know what happened to the maternal health loan request; we are waiting for it. We are not going to pass any loan requests any more if you do not bring the motion for the loan on maternal health. (Applause) We have warned you. 

Page 20 of the report talks about women with disabilities not having facilities in maternity wards. That is very bad. How do you expect them to give birth? That is why I said in the first case that with the loan for maternal health, we should be able to come up with all these issues, and please help us and do not bring these other loans which are not very useful. Bring this one and we shall support it. Thank you very much.

1.11
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two issues, but I also want to thank the committee for this humongous report which, however, is very precise. I want to thank Dr Epetait and hon. Alaso. Apparently, Dr Epetait has got appetite for detail. (Laughter)

I will start with education and talk about the student loan scheme. The report says that the committee noted that the education ministry is planning to formulate the student legal and institutional loan scheme, and in the recommendations they say that the ministry should expedite this process. 

However, I think that is too lukewarm. I do not know about the others, but I think we have the same problem. When I am in the constituency, every time I get out of my house and go to the veranda, there are more than 10 people and they all come with one request, “Please, buy our land”. Because if a parent has got three children in secondary school and three in university, where will he/she get the fees? 

Mr Speaker, there are situations that are called emergencies. This is an emergency because there is a lot of desperation. So, for us to recommend that the Ministry of Education should quicken the process, no! We want a time frame.

I have browsed the Internet and I have produced a document detailing how this loan scheme has worked in some of the countries. I want to present it, but we must have a time frame, otherwise parents out there are really desperate. One parent broke down in my sitting room and said two of her children had said, “If you cannot take us to university, why did you give birth to us?” That is how bad the situation is.

Mr Speaker, I beg the indulgence of members. I just want to give information about KIU. Kampala International University has been offering two scholarships to two students every year for the past seven years - (Interjections) - but I have not finished and you are saying, “So what,” honourable member. This is information that is very vital and very pregnant. 

That is a very good service, Mr Speaker. Not only that. This teaching hospital is going to offer free treatment. We are putting up 1,200 beds and there is going to be free treatment. This is the only private teaching hospital in Uganda. Surely, it needs all our support. And if people think that there are other reasons behind it, I invite you to come and visit this teaching hospital in Ishaka and Bushenyi and you will agree with me that the services provided are for all Ugandans. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

1.15
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am grateful to Hon. Rosemary Seninde and my shadow ministers for the proposals they have given Government. I want to start with the high drop out rates in our primary schools; particularly the high drop out rates of the girl child. I remember there was a tax waiver on sanitary towels, but these products continue to be exorbitantly priced to the extent that parents cannot afford them. I want to give you the basic calculations.

On the Ugandan market, a packet of sanitary towels costs Shs 1,500 and the school term is three months. That requires a girl child to have Shs 4,500 in order to be at school per term. If you multiply that by three in the school year, the requirement is Shs 14,500. And, therefore, I believe that if we provided an increment in the grants, these facilities could be provided through the schools so that every time a girl child walks into a school, she is given a packet of sanitary towels in the first month. If that is done, our girls will not drop out. This can be done. Yes we can.

There was a very cheap innovation by Makerere University that would have been affordable to our parents, but this has not been pursued. What happened to the presidential pledges? If they can be given to the banana programme, they can be given for this purpose, and I think it is important that we do that. 

This is for the information of the committee. The suggestion to have a constituent college of Gulu University in West Nile region is totally unacceptable. We had a meeting in the ministry offices not so long ago, in fact this week, and we reiterated our position very clearly. The President promised, and it is our right anyway, for a public university to be called West Nile University. Therefore, as I speak, we have agreed unanimously that we are taking nothing less than a public university. It must, therefore, be sounded to the ministry, and it is good my former colleague is here, that we in West Nile are taking nothing less than a public university as promised by His Excellency the President, and given as a directive to your ministry to implement it the way it was agreed. Not a constituent college of Gulu University in West Nile because it even sounds ironic. 

I would appeal to all the mothers of this nation not to vote for His Excellency the President ever again, for the following reasons:

One, we were promised and delivered a roadmap of maternal health in this country. The technocrats in the ministry worked around the clock, put in all their energy, and ever since that time, this element has never appeared in the budget of the Ministry of Health. This, therefore, amounts to total deceit and abuse of executive power. One would wonder, then, why would you believe in your head of state if he cannot deliver to you who deliver voters? Why?

Mr Speaker, the pathetic state of our regional referral hospitals. These hospitals have stopped being referral hospitals. They are treating wounds and other petty sicknesses that are supposed to be handled by the lower health centres. Unfortunately, in the NRM regime, these so called lower-level health centres have never worked. As for health centre II, I can assure you that on my way to Rhino Camp, there is one on my right; I will take the hon. Minister there. All the time it is a mating ground for dogs. There is nothing there and there are no drugs; it is such a disturbing scenario. Why did you put the structures there in the first place?

I want to assure this country that unless the lower-level health centres start to work, we are just joking. It pains me fundamentally that until now, in the 21st Century, we have health centres at that level and they just do not work. We are bothered about the statistics of the health centres we have, but we are not bothered about their functionality.

I want to applaud the ministry for one thing, the health centre I – these are the only ones that can work, especially where public health concerns reoccur. Look at our situation in West-Nile as a region; by the way, people prefer calling us a sub-region - we are a full region, not only a sub-region. And in that region, we have only one referral hospital. 

So, given the population and our service to the nearby countries, we deserve a second regional referral hospital. But fundamentally, let there be functionality at the lower health centres so that the referral hospitals do the business of referrals. Otherwise this is just a big time joke –(Member timed out_)

1.21
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): I would like to thank the chairperson for this report and the shadow ministers of the government in waiting for the work you have done. It has done something to spice up the entire debate.

I start with page three; we can look at the figure of Shs 4 billion to Kampala International University. Yes it is big, but the Ministry of Health should come out and tell us the criteria used to select them. The committee has specifically said that it was irrational. I do not know what is behind that word “irrational”. Let them give us the criteria and then we shall decide for ourselves. Otherwise, we might think that it is a deliberate move to skew the balance against the other private universities. 

Regarding the presidential initiatives on banana industrial development, the suggestion is good, but we would like to know how the other monies were spent because we are yet to get value-for-money in this project, and even in others. But for this one, we need a total break down, even if it takes a financial audit. We need to know exactly the impact of the money disbursed by this Parliament, and how far the project has progressed.

On page 4, we are about to appropriate this money, but I am taken aghast when the committee brings out such a finding that the donor funds are not captured by the system. Where does the reporting go? I think I should excite the shadow minister, hon. Oduman, to take keen interest in this matter. 

It is not a matter of just receiving money from the donors and appropriating it here when we do not know what we are doing. If need be, we can call for a ten-year audit for these monies. When we appropriate, it is our oversight duty as Parliament to follow this money. I do not know at what stage we are going to readjust, but we should look into this matter.

The loan scheme is taking too long, particularly the Makerere students loan scheme. Ever since the Seventh Parliament, we have been promised – the university fees have been increased and I do not know why the minister does not come up with a paper where we can ask Government. As Parliament, we should know what forces the fees structures to be adjusted against the poor students of this country. If it is for building, let us shoulder that instead of loading it on the parents. 

Already, UPE is stunted; now even tertiary education is becoming stunted because most of the people in this country cannot afford it. I remember the President at one time quoting that without people being educated, we cannot progress. But if you are killing it on the top, yet it is already stunted at the bottom, then where are we heading?

On UPE, we should take this more seriously. It seems the money we appropriate for UPE does not reach the target. This needs a real value-for-money audit so that we can get to the bottom of the problem on how this money is spent. 

For the benefit of this House, if you look at the demographic structure of this country, 56 percent of the population of Uganda are young. The age between one and fifteen are 18 million. And between 15 to 21 years, they are about 5 million. If we kill this generation, nobody is going to be safe. 

Those who are eating UPE money should be brought to book. We need a special audit for both the financial and value-for-money, so that we get to the bottom of the matter. It seems something is badly wrong in this country.

I want to wind up by looking at special needs and then Makerere University. The chairperson says on page 6(g) that the committee recommends the provision for Special Needs Education. They should have used the phrase “a separate vote” because you cannot give us that elaboration when the people with special needs are not being catered for properly. I think the committee should have suggested that they come up with a separate vote such that they are looked at in that vote rather than using the word ‘provision’. 

I think we should come out to save Makerere University. The workers are being laid off and there is a funding gap for laying them off. Such attrition at higher institutions level demoralises the entire country. 

How do you start laying off people without making preparations? Already their saving scheme is in danger under the National Insurance Corporation. They do not know about their pension, and now they are being laid off, and yet there is no money to lay them off. Even students cannot afford school fees. I wish we should give the best that Makerere University deserves, particularly when laying off these people –(Member timed out_)

1.29
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I have just made an observation that the committee report is not strong enough, especially on the issues of health in Uganda. I want to decry the state of our health sector in Uganda, and everything must be done by members of Parliament and by everybody concerned, to ensure that we restore efficiency and effective delivery of services in this very important sector. 

Building a health network does not necessarily mean constructing buildings. I think that the most important aspect is to fund health workers, remunerate them and stock drugs and equipment. Despite the fact that we have got so many health units sprouting and that Government is assisting the community in building so many health units, you realise that most of these units do not have drugs, they do not have health workers, and they do not have equipment. 

Just recently, I visited Mulago Hospital. A friend of mine had been delivered of a baby with complications, and this baby was taken to the Special Care Unit of Mulago. I got the opportunity of visiting the Special Care Unit of Mulago and I was appalled. Four babies in very delicate condition were sharing a cylinder of Oxygen, while 30 women waited in line to take a turn to access an incubator. There are only five incubators in the Special Care Unit of Mulago and I found a line of 30 women with premature babies waiting in line to use the five incubators. Now, if this is the condition in a National Referral Hospital, how is the situation in Hoima, Fort Portal, Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Gulu and the rest? And that is why I believe and observed that this report is not hard enough on this sector. 

It is 2009 and you still have Ugandans giving birth to babies in yam gardens and banana plantations? These were the conditions of the 1940s; but in the year of our Lord 2009, you still have women delivering babies under banana plantations? 

I am going to take charge of Government in the near future -(Laughter)- and I would not like to lead a population that cannot trace their year of birth or even place of birth. When you ask a Ugandan where they were born, they will tell you they are not very sure. “When were you born?” They will say, “Maybe at the time of the Temangalo saga.” I think we must help Government to end this kind of scenario, and that is why I am disheartened that here we are talking about funding patriotic clubs when we cannot even provide basic and social services. 

Why can’t we reallocate this money meant for patriotic clubs to, for instance, acquiring equipment for the children in the special care units in Mulago, and other referral hospitals –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Mabikke, for giving way, and thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give you is that you cannot be patriotic when you are sick. So, one can only be patriotic when they go to the hospital and get drugs or get help, and then you can say, “My government is doing well.” 

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, I would like to reiterate that it was a wrong strategy for us to put so much money in constructing health centre IVs. I visited Benin and it is one of the least developed countries in Africa, but they seem to have a better health network than Uganda. They have not constructed hospitals; in fact, they have got very few hospitals, but what the Government of Benin has done is to acquire so many mobile health units and they have equipped these mobile health units with all the drugs you can think of and health workers. These units are getting to as far off places as possible and they are sensitising, treating simple diseases, and even evacuating the complicated cases to hospitals. This is much more effective than having health centre IVs and IIIs which do not have health workers; which do not have equipment; and which do not have drugs –(Member timed out_)

1.36
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to recite a verse in the book of knowledge and wisdom. It is found in Colossians 3:23. It reads, “In all work you are given, do the best you can. Work as though you are working for the Lord not for any earthly master or for any earthly gain.”

I am bringing a new voice. It is true that there is a demand that we must pay our teachers and health workers well, and there is no doubt about it. But as we are grappling with that problem, our health workers, teachers and all people in this country should know that we are in the service of the Lord. We are not serving any master in this world, and we are not serving anybody for any monetary gain.

We have chosen careers. Choosing a career is not very easy. You choose a career basing on your talent. You did not give yourself that talent; the talent was given by God and you must put it to God’s service and nothing else.

I was terrorised when I saw that a pregnant woman died in a hospital in Mityana simply because she could not give a nurse Shs 50,000. It was terrorising. Where is your talent that God gave you to help this woman? Where is the career that you have chosen? Which is your property until you die? I know we are not paying them, and it seems that we are hiding behind pay not to do our work in this country.

We must develop a positive attitude towards our work. It is one thing to have a positive attitude towards work and it is another to gain from your work. Ugandans, you must know that - you may not be gaining from your work, the work that you have been called to execute - You must use your talent and your career to advance the cause of humanity -(Interjections)- What are you saying? 

MR LOOTE: Thank you, hon. Chris. The clarification I am seeking from you is, how can you develop career ethics and patriotism when even doctors in our hospitals abandon patients and go to run their own clinics? I heard one old woman saying if she had powers, she would close all the clinics and have wel facilitated hospitals.

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, we have a very genuine concern. What I have seen in this country is moral decadence. Our morals have decayed and died. People have no integrity and this is the biggest problem. It is not about pay. If it was about pay, this Parliament would be full. How much money do you take home per month and where are you? It is about morality; about work ethics; and about the integrity of people.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kibanzanga, where is your church so that we come to get this speech? (Laughter)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is not about a church Jesus Christ preached to the whole world along the road; along the lake shores; and everywhere. We are here in the Chamber. 

The morals of this country must be revived. Unfortunately, even the leadership does not know the levels and stages of our moral development and reasoning. This is because if we knew these levels and stages, it would be very easy to induct our people from the lowest levels and stages of development to the highest levels of development and then we move the country forward.

It is not easy to stop a pastor. (Laughter) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the time you have given me, but allow me to make one comment about school fees in public universities. 

These universities are competing with private universities in terms of charging school fees. Do you ever think that you are taxing us twice? Our fathers have paid taxes, which you appropriate here to run public universities. When our children are going to school, we again pay a lot of money to public universities. 

I have a conviction that if these public universities charged lower in terms of school fees, you would regulate private universities. You can imagine a peasant paying Shs 1.9 million for a child studying Medicine at Makerere University. What will Mukono do? What will KIU do? What will other private universities do? And you are there and you think you are in charge. You are taxing people twice and you cannot even think about it.

It is my strongest conviction that public universities should regulate private universities in terms of standards, tuition, morality and integrity, but you are also dancing to the tunes of private universities, which you have no means to even regulate. I thank you very much for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is now 15 minutes to 2.00 p.m. I think this is a convenient time to suspend the proceedings. Let us reconvene at 3.00 p.m. prompt and we continue getting some contributions, hear the minister and then wind up. Proceedings suspended.

(The House was suspended at 1.44 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.03 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

3.04
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for raising pertinent issues in this report. However, I would like to add a few concerns especially on the issues of education and health.

On education, I remember very well four years ago. The programme of BTVET was planned to be extended to more districts, and among the districts that were listed was Kalangala. These districts were requested to identify land for construction of BTVET institutions; this land was identified, but since then, nothing has been done and the land is lying redundant, and nothing is going on. I would like to request Government to give an explanation to the nation as to what is happening to this BTVET extension programme.

I also want to raise my concern about the farm schools under the Ministry of Education which were established way back in 1960s. 

The major purpose of starting these schools was to take on dropouts from primary schools, and now that we have a universal primary school programme, I think their purpose has been overtaken by events. 

One of such institutions is Ssese Farm School which was supposed to take on dropouts from primary schools, but they are now taking students from O’level and A’level. Can the government now think of upgrading these institutions so that they run according to the current situation, because we do not expect anymore primary dropouts since there is universal primary education? I expect the minister to give a clarification as to why these farm schools are not upgraded to institutions.

I want to thank the committee and the government for categorising Kalangala as one of the hard-to-reach districts because life there is very difficult. I also want to extend my appreciation to Government for giving a top-up to teachers. However, there is one big concern with deployment and allocation of teachers to schools, because in the education policy, allocation of teachers is pegged on the number of students. It depends on the teacher-pupil ratio, but because of the uniqueness of some areas like Kalangala, you find a school on an isolated island where you cannot get enough pupils to reach. Therefore, you find a primary school which is not a multi-grade school but having five teachers, whereas it has seven classes. Some classes go without teachers. I want the ministry of education to consider this uniqueness. Just as you considered these areas to be hard-to-reach, you should also consider the uniqueness and waive that regulation on teacher ceiling so that all the students in those hard-to-reach areas can access quality education.

In relation to the health sector, I request Government to also start giving hardship allowance to doctors because it has become very difficult to retain doctors in the difficult areas to stay in. As I talk now, Kalangala has only one doctor and that medical doctor is doing administrative work. People there are getting problems especially when they get serious cases. Doctors that are recruited cannot be retained because they find staying there very difficult. I want to ask Government to extend hardship allowance even to medical staff.

Another concern is about ambulances; we have been complaining about them for so many years. The nearest referral hospital for Kalangala is Masaka, but because of lack of an ambulance, many people have died before they reach hospital.

One week ago, a pregnant woman died. She had stayed in a health centre IV and was supposed to be referred to Masaka but there were no means of transport - no ambulance. After one and a half days, she died. This kind of situation does not only pain the relatives, but it pains all the Ugandans. So, can the Ministry of Health start thinking about providing functional ambulances to such districts?

I want also to request for more support to outreach programmes in the Ministry of Health, so that a geographically problematic area like Kalangala can be provided with money, where the staff can move in their mobile clinics and conduct clinic days on different islands and in different settlements. I know Government cannot put health centres on every island or in every place, but the ministry can think more about providing mobile clinics and outreach programmes to difficult areas – 

THE SPEAKER: Before you come, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Katwe Vocational School, Ngalama in the Sub-county of Bukanga Isingiro District. You are welcome. (Appluase) They are represented by Hon. Nathan Byanyima.

3.12 
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale):  Before I proceed to comment on the report of the Committee on Social Services, I just want to seek the indulgence of the Prime Minister on whether the comments we are going to raise about the education sector will be noted; I do not see anybody from that ministry.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a Prime Minister, I am duly noting all that is being said in respect of the various sectors. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Prime Minister. Let me begin with the health sector. The committee made an observation that among the achievements of the Ministry of Health, they have started on the rehabilitation and construction of different hospitals in the country. I know this is part of the loan that we approved here in 2007. This work was supposed to commence in May 2008, but as a beneficiary, I would like to report that I have two health units; one at Kamuganguzi and the other at Butanda where the work has taken almost a year without being completed. And if you went there to see what is being done – it is just amazing. 

One of the reasons that the Ministry of Health is giving us is that the contractors who were given the work had too many lots to handle and so they could not take on all the lots at the same time. I am wondering whether this work is going to be completed in the specific time that the loan was speculated to –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and hon. Bahati, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that there are so many health centres in the western region - about 28 of them - where all the work was given to one contractor, Multiplex. I can report that the contractor has virtually done nothing. I am disappointed that the committee, in its report, said the work is going on. It is not going on; the work is stuck. The contractor is not doing any work. I think the committee should visit that place to see for itself. The problem is that there is too much work for one contractor. Thank you.

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to report that we actually found the same problem in Masaka last week when the Minister of Health visited us. The major complaint was that when tenders are given, the local management teams are not involved. The same thing happens at the time of paying the contractors. So, they cannot tell who the contractor is and for what work a particular contractor is paid. My suggestion is that we should always involve the local management teams at both tendering and payment stages.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, colleagues, for the information. Probably, we request that if a given contractor cannot manage the work that has been assigned to them, at least let them sub-contract so that work can move on.

Let me say something about the support by Government to public universities. I want to make it clear that we are not against any support that is being given to Kampala International University; what we are demanding here is fairness. We should be fair to all private universities that are supposed to receive support. For example, we have a university –

THE SPEAKER: You mean private universities and not public?

MR BAHATI: Yes, private universities. I beg your pardon on that. In Kabale, we have Kabale University, which is a private university and recognised by the Ministry of Education and Sports, but since it started, it has never received even the Shs 0.5 billion that other private universities are receiving from Government. The point I am making is about fairness to all private universities.
 
In 2006, the NRM Government pledged to the people of Uganda that it would offer Universal Secondary Education, which was implemented in 2007. I think this Parliament has done all it could to support the government by passing the relevant laws like the Education Act, which has made it compulsory for all school-going children to go to school. What that meant to me was that education, especially UPE and USE became the core priorities of Government in addition to Prosperity-for-All, peace and development. 

However, the observations raised by the committee on page 5 of the report about the delayed release of funds to these schools, and the delayed access to the payrolls by teachers recruited into Government schools, is extremely disturbing. I think the recommendation is just too light; we cannot take it the way it is. We need to make a special recommendation, for example, by calling on the Auditor-General to investigate what is happening. Why should a school take a whole term without getting the UPE contributing fund when Parliament appropriates such money in time? I have a special case of Kakomo Secondary School, which has just gone into partnership with the Ministry of Education, but has now taken two terms without receiving any USE contributions from Government - there was a Memorandum of Understanding.

We also have teachers who have never, for the last eight months, accessed their salaries let alone the payroll, yet they continue to teach. We need to ask the Ministry of Education and Sports to be serious. We should also ask the Auditor-General to look into this to discover what happens to the delayed release of funds from the ministry to these schools. When you approach the ministry, sometimes you are told that the real problem is the computer yet we thought we are computerising to ease the process. But now it looks like the computer is doing the reverse. 

On that note, I want to once again thank the committee for presenting this report. I also want to thank the shadow ministers – it is unfortunate they are not here – but I think we have common grounds on a number of issues that were raised, especially in regard to patriotism clubs.  

I want to agree with hon. Alaso that it is good – the issue of whether patriotism can be taught or not is debatable, but I think it is a good idea, which we can support. However, why not start with the clubs that already exist in these schools like the boy scouts and girl guides clubs?

THE SPEAKER: I think when they talk about teaching, they mean sensitisation. That is what they call teaching. Don’t you think the young children should be sensitised or we just leave it that God has planted it in them?

MR BAHATI: Thank you for that clarification. I think the point I am making is that as we allocate these funds, let us know that there is some work being done by voluntary clubs that already exist in schools. One example is the Boys Scouts and the Girl Guides. These are clubs that teach children how to love God, love their country and serve their neighbours. These are the clubs that have not really been funded for the last so many years that we have known them, and yet they are really good clubs that can nurture values that we want from these patriotic clubs. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.22
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues to appreciate the committee for the job well done. I have just two issues to comment on. 

The first one is that I want to appreciate, from the report on page 23, the plan of 2009/2010 which says the ministry intends to develop and accelerate growth of new sub-specialities of psycho-trauma, alcohol and drug abuse as well as child and adolescent psychiatric patients. However, when I go ahead and read this, it appears to me that the Ministry of Health is still thinking of psycho-traumatic patients in hospitals only. 

On this Floor of Parliament, I have before raised a concern about my people, the people not only of Oyam but of northern and eastern Uganda who underwent war and are terribly traumatised. Is the ministry telling us that they are going to wait for all these people who are so traumatised to first break down and then go and be treated in these mental health units? I want to challenge the Ministry of Health that you need to come out with a proper programme for addressing the issue of trauma in Northern Uganda. 

I am aware that under PRDP, there is the aspect of psycho-social support, but this is left to non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and development partners. These people are not evenly distributed in the different districts. There is an over-concentration in Gulu – (Interruption) 

MS KAMYA: Thank you, my sister, for giving way and I thank you, Mr Speaker. The question of trauma management is very important. Psycho-trauma management is very important and very dear, close to the hearts of most of us. I would encourage members here when they talk about that subject to consider all people who go through such experiences. Even today, there are people who are picked from their homes or from the streets, they are taken to safe houses or wherever and they are tortured. So, it is not just about Northern Uganda; it is about so many people who have suffered trauma. Thank you.

MS LAGADA: Thank you, hon. Beti, for the information, but do not take any more of my time with your debate. My point is a very specific one; I am talking about people who stayed in camps for 20 years. They can never be like the other Ugandans. I want Government to come out very clearly with a programme for addressing that and not leave it to non-governmental organisations. 

First of all, non-governmental organisations do not have specialised staff. Let me tell you, my own daughter and sister worked in World Vision and they were dealing with this problem of psycho-trauma and they ended up being traumatised themselves. So, where is your programme for dealing with that issue? 

The effects of trauma are already being felt. A few months ago, the Law Reform Commission came out with a report on a survey on domestic violence. The northern region came out on the top for men beating women. It was the northern ranking first and then the eastern region. I will not rest until Government rises up to the challenge of coming out with a proper framework for addressing that problem in my region. 

Secondly, there is the question of substance abuse, and alcohol abuse which has already been mentioned. We are in the unenviable position of being the number one drunkards in the world. What have we done to address this? Government ought to come out decisively and deal with the alcohol which is packed in buvera and costs about Shs 200. It is accessible even to children. 

In addition to that problem, Cannabis has been mentioned in this House today by the Shadow Minister of Health. I want to report that in the North, especially in Amuru and Gulu, the ground where charcoal has been burnt is very fertile ground for growing Cannabis. People there are busy growing and consuming Cannabis. Is Government aware of it?

The other subject that is dear to me is the question of maternal health. I want to thank the Shadow Minister for highlighting it. The women of Uganda did present to Government the roadmap for maternal health. In our conversations with the Minister of Health, I note that Government agreed that they were going to get a loan for this problem. As an interested party and chair of gender, I have been very interested, together with my colleague, hon. Sarah Nyombi, in following up this matter. To the best of our knowledge, Ministry of Health has not made any loan request for carrying out this roadmap of maternal health. When are you going to do it? Is the health of the women of Uganda not important enough for money to be borrowed? This year the women parliamentarians are not going to wear white; we are going to wear black because women are dying. 

Lastly, I want to talk about patriotic clubs. We are all aware that in the Constitution of Uganda, under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, no. XXIX states the duties of a citizen and it says that every citizen shall have the duty to be patriotic and loyal to Uganda and promote its well-being. That being the case, we should not have a debate on whether there should be patriotic clubs in Uganda. We should be asking ourselves, as leaders, are we satisfied that Ugandans are patriotic? 

These things we are talking about - the haemorrhage of funds meant for health centres, schools and others - why is it like that? It is because the people handling these things are not patriotic; they do not understand the meaning of the word. Therefore, when His Excellency the President of this country identifies and says that we have to do something about patriotism, as indeed directed by the Constitution, then we should come in and support. Maybe what we should ask is the best way of going about it, because we cannot sit back and close our eyes and keep on saying that Ugandans are corrupt, things are going wrong, etc. Let us start somewhere. 

I am a teacher and I know that it is very easy to mould the minds of students. If they are in clubs that are talking about good values, selfless service or talking about things that encourage a person to give a little more of himself to his community, then definitely tomorrow you will have better citizens of Uganda. If you are talking about a midwife who can allow another woman to die because she cannot give her Shs 50,000, then we are in dire trouble. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.31
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the committee for the report and the various recommendations in that report. 

I want to draw the attention of this House to page 8, and that is Makerere University. Section 17 of the Budget Act is very clear and it says that a minister responsible for any vote on appropriation-in-aid shall make a quarterly report to Parliament on the matter in which the funds from that vote are expended. It further requires a report to be made under this section to reflect specific data on value-for-money in the expenditures involved.  

We met the Minister of Finance some time early this week and it was one of the issues we brought up on appropriation. Who are these entities? Makerere University is one of those that have been authorised to spend money at source, but it is true that for the whole of the last financial year, we have not received any report from the Ministry of Education regarding the money that is collected at source by Makerere University or how this money is spent to reflect value-for-money in the way it is expended. 

I want to inquire from the minister why this section 17 of the Budget Act has not been adhered to; and secondly, whether in this financial year, with effect from September, we shall start receiving those reports. It is not only Makerere University; there are also other institutions under your ministry that have been given that authorisation. So, we need that clearance.

Mr Speaker, in the various debates in this House, one of the issues that have been highlighted was the issue of asbestos roofing in many of our Government schools. The main reason it was cited was the effect asbestos has on the health of these students who sleep under those roofs or who drink the water from those roofs. When there is water scarcity, these students collect that water and drink it. The House was concerned that actually our children could contract some dangerous cancers as a result of this exposure to asbestos material. 

I remember that the minister made a commitment that her ministry would, in future, and I believe it should have been in this budget, try to budget for the replacement of these rooftops so that the students who sleep under these asbestos roofs are secure in terms of their health. I have not seen it in the budget and I do not know when we will be getting it. I do not know what assurance the minister will give us today in terms of re-roofing these schools with such roofing materials. 

I want to move to page 22, and that is the Ministry of Health. I want to also thank the committee for recommending that we recentralise the recruitment of health workers. I believe it is to improve service delivery, but along with that, I think it is high time we thought of providing job related accommodation to health staff. Their kind of work is meant to be 24 hours and it has been cited even in the papers that some of our health workers have met their deaths on the way home after duty because they do not sleep at their places of work. 

I also want to refer to page 23 on the issue of the Cancer Radiotherapy Unit at Mulago, which is now obsolete. We have raised this issue on several occasions here in the House and I have not seen here in the policy statement that the ministry is now prepared to procure a radiotherapy unit for Mulago Hospital. The current status as reported here is that it has only one obsolete machine. 

It is very unfortunate that 80 percent of the people who go there are women. Mr Speaker, if you went there by 7.00 a.m. or even 6.00 a.m., you would find a line of about 50 women waiting to receive a service from this machine.  Unfortunately, it can only work on eight people per day. So, they have to come so early. The doctors report at 7.00 a.m. in the morning hoping to at least attend to their patients, and by 5.00 p.m. they have only attended to about four or five people. So, they work up to 11.00 p.m. in the night. It is pathetic and yet this is the only machine for the whole country. It even serves the people of Sudan, Kigali and Congo. I really want to make a humble request to the ministry; these women who line up from 5.00 a.m. waiting for treatment, it is their right and we should not deny them –(Member timed out_)

3.38
MS MARY TURYAHIKAYO (NRM, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the Committee on Social Services. I will start with issues to do with education and especially UPE. On page 5 when they were talking about recommendations, they mentioned that it is because of automatic promotion that students are not doing well. 

Among the recommendations, I feel that they should have added something to do with the quality of the teachers. We are aware in Uganda we have been having problems with some teachers, and even other professionals; we have been having problems with certificates even from the university. We have doubted the quality and authenticity of these certificates, and in our primary schools it is not a story but the truth. There are teachers who are teaching using certificates other than their own. 

This means that the district service commissions should, every year or I do not know how often, take it upon themselves to prove and find out the authenticity of the teachers who teach our children in our schools. Although we talk about automatic promotion, it is important to know that even the information that these children are given from the unqualified teachers is a hazard to the education of this country.

Secondly, on UPE, we are talking about salaries. It is very important that these teachers get a salary increase, but how do we explain the fact that some private schools in the rural setting, which are earning a quarter of the salaries that the Government teachers earn, are getting better students than our Government paid teachers. Our teachers get higher salaries than many in private schools, and yet the private schools are proving to have better quality education than our government schools. So, in my opinion, it is more than simply giving salaries. The UPE programme needs to be revisited.

There are areas where parents can afford lunch for their children every day and can pack it the way our parents used to pack food for us. However, these parents are also relaxing and waiting for the Government to provide lunch. We know that the North and the East have had very many problems all these years; if somebody says lunch is not available, it could be understood. But there are areas which have never had those problems and the parents do not give lunch to the children. 

I think UPE as a whole needs to be revisited. Why, for example, do some teachers believe that it is the parents who should give them lunch? The teachers get their salary. Although it is not enough, it is important that a teacher plans for his lunch just as he plans for his dinner. Honourable minister, I think it is very important that we revisit the UPE programme because there is more than meets the eye.

When we go to USE, I thank our Government for having selected some schools for USE. I know that if the funds were available, every school would be under this programme, which would be very good for the country. However, there are schools which are not under USE. I know the government pays salaries of teachers and pays capitation grants, and yet there are many schools that are paying higher fees than the private secondary schools where the government does not spend any money. How do you explain that, honourable minister? 

I believe we need a system to regulate these Government secondary schools that are hiking their fees every term. Some parents find it cheaper to take their children to private secondary schools where the government is not paying any money for the teachers, rather than taking them to Government schools. I think this is a disservice to the children of this country.

I will talk about our university campus Kihumuro, the Mbarara University of Science and Technology. While I agree that there should be support to private universities, I think as Government we should prioritise our Government universities. There is no reason why the campus of Kihumuro should have taken all these years without being developed and yet we divert the funds to private universities. First satisfy our Government needs and then look to the other private universities. That is my view. Why don’t you first clean your own home before you go to better somebody’s initiative? That is what I feel.

Finally, I would like to talk about our health facilities. I thank the ministry of –(Member timed out_)

3.44
MR LASTUS SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I thank you, hon. Speaker. I also thank the committee for the good report and the supplementaries from the Opposition.

On UPE, the programme is quite good and many of our people who had children who would never have had a chance to go to school got the opportunity. Unfortunately, management is still lacking. One of the issues is feeding the children. I think we need a strong and clear policy that the parents are supposed to feed their children, otherwise we get counter accusations. When parents are told to feed their children, some leaders go and say, “You should not feed the children” and that brings a big problem because hungry children cannot be taught and they learn.

I think this policy should not stop at only UPE. We should be clear with the feeding because even in the committee’s report on page 9, it talks about Makerere University going to outsource the feeding of students. Since the university has a lot of problems as regards affording to pay their academic costs, I would think that we need a general policy that parents feed their children at whatever level and Government concentrates on the core business of education, materials, infrastructure etc. Otherwise, if the teaching institutions get involved in the non-core business of cooking and looking for utensils, we will lose the point.

On UPE and USE, delayed payment derails the activities of the schools. First of all, the funding from Government is at the bare minimum and once it delays, it puts the operations to a standstill. You reach many schools and they do not even have chalk because the headmaster cannot purchase the chalk, and yet the children are at school.

Also, the inspectorate division is so weak. When you visit these schools, the attendance of both the teachers and pupils is so low and drastic that even the actual numbers in these schools is difficult to tell. You can never go to any primary school and you get full attendance at any one time.

As far as university is concerned, what is current? Even on radio today I heard that the students want to go on strike because of fees. In the committee’s report, there is no evidence that some action is going to be taken to alleviate this problem. One of the fears we have is that the universities are becoming for only those who can afford. If you come from a third world school, you can never get the best grades and that means you will never get Government sponsorship.

People who have goodwill and wish to join certain professions will never be able to go there. It is only those who have opportunity and are pushed there. No wonder we are getting sub-standard services from not only teachers, but also medical workers and other professionals. People do not go for the professions they would have wished to go for because they cannot afford the fees. Those who can afford end up being the ones trained and they do not provide the service. I request that this House puts forward the loan scheme to be tabled by the ministry by next financial year so that we enable the poor to join the universities.

As far as the patriotism clubs are concerned, I would say it should not include only the school-going children, but also those out of school as well as adults. The implementation should have a wider scope. 

3.50
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Bulambuli County, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. On page 5, the committee has noted the poor quality of UPE due to automatic promotions, poor teachers’ remuneration and lack of feeding. 

You find that these days teachers get salary loans for four years and many of them are engaged in business and do not go to school. Some teachers even ride boda bodas. There are many of such cases in my constituency in Bulambuli. I have impounded seven boda bodas from primary teachers. They are in my house. (Laughter) So, it is not true that it is because the money is little, but it is because they are indisciplined and there is no supervision at all. 

On the policy of school feeding, there are many parents who are willing to provide money for lunch, but last year, the President was at our place and said parents should not pay such money. Recently we had famine and in some places famine is still there. So, now if you encourage pupils to carry packed food and there is no food at home, what are you going to pack for the pupil? I think let us be practical so that where parents can afford, they pack the food.

On sanitation in primary schools, I had the chance to get some Ecosan toilets, but none of them have been used. So, that was wasteful expenditure. All of them have collapsed; I do not know what is happening.

When it comes to USE, there is a memorandum between private owners and the government. I think we should review that because there are many people who have registered such schools and have now turned them into purely private ones and yet they are getting money from Government. There is a community school in my parish and the man who owns this school draws money from Government and does other things with it. There is nothing at all on ground. So, we have to review those terms. Why can’t Government grant aid to community schools rather than giving help to just private ones? 

When it comes to the head count, it is true the ministry is trying to see if they have the actual numbers, but in reality I do not agree with their method of head counting. They use GISOs, but who is a GISO? He is a local man around and anything can happen. I think there is a problem there, and I want the Ministry of Education to fix this. Why can’t they get a team from the ministry to do the head count? So, this is a big problem. 

When it comes to vocational training, the ministry at one time said that each sub-county must have a vocational institute, but in my constituency, Bulambuli, we do not have any vocational training school. We are trying to establish one with support from Uganda Women Concern, an NGO, but they want a community contribution of Shs 80 million and yet these are poor people. The other day we were on a fundraising drive and we only managed to raise Shs 1.3 million. I gave one million so the rest gave Shs 300,000. 

I think Government should support those people who are coming up, just like they are giving money to private universities. We could as well support such initiatives other than leaving it to the community alone. 

On placement of head teachers, many secondary schools are now manned by what we call caretakers. I think under the Education Service Commission, the ministry should recruit head teachers and post them to schools. Government is sending money there but the person who is caretaking is not bothered to make a follow-up on that. 

On providing meals at the university, I have seen there is a shortfall; they have provided Shs 2,800 per day and on average that is Shs 900 per meal. Really, where can you get food for Shs 900? Issues of food should be automatic and there should be no discussion over that.
 
On health, some of us have abandoned most of these health centre IIIs because it is only buildings that you find there.

3.57
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My main interest in this debate is about the quality of education in this country. 

A year or so ago I did raise, on the Floor of this House, the issue of the ever declining standards of education in this country and the Minister of Education was here. I vividly remember that in her reply she gave one of the causes of the declining performance in national examinations, especially in the previously prestigious national senior secondary schools like my former school, St Joseph’s College Ombachi in Arua. She said it was because some of these schools are very old and they have outlived their usefulness. The minister did forget that schools like 
Budo and Namilyango, some of the first and oldest senior secondary schools in this country, are also some of the leading schools.

In my view, privatisation of education in this country is to condemn the children who come from poor families to total illiteracy. When I joined senior one in 1970, in that school you would have 40 students in a class and in that one stream you could see a whole spectrum of the various tribes in this country.(Interjections) I remember there was a boy who was younger than me, although I was one of the youngest in the class, who came from Bugisu. We had students who came from as far as Fort Portal, Bunyoro and even in Buganda here, going to St Joseph’s College because it was one of the shining schools that time- (Members rose_) – I do not have the time. I am sorry.

When you come to Primary Leaving Examinations, Maracha County used to be one of the leading counties in producing the best results. Every year Maracha County would produce more than 100 students in division one in PLE. However, last year alone, Maracha only produced a mere eight - one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and eight. This whole county with the shining primary schools is what we are talking about.

Sometime back, in May 2008, the President visited Vurra County and I was there to receive him. In that school, there was a brand new building constructed under this Government. Next to it was another primary school which was built under the previous Government, probably in the 70s or late 60s, and the President was comparing the two. Of course we admit that this Government has constructed many schools but in comparing the two structures in that school called Ekarakafe in Vurra County, it did not occur to the President that the old structure he was talking about was the structure that had produced people like Dr Mallinga who is now the Minister of Health Mr Speaker, yourself - I believe you also had your primary education some many miles away from Kampala in a rural school before you came to these secondary schools which are concentrated here. So, those old structures are the ones that produced engineers, lawyers, doctors, mention them. 

But what do you get out of these shining primary schools and secondary schools with very good structures where students cannot even attain division one? What is the purpose? What purpose does it serve to have good structures with very poor results? (Member timed out_)

4.03
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Nobody can tell you to love your mother because your mother produces you and breastfeeds you; that is your mother. Nobody should tell us to be taught to love Uganda. Uganda should be loved and we should love it if it provides goods and services to the population. If I go to the hospital and I do not get drugs will I love Uganda? If I go to school and I do not get education, will I love Uganda? I think we must be realistic that we do not need to be taught to love this country. We need to know by provision of services.

Recently, I was watching a television programme and the youth were saying, “Why should we be led by people who do not know the computer or who do not know how to send even SMS?” If you look at the Ministry of Health, who are the leaders there? Can they work on the computer? Look at education. Can they try using a computer? (Laughter) These are people with ideas of the 50s- (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to use unparliamentary language and refer to our ministers as people who do not know how to operate computers when they have saved and given out to schools in Sironko? Is he really in order?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -(Interjections)- the Speaker has kept quiet; that is the ruling. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

Health: anybody who aids somebody to kill commits murder. If you do not treat somebody in the hospital and he dies, you have committed murder. If a minister in charge of health cannot supervise people to get drugs and be treated and people die, he has committed murder. 

The minister is the overall supervisor of that ministry. You cannot give us expired drugs. Uganda National Bureau of Standards is useless; you can clear drugs which are not helpful. As for National Drug Authority, I do not know where they are and yet people are dying and the minister is seeing all this. Is this fair?

This country belongs to all of us. And since it belongs to all of us, it is very unfair that only a small number of the people are benefiting from our taxes.

In 1986, the revenue of this country was Shs 30 billion. Now it is Shs 7,500 billion. The population by then was 16 million and now it is 30. That means it has almost doubled but the revenue has gone up 25,000 percent. That is 250 times. I recall that all students who would go to the university at Makerere at that time were paid for.

The same number which was paid for in 1986 is the same number being paid for now yet the economic growth has increased. Is that fair? Who is taking out resources? why should we have State House Scholarships, which only a few people can access like the ministers who are near the President; is this fair?

You can see that Prof. Kamuntu is happy because Bushenyi where the International Institute is has got Shs 4 billion –(Prof. Kamuntu rose on information_) – I am well informed, hon. Kamuntu. I went to school. KIU got Shs 4 billion – 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Order -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you stand for information, and then, without anything happening, then you turn it to order.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, when a member of this House decides to argue with you when the Rules of Procedure are very clear; when he continues his propensity without any cause; the man is shouting at us for no reason. And when he deliberately tells lies to this House; he knows Kampala International University has campuses around the country - here in Kampala and in the West. But he wants to show that it is in the West, which is sectarian and dangerous, and we should not allow hon. Mafabi to get away with it. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, it would be out of order for anybody to quarrel in this House. But the point is, if one stands for information, he cannot change it to order. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have lost about five minutes as a result of Prof. Kamuntu; you see, we anticipate that professors should be of high calibre but what Prof. Kamuntu has said – anyway! Shs 4 billion to Kampala International University, Shs 22 billion from Bank of Uganda to the same people of Kampala International University. 

Gulu University is getting Shs 0.5 billion; Busoga, Shs 0.5; Bugisu, nothing! Is this how we should allocate resources? Rwenzori region, nothing! Mr Speaker, this country belongs to all of us. We plead with the people allocating funds that they should allocate resources taking into consideration that Constitution which says that those who are less developed should be supported more. 

Western Uganda is more developed than Northern Uganda or the North West - I think that is the best way to help this country. 

We have taken our children to universities; we have borrowed money to take them to schools. When they reach Makerere, it is the poor parents who have to pay in the universities. Those who get sponsorship are the well-to-do. We must rationalise this. The other time we talked about it, Government should come out and pay for university education so that we can pay for the education of our people. To have patriotism, we must develop the human resource –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery, we have visitors from the United Kingdom led by Ms Zena Zenaco. These are the people supporting the people of Bunyaruguru in Bushenyi district. You are welcome. 

4.11
MS BETI AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Mr Speaker, I want to start with the committee’s observation in page 9 under Makerere student’s welfare, where in this Budget of 2009/10, the committee asserts only Shs 2,881 is provided for per day. However, the University Council agreed to a rate of 4,000 for the students’ welfare.

Honourable members, the budget shortfall amounts to Shs 2.6 billion. I started with this because I wanted to pick on education as a fundamental right. The priority that we give to education verses the background of the majority of this country being poor is unfair. We seat in this House after being voted by these poor people, but we fail to protect the fundamental rights of the people who gave us the votes.

I want to give you an example; UPE allocation per pupil is Shs 6,000 annually. USE is Shs 41,000 per term per student; we are singing that Government is funding Universal Secondly Education, but allocation is Shs 41,000. For private schools that Government partners with, it is Shs 47,000 per term under USE. These are the monies we give to support the local people who vote us to study, and to get quality education. I want to ask members of this House, how much do you pay, per term for your children in nursery and in secondary? Some of you are even taking your children outside these schools. In my case, my son whom I pay for at nursery school in Kampala Junior Academy, I pay Shs. 540,000 per term. That is only school fees, and you have to drop the child everyday, so you account for fuel. So, in a term, you find that you have used Shs 1 million for a child. 

Those who take their kids to other private schools, how much do you spend per term? And you sit here and you say you are providing free secondary education and you are giving Shs 41,000.  What a shame! (Members rose on information_)

I am giving statistics and data. If you disagree with the data you can tell me information, but I am giving you the statistics of what you give that ordinary person whom you sit here for, who voted you. Education is their fundamental right and you allocate Shs 41,000 and you think that the government has introduced Universal Secondary Education? 

Sincerely, are we serious in this country? How can we give somebody who initiates a private university; who believed he has the money, Shs 4 billion, then at the same time you cannot provide Shs 4,000 for a poor university student studying in Makerere? And the committee tells us you have a shortfall, you cannot cater for the Shs 4,000 per student but you are giving Shs 4 billion to Basajjabalaba. Tomorrow, yesterday, Bank of Uganda is giving billions to the same Basajjabalaba. Yesterday but one, we sat in this House and the committee on trade recommended US$ 540 million to be given to Salim Saleh’s company for promotion of coffee but this student in Makerere University, you cannot afford to allocate Shs 4,000 for the person to eat meals to earn education, which is a fundamental right.

MR KUBEKETEREYA: Mr Speaker, I have stood on a point of order.  Just two years ago, there was a motion moved by two honourable members of Parliament. One of them was hon. Ssekikubo and the seconder was Hon. Betty Amongi. And the motion was to the effect that the Government of Uganda waives taxes for the hospitals run by Kampala International University and the Government of Uganda waives taxes to private hospitals and that was Paragon. And I remember vividly, hon. Amongi was among the seconders. Therefore, is she in order to disregard what she moved here and go ahead and lambast the whole motion that she really brought forward? Is she really in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, from the account you have given, the two things are not the same - (Applause) - waiving a tax and making a contribution is not the same. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker for the ruling. The point I am making is that it is not proper for us as members of Parliament to sit here and fail to fight for the people who vote us; people whose rights we need to defend and we fail to defend. And I want to really support that this money for Makerere University, Shs 4,000 per student, be given. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I have indicated before, so far, we’ve received 25 contributions on this report. And as I have indicated to you before, do not think that discussing or debating issues affecting the two ministries will stop today when we are handling the Budget. I have offered that any time you want, after we have finished the budget process, we could maybe every month allocate time for two committees to discuss policies or matters affecting the ministries. And I think that will satisfy you. Today we are not going to exhaust everything, and we have got other votes to consider. As you know, there are over 10 votes we have to consider. I think let us really ask the ministers to make brief responses to matters that have been raised so that we dispose of the budget aspects of these ministries, and then we take another one. Please bear with me.

Hon. Anywar, I think it is not fair when actually you had stood to make a contribution - simply because you have not been able to make the contribution  -to walk away when we are considering a matter.

4.21
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (MRS NAMIREMBE BITAMAZIRE): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my honourable colleagues who have thanked the committee for coming up with a very articulate and very good report. We as a sector for education, we are very grateful that following our discussion at the committee meeting all the ideas were internalized and have been very well summarized in the report. We are very grateful to the chairperson and the members. 

I would like also, again like the previous speakers, have done, to thank my colleague, the Shadow Minister of Education, who is probably not yet here to respond to the issues in a very constructive way. Because there are many comments he has made and many recommendations, which we are taking note of and which we are going to consult about, consider and analyse as we formulate policies and budgets.
  
Many issues have been brought up and I want to thank all the members who have contributed. I have picked about 40 issues and I do not think I will answer one-by-one. But I would like to request members that I summarise so that as you have indicated, Mr Speaker, we shall be able to respond to many other issues and definitely, we shall finally make sure that we clarify most of the ideas. 

Let me start with the quality of education. Almost, more than 50 percent of the speakers have indicated that we still have a long way to go to achieve quality education in this country - and I will not protest such comments. 

But what I want to add - and I have said this before and asked my colleagues to support me here - is that gaining quality in education, especially at the basic level, is not a one man’s show. If we are to get our young children between the age of six and 12 or 13 to really pick up, do well and perform well, and really benefit from the basic education, then we all have to participate. 

The mother and father who wakes up the child at six years to go to school; the mother and father who ensures that the child has got a pen; the mother or the father who ensures that the child gets to school at 8.00 O’clock; these are all forms of support which can help us to improve the quality of education. So, at that basic primary level, we are all called upon and executed to give support. 

What about the communities outside the household - the LCs and the elders in the area? If the road going to school becomes unsafe, everybody must make sure that there is security and children can walk in and out of the school without getting any problem. So, on the issue of quality education, I am making two points; One is that – 

THE SPEAKER: Somebody wants clarification.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Bitamazire. I had also wanted to speak on the same issue of the safety of children. I wanted to raise a question to the minister about the hours of school. When does school start in the morning and when does it end? 

About two weeks ago in Masaka, I had an incident where a mother woke up at 5.00 O’clock to escort a child to school. Because it was still too early, and she found the two children she had left in the house were burnt just because the other child had to be early for school. And in the evening at around 8.00 O’clock, you still find pupils going home. What are the school hours?

Secondly, what is the school term? Today schools will close and the following day schools will reopen for vocational schooling. What is the formal yearly term for schools to open and close? I am very concerned. I no longer have children to work during the holidays because they have to participate in vocational school, yet I have to raise fees. What is the formal time for schools to open and close? Is the syllabus too long such that we can shorten it so that it can be covered within the schooling time? Thank you very much. 

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you so much for that clarification. In fact, that is the point I was going to talk about - improving the quality of education and participation by all Ugandans. We have got a school calendar and school calendars are issued every year. By December, we issue the school calendar for the following school year and every school and every institution gets a calendar. 

I remember, probably three years ago, we distributed them here in Parliament. So, the school calendar indicates three terms in the case of the basic primary, secondary and other institutions – that is the first term, second term and third term - and we even give the exact days each term lasts. 

Probably to answer that question, what I wanted to say  -and I am happy the member has illustrated it or helped me to clarify - is that the number of days in a school term, and the openings and closings must be complied with, and that calendar also has a time in the morning when the school starts and a time in the afternoon when classes close. 

So, according to the school calendar, we have three terms. For example, next term will open on 7th September at 8.00 O’clock. So, what I am saying is that as Ugandans, mothers and fathers, we should all make sure that every student and every pupil is at school on Monday 7th September at 8.00 a.m. latest -(Laughter)- that is exactly what we are talking about. 

Under that cooperation to improve quality, we are also appealing to the teachers and directing them to be on duty during the school days, and they know that from their ethics; and they know that from the Public Service regulations. 

Like in any decentralised governance, for the enforcement, the implementation, the supervision and the monitoring, the LCs and the secretaries for education are there. Wherever I go, I am introduced to ministers of education at district level, at gombolola level and at parish level. These are the people who should help us to ensure that all these regulations and laws, and calendars are applied to the system. 

If I may summarise on the issue of quality, we still have a long way to go, but in our manifesto, the NRM Government says that we shall continue working hard to see that the quality of UPE improves. 

So, I appeal to all members of Parliament on the Government side and the Opposition side - it is not a one man’s show, but everybody from mum and dad need to see that the quality of UPE is improved and we achieve our objectives.

About Universal Secondary Education, it is running for the third year. I want to tell colleagues that next year will be the first ‘O’ Level examination for this group of Ugandans. Let us encourage them to do well; let us try our best - some circumstances, as members have indicated, might not meet our expectations right now. But I want to inform this House that there is a minimum of the expected facilities and requirements for these young people to go through; a Government sponsored secondary education programme.

We shall continue working together to make sure that we perfect this programme to benefit the poor and those who cannot take their children to private or very expensive schools. It is a programme which the government is sponsoring, and if I may say, many other countries are admiring us in Uganda for having ventured into Universal Secondary Education.

If I may add, on the 21st October, other African countries are coming here to discuss exactly how Uganda has managed to start this programme, and how we are moving. I will invite members of Parliament to participate in the discussions.

Members, regarding the quality, let us all work together. I want to assure you that the government is committed to investing more money and putting in place measures to ensure that the quality of education improves. So, on quality, I thought I would just conclude with that comment and move on.

Other members have brought up ideas about inspection. Inspection is part of improving quality, and members will remember that since last financial year, Shs 2.5 billion has been put into school inspection, and each district is getting money quarterly for inspection. The step we are taking now at ministry level is to find out which district has not done the inspection, because we are recording figures. We are getting reports on inspections and I am informing my colleagues that your districts are all receiving money for inspections. 

The CAO is supposed to see that inspectors go around, spend the money and account for it. So, when we get a statement on all this, I will indicate it to all of you and you will see how much money has already been spent and where possible, we shall give you the report of what the inspection has been all about. This is because inspection is very important and that is why Government decided to put in that much money.

During this new financial year we have also put Shs 2.5 billion and this money goes straight to the inspector’s account at each district. I think members should help us monitor and find out what the money has done in your district or constituency.

On the money used for UPE and USE, I think members were at the Budget Speech function where the President of the Republic of Uganda committed himself to put a judicial commission of inquiry into how money for UPE and USE is being used, and I think he is about to announce that judicial commission. 

We are all happy because we want to know who really diverts the money. When that report comes out, we shall be in a position - It is not just a home-made commission, but this is judicial. We are all looking forward to seeing what its findings will be. Through the recommendation of such a commission, at that level, we shall be able to address issues of how money is used.

Many members have indicated that so much money is being sunk into these programmes, but where is the impact of the money? That commission I am sure will come up with a very comprehensive report and findings, and that report will show us which district and which officer took the money and then we shall all transparently look at that report.

Having talked about UPE and USE, there was a statement that Government has ignored technical and vocational education. I want to assure this august House that we have not, because last year we were here and passed an Act on Business, Technical and Vocational Education, 2008. That Act was to lay grounds on how we can implement vocational and technical education in this country by putting down statutory structures, which will guide us to manage, implement and reform technical education in this country.

I want to assure my colleagues that the Directorate of Technical Training has already been put in place as well as many other organs, according to that law. We are already expanding the existing technical and vocational schools and we shall continue expanding, renovating and constructing.

Members have said we were promised vocation and technical schools in every sub-county. The plan we have put in place now is to start with every district. Very soon through the Social Services Committee, we shall be informing Parliament of the strategic plan we have for vocational and technical education following the law we have put in place and the strategic plan we have.

I want to assure this House that we are very serious. Quite a lot is going on in the vocational and technical education area. I should tell you that the Germans, Japanese and many other development partners have helped us streamline and formulate strategies, policies and organs, and indeed in two or three years time or even one year, you shall see a big change.

Concerning delays in releasing fees, I want to say that I have noted hon. Bahati’s comments on that. We shall look at this with the Minister of Finance and find out exactly how we can improve this.

THE SPEAKER: Madam, you may wish to know that as you were talking there are stakeholders who are in the gallery. We have pupils and teachers of Mukitale Development Foundation Secondary School who are here. Join me to welcome them. You are welcome.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, I join you in welcoming those stakeholders who have come to listen to these discussions. As I was saying, the Ministries of Education, Finance, Public Service and Local Government are examining those situations where there are delays in releasing grants to schools, and we have done quite a lot of consultations and we have registered some improvement. 

About this patriotic club; almost every Member of Parliament has made mention of it. I want to thank hon. Lagada for pointing out what is in the Constitution. Ugandans are very keen on the Constitution and we always make sure that nobody breaks the Constitution. 

What I am realising is that we may not be reading all the provisions therein. If we agreed and signed that Constitution and made sure that patriotism is our responsibility why are we not picking it up? 

I am glad that she pointed out the Constitutional provision and I want to appeal to my colleagues to read that provision. The question now will be: How do we do it? Not “why” but “how”.   I do not think I need to add more but I would say –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you Minister for quoting the Constitution. It is now 14 years since it has been around. Since we are talking about the Constitution, Article 4 talks about promotion of public awareness of the Constitution, and one of the articles talks about translating it in all the languages so that everybody understands it; so that even a Mugisu can understand it. Why have you not operationalised this?

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you so much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi; that is a good idea. But I think that at times, especially during the campaigns, I know that MPs translate those Constitutional provisions and even come out with what we call popular versions. 

Secondly, I will ask my colleague the minister and the Attorney-General to do that job. But as the Minister of Education, my role is to make sure that we have the Constitution, and I am appealing to you to look at the Constitution and please let us abide by what is there. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank the hon. Minister for giving me this opportunity to seek this clarification. 

Madam Minister, you are about to convince us that it is okay for us to have patriotic clubs. And in this year’s budget, quite huge amounts of money have been earmarked for that exercise. I look at the difficulty practically, as to how, as a government, you are going to implement this programme. 

You are here as the Minister of Education, the ministry that all Ugandans look up to when it comes to issues of education; be it issues of policy or curriculum development; we are looking at you as the minister responsible. 

But here is a programme where our friend the super minister, hon. Amama Mbabazi, the Minister for Security, is brought on board; the Minister of the Presidency as the in charge of the RDCs is being brought on board, and these resources that we are about to appropriate are to be availed to Government for immediate utilisation. And I am cork sure that even under the Vote-on-Account that has been given, the fraction of that money for patriotism is already there and yet you have no syllabus whatsoever. 

With due respect, many of these RDCs are wanting when it comes to their level of education, but you are going to involve and engage them. (Interjection) Yes, I have a reason to say that because I know that in this country there are RDCs who are Primary Four graduates. (Interjection) Yes, we have sung about this several times. (Interjection) That is not the point; we will come to that later. 

The point, therefore, that I would like you Madam Minister to help me understand is that, for the time being, during this Vote-on-Account arrangement, how is Government already using that one third of the budget which has already been released? And how are they going to continue using it? 

I really have difficulty understanding this. Which schools shall these be? At what time is the RDC or the Deputy RDC going to come in? At what time is the DISO, who is the eye and ear of Government as the in-charge of security, going to come in? How is it going to be vis-à-vis your trained teachers who prepare teaching and lesson schemes? So what is going to happen? Just help me understand that so that I can give my support to that exercise; convince me.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the questions put across are very good. But there is a concept which I was only elaborating yesterday at a function where a workshop on financial literacy is going on. 

When I was launching this workshop that week - and I want to repeat this with you permission, Mr Speaker. In the wake of UPE and USE, we need to adopt what we call in educational language, “life-long learning”. Life-long learning is a concept meaning that you continue learning as you live and you do not stop. 

I preside over graduation ceremonies and when parents rise up, they say, “This boy has finished studying.” In my language they say, “Omwana amaze okusoma.” We are saying that we are not going to accommodate every kind of education that you need in life within the four walls of the classroom or within the school. If we did that we would be doing this country a disservice. You have to pick these skills and continue learning them within and outside the classroom.

Secondly, it is not proper to say, “Where is the syllabus?” or “Where is the exam?” That is exactly one of the statements. When shall we, in Uganda, run away or get away or modify a system where the exam stops being a driver of whatever we do?

So, right now, what we are saying is that should we formulate another curriculum for girl guiding, scouting, football clubs? No! There are issues and areas of learning outside the classroom. There are topics which no professional teacher can teach ably. So, what we are doing is to expand the areas of learning and the concept of education so that our young people can learn in the classroom, in the school and outside. 

This leads me to another area. Many parents want their children to be in schools 365 days. We are fighting the coaching and the holiday classes, but people think the children should be in school all the time. For example, these students up here in the gallery are learning about Parliament. (Mr Ssekikubo rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: I have got 34 questions to put on this vote so could you abridge your explanation please?

MRS BITAMAZIRE: So, finally, we are all agreeing but the question is how shall we do it? We are going to do it and it is going to succeed. I have case studies where I have been invited to preside over and I did. Seeta High School is an outstanding example where this patriotism is already catching on and they are doing so well. There are many other schools as well. So, the thing is moving like a fire in the bush. (Laughter)

Finally, the university. Quite a number of questions have come up on university education. First of all, I want to say we have noted, from the Shadow Minister, from the report which was given earlier on, the budget and from the comments. We are revising, we are reviewing, and we are consulting about funding university education in this country.

The steps being taken by Government are not to eliminate the poor, but we have also to be sensitive about university. University means universal. We do not want university education here which is below the global and universal standard. It will be unfortunate because I remember times when there were degrees we would not recognise in this country from some countries I will not mention. I would not like to see Uganda getting on the list of countries whose university degrees are not recognisable.  

What we are trying to do is to keep the standard universal. Universal means for all. I am sure you know. (Laughter) 

I really cannot see a home-made university standard and degree here. We have to keep that standard. And if we are to keep our graduates at a global level we have to match the global standards and we cannot do that with what we are saying that is; that let us admit children who do not qualify.

What we are doing now is to improve the system right from primary. The 42 schools we are now developing into centres of excellence are going to help us get everybody around the country to join schools which are well-equipped where standards are high. And finally, we shall have people qualifying on merit. 

There are no universities where admission is done differently on tribal, district or political level. From what I know, universities are competitive. There is no way we can now start bending this and bending that to allow one who did not pass anything in science to study Medicine. No! 

So, ladies and gentlemen, I want to assure you that the programmes we are making now will improve education right from the bottom upwards so that many Ugandans can qualify on merit.

Now there is the quota system. The quota system is not based on population. When we started the quota system three years ago there were four districts which had never sent a student to a public university. What do you call equity, when there are districts without even one student in a public university? That is how we came up with the quota system. 

But I think there is a misunderstanding, Mr Speaker, that everybody admitted is admitted, on the quota system. No. Three thousand plus are admitted on merit, but then a small fraction, about 870, are the ones who come on the affirmative and quota system. 

And now the idea is that we scrap it. Well, it is probably a good idea. However, I think that when you look at equity as a principle in education we should make sure that at least if there is a boy from Nakapiripirit who by good chance completed in another district, but comes from there - we should consider him on affirmative action. But anyway, we are going to consult on this matter. 

If we base it on population the issue of equity will be lost because when you look at Uganda, the population is concentrated in some areas and the remote districts will not qualify on population either. So, we shall have to decide whether to leave those in the sparsely populated areas or not. I do not know but we shall discuss this in the Social Services Committee.

So, Mr Speaker, I thought I would just summarise that and then we shall continue answering the rest as we move on and discuss the rest of the programme.

THE SPEAKER: Thank You.  Minister of Health; you can also be brief.

4.54
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (NRM, Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me also take this chance to thank the Social Services Committee for producing a very good paper and covering most of the problems that we face in our ministries. 

I would also like to thank - I was really surprised that the Shadow Minister dealt with issues quite comprehensively.  Normally, they come up with facts which are faulty, but this time it was precise and I would like to commend him. (Laughter) Thank you very much.

I think I should dispose of this corrigendum which was circulated by my ministry. Actually, this was to answer correspondence which we have continuously had with the Ministry of Finance, but they had not acted on it. So, we brought it up to stimulate them; it is like probing a bull to act, and they have acted. 

I am glad that Prof. Kamuntu is going to present a comprehensive corrigendum which involves obeying the order from the honourable members of Parliament, which stated that money for drugs from the districts, which is 50 percent of PHC from the regional referral hospitals, and which is 40 percent of the money we submit there; and also, from Mulago and Butabika Hospital, 70 percent of the money we have been sending them is now going to National Medical Stores to answer the problem of shortage of drugs at the districts and the health centres, especially the lower health centres. The hon. Minister of Finance will be dealing with that.

Mr Speaker, the problem of drugs has been consistent in this country; we are coming up with comprehensive answers to these problems. What I have just mentioned is just part of it. Our friends from the eastern region may report that there has been an exercise there going from town to town; clinic to clinic, to sweep out those who have been stealing government drugs. About 70 percent of the essential drugs in the country are now marked with the emblem of “UG”. So, if anybody steals those drugs and takes them to a clinic, they will face it rough as those in the eastern region have faced it.

Hon. Mudimi will answer to that as there was an operation in his constituency. Secondly, we are having a slight increase in the budget for drugs; we are not yet there, but eventually we want to see that whenever patients go to a clinic or any health centre, they should be able to get at least the essential drugs. 

Mr Speaker, the shadow minister raised the issue of human resource. Human resource is a problem all over the world, and especially in Uganda. It is compounded by several issues, one of them is remuneration. But as I speak, there is a paper already in Cabinet where we have suggested raising the salaries of health workers. 

Another issue is accommodation. We are in the process of getting a loan from the World Bank. His Excellency advised that we get a loan of US$ 600 million and it will be in compartments of US$ 100 million. That means it will take about six years as we would not absorb all of it at once. That is in advanced stages and I think by next year we will get the money. 

That money is supposed to rehabilitate all the district hospitals in the country. As for the regional referral hospitals, honourable members should have realised that we have been sending close to Shs 2 billion to each of the regional referral hospitals for rehabilitation. I must say that Masaka Hospital has been a star in performance, but the other hospitals are also following. All the money has been utilised.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the Minister for Health for giving me the opportunity. As he rightly quoted, the Shadow Minister for Health did mention that one of the reasons why our manpower in the health sector flees for greener pastures is because of lack of housing. 

You sort of soothed my heart when you said you are in advanced stages of securing a loan from the World Bank to the tune of US$ 600 million. While that is being considered, Ministry of Public Service has divested itself of the responsibility of housing civil servants and this has been for over ten years. Many of our health workers are staff of the local governments. How are you going to rationalise this arrangement of building institutional houses for health workers vis-à-vis the government position on housing civil servants in general? Is Ministry of Education going to do the same? For me I look at it as a problem when it comes to synchronising it with the government policy. Please, help me on that. 

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, health is a special situation. We know that for health workers to work properly –

THE SPEAKER: Well, why don’t you say that for purposes of health, we have changed the policy?

DR MALLINGA: We have not changed the policy. There was an extensive discussion with H.E. the President and we pointed out that for health workers to be effective, they have to be near the hospitals. We also went around; there are units which were built in the past, including Arua Hospital - I used to go to Arua to visit nurses, and those units are still there. (Laughter)

For the health workers to access their patients at night - whether they are called at night - it is almost a universal custom that health workers must be housed near the hospitals. H.E. the President agreed with us and said, “Go a head and get the US$ 600 million”. So, I hope my hon. Member from Arua understands.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have to finish this vote; there are 34 questions I have to put. Would you really allow him to finish?

DR MALLINGA: And I just mentioned that our national staffing levels are at about 56 percent but the honourable member on the other side said it was below 50. 

Failure of recruitment of staff at the districts; that is partly the problem of decentralisation. We decentralised health but we were not aware that at the districts, they did not have capable personnel to run health units and to carry out the recruitments, and some members have ably pointed out that there is a great need for recentralisation of health. The districts have failed. So, there is a need to re-centralise and we are working on that, and recruitment will be at the centre. 

With my generation of doctors and nurses, there was no problem at all, but because of decentralisation, health workers have tended to be tribal. Arua Hospital recruits Lugbaras and it is the case with all the other hospitals. In Moroto Hospital, you will find mostly Karimojong and Itesos; in Gulu Hospital, you find mostly Acholis. So, I think we have to re-centralise and as soon as the doctors finish training, they will be interviewed and they will be posted. They will stay out for a certain period - maybe two years - and then they will come back for post-graduate training. That will be an attraction for them to go upcountry as it used to be in my days. 

But when you post a doctor nowadays, for example, to a place like Maracha, he is recruited by the district and he will stay there forever and ever. Most of them get depressed and they start drinking and become irresponsible. But if there is a chance for them to go up for post-graduate work, and if there is also a chance of being transferred to reduce on boredom, we feel there should be an improvement. So, there is a need for re-centralisation of health workers. 

HIV/AIDS. Mr Speaker, I sit on the HIV/AIDS Commission and we realised that we have not really been emphasising prevention. We have concentrated on treatment. But I think from this financial year, we are going to be on the radios, we are going to be on TVs and we shall start drumming again to bring to the attention of the people that there is a problem which needs to be solved.
 
We will be distributing test kits up to the level of health centre IVs and at every health centre IV in the country from the health units above, there is testing now. We shall be carrying out testing at some chosen health centre IIIs and distribution of AIDS drugs.

On the Ogola Commission, Mr Speaker, I think you have to commend the Ministry of Internal Affairs. They have carried out investigations and honourable members have realised that I think about five people have been tried and all of them were convicted. Some of them have been bailed, but a very good job is being done. So, do not blame us for that; I cannot give you the figure of the money that has been recovered, but quite a big sum of money has been recovered and it is in the banks. But whether that money will be available to the Ministry of Health, that has got to be discussed with the Global Fund and a final decision will be made.
 
Quality Chemicals. Quality Chemicals is a very advanced technology, which our country has been fortunate to get. The mother unit is in India and it is called CIPLAR. As I speak, the Government of Uganda owns 20 percent of the shares, which we bought for Shs 10 billion. CIPLAR owns 40 percent and Quality Chemicals owns 40 percent. When a decision was made to purchase shares, the Ministry of Finance was supposed to pay for the shares. Unfortunately, they convinced the Ministry of Health to take some money which was supposed to be paid to Quality Chemicals for drugs to pay for the shares and that money was supposed to be replaced. Up to now, we have not had that money replaced, but we are going to put some pressure and I am sure with help from the honourable members of Parliament, we should be able to recover that money from hon. Kamuntu’s ministry. (Laughter)

When we had a pending strike, again we were convinced to come up with Shs 6 billion from drug money to redress the issue of remuneration of health workers, and we did that; but all of it did not come from Quality Chemicals. As I speak, the government has an obligation to purchase drugs worth Shs 60 billion from Quality Chemicals every year. That was the agreement when the factory was brought to this country, and there has been a lot of benefits. Some of our young people have been trained in the manufacture of drugs at a very high level. Quality Chemicals is undergoing inspections so that they can have access to some of the World Health Organisation programmes like the Global Fund. Since they have not passed inspection, yet they cannot participate in having some organisations purchase medicines from them, but the process of them having that approval and eventually participating in programmes like the Global Fund is very advanced, and I think by next year, they will be able to participate in these programmes. 

Matters regarding reproductive health. Quite a number of honourable members are concerned about this. We in the Ministry of Health are also concerned and we would like to reduce maternal mortality and infant mortality as well as the mortality of children under five. We are not handling this as an isolated programme. Rather, it is incorporated in the total programme of the Ministry of Health. For example, shift two -(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, this is very pertinent to me. The honourable minister is aware that a lot of his technical people put a lot of their energy in drawing that road map. The President asked for it and for the last two financial years, you have never done anything about it. Every time we talk about maternal health you say, it is all embedded in there. What don’t you have? 

You have all the statistics of mothers producing in this country. You have the figures of babies being born every year. What makes your statisticians not to put the statistics into financial terms? You are asking your honourable friend the minister in charge to look into other things. What about maternal health? Where is our money? Why haven’t you operationalised that? Where is the budgetary request for that specific aspect of our lives, Mr Minister? Anyway, why is it that it is always in isolation yet you know that the specific figures are there?

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member of Parliament pre-empted me. As the Baganda say, “Nze nsumulula ate gwe onsuna.” I was just beginning to explain how this programme is working. For example, some members here complained about the ABB constructions which are going on in the western region. In each of those constructions, there is a maternity wing that is addressing the issue of maternal mortality as well as equipment and ambulances, which we are purchasing. That is trying to answer the question of – (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Mr Minister, I think you are taking this House for granted.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable member of Parliament-

THE SPEAKER: Make your responses.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, for protecting me.

We are working hard. I am an obstetrician gynaecologist and my major problem and concern is maternal mortality. I have even participated with members of Parliament, those who were expecting babies while they were in Parliament and I made mosquito nets available to them - (Laughter) - as an effort –

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, the issue of mental health. The ADB loan, what they call Ship One, was used to construct Butabika Hospital and we have a modern facility. In most of the regional referral hospitals now, we have mental health units. There is one in Fort Portal, I think there is one in Mbarara, in Arua we have one - most of the regional referral hospitals have mental units to cater for the patients.

As our society gets sophisticated, stress becomes a factor. People move to the cities and because of that stress, mental problems unveil and we have to take care of our people. In addition, we have drug abuse. As we move into the cities and people live in crowded places called ghettos, drug abuse becomes a problem. Waragi becomes a problem, marijuana becomes a problem and so many other - Malwa is not really a problem. (Laughter)

Consequently, that leads to a rise in crime. The Mental Health Bill I think was tabled here and is in one of the committees. If not it is in very advanced stages of development and it will be coming here soon.

Mr Speaker, the honourable member from Burahya –

THE SPEAKER: I think on Butabika, they asked you how it is that for Butabika’s capital development there is a lot more money than to other hospitals like Mulago?

DR MALLINGA: You see, Butabika was built under the ADB loan and part of the conditions of that loan is that we have to provide matching funds. The programme is ongoing as Ship Two so we have to produce matching funds for everything that we receive from ADB. That is why, what we give to Butabika appears to be a lot of money in comparison with Mulago, but I would like to mention that for Mulago we are about to secure an ADB loan. 

What we are interested in doing in Mulago is that the Obstetrics Unit should get out of Mulago. We are going to build a new unit in what they call Old Mulago. Pre-natal care as well as delivery, laboratories and investigative machinery will also be at Old Mulago. We are also trying to move all the laboratories and all the unnecessary utilities to Old Mulago so that Mulago Hospital as it stands now will only contain wards for the care of patients.

As the honourable members realise today, the Heart Institute has its own vote now and they are ready to start construction, as they received some money from abroad. 

The Cancer Institute has built their out-patients and it is only the in-patients remaining. They also have their own Vote and they will be able to receive money from outside as a result of this Vote. So, we are really trying hard at Mulago –(Interruption)

MR SEMATIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you minister. My clarification goes to the honourable minister on the proposal to put up a new obstetric unit, and even remove the laboratories from New Mulago. My opinion on decongesting Mulago would first require Kampala District to have a district Government hospital so that instead of all the people pouring into Mulago Hospital, you can decongest them into the division hospitals which are the equivalent of a district hospital.

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I think I am having unnecessary interruptions. My next point was on how to decongest Mulago. We are going to strengthen the Health Centre IVs in the area. The Chinese are building for us an 100-bed hospital at Naguru. We also want to work with missionary hospitals around so that we strengthen them and they take care of most patients that come from those areas. 
We are also planning to build four or five 100-bed hospitals. That is a plan which we may operationalise later in order to decongest Mulago. Mulago will only have referral patients and not those with minor cases who just walk in to seek treatment. 

Hon. Nsubuga from Kiwangala – is that Kiwangala? – Yes, not Bukoto. Kiwangala - I know it better.

THE SPEAKER: Well he is from Masaka.

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Okay, Sir. He is concerned about utilities - there is one health unit along the road which is a health centre III – I went there and found that they cannot pay their electricity and water bills and so all these have been disconnected. I think that with recentralisation, as one of the advantages, the centre will be able to pay those bills. 

The money we are sending to the districts is not enough. At health centre IIIs, they cannot even run the ambulances and it is partly why you are having problems at your constituencies. People are asked for money for fuel to go and collect their patients. But this was centralised and I think it would make it easier for us to deal with. About 70 per cent of our essential drugs are embossed now. 

I have answered the concern about the excess money to Butabika. Hon. Kiryapawo, we are going to renovate the health units and the health centre IIIs and IVs because that is where most of our patients go. So, we are going spend a bit of the money from the World Bank on that. 

On the case of the woman at Kiwempe Health Centre II - actually health centre IIs are supposed to have midwives. Women are not supposed to even deliver there, but usually we leave some children there in case of emergencies, and a midwife may be there. If there is one, then she is not a very active midwife. She has no clinic, she does not deliver daily and she is there just for the sake of emergencies. Health centre IIs are supposed to carry out immunisation, treat minor conditions and also advocate for health in the community. Mr Speaker, I should be protected against forces behind me who are very hostile

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: The lack of latrines is the matter for the districts. We send people to oversee these units. They go there and make recommendations and as we stand now, for the health centre IIIs and IVs, it is the duty of the districts to carry out any changes we may recommend. 

About the need for another regional referral hospital in West Nile – we are spending a lot of money to construct Arua Hospital and before it becomes functional, they are already asking for a second regional referral hospital in West Nile. 

The last item I want to speak about is psycho-traumatic medicine. If the honourable members were following this, Dr Runuumi was in Gulu where we have opened a psycho-traumatic centre. I went to Kitgum and we have opened a psycho-traumatic centre there. We are in the process of opening one in the old Lira area and this is going to expand until we have opened centres in all the areas which experience stress. 

We are in the process of installing a new Cobalt Unit for treatment of cancer at Mulago. It has already been bought and we intend to expand as we train more staff so that there may be more than one machine to treat cancer. We would like, as we train personnel, to expand to regional referral hospitals to treat cancer as soon as we have -(Interjections)– yes we are training. 

All of you have advocated for recentralisation and we have already written a paper that is in the process of being brought to Cabinet.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

VOTE 13, Ministry of Education and Sports, Recurrent expenditure.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 178,074,826,000 under Vote 013, Ministry of Education and Sports, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2009/10.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Under that vote of Shs 178 billion, there is Shs 4 billion for Kampala International University and yet we are crying for money for government universities like Makerere University. There are also issues of meals. Some of us propose that we move the Shs 4 billion from KIU and take it to Makerere University to cater for meals. [Prof. Kamuntu rose_] 

THE CHAIRMAN: My concern is that every year when you are reading figures, you come with corrections. We are tired of that. (Applause) 

PROF. KAMUNTU: With all due humility, Mr Chairman, we consulted during the time of debate and corrected the figure including the adjustment on corrigenda on Medical Stores. I think the papers must be somewhere with the clerks and they might not have been distributed because I have this paper which contains all the information we are reading. 

THE CHAIRMAN: That is not the issue. Every year this happens. We debate, we go to the Committee of Supply and read the figures and then you say we should correct them. Surely, every year!

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, it was not distributed but I think it must be -

THE CHAIRMAN: The issue is that when the committee is discussing these figures, you should note this in your books and make corrections.

MS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I do appreciate your concern and this is the concern with almost all committees. We sit as committees, we look at the figures, we make our recommendations and at the end of the day when we are all here on the Floor of Parliament, we get three or four corrigenda. Now, it seems that even some of the figures that we have already read for the Ministry of Education may be slightly different from what the corrigenda is showing, and the same applies to Health. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the solution to this is for us to adjourn so that the Ministry goes and corrects their figures. But this kind of thing happening every year - when were they distributed? I want to inform you that when we come for this kind of debate we have our forms. We look at the report; we look at the figures and fill these forms. And when I read and then you say I change –

PROF. KAMUNTU: You know I cannot argue about that but I did pass the papers to the clerk - (Interjections)- yes, I did. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, this is the habit of the Ministry of Finance because when you look at the corrigenda and you look at our book, these people just smuggled in figures after the Budget Committee had finished work and they want us to collide here; they think we did not go to school.

So, I would move that we should always go with what is here and what committees have agreed on. Because this is a trick for these people to somersault and bring funny figures here when the chairperson is reading it. Because even what the minister is reading - for example, the Cancer Institute is supposed to be Shs 3 billion but they are saying it is Shs 2 billion. They have cut off Shs 1 billion and I am going to oppose that, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: On the Budget Day, these were the figures you presented to us. [Hon. Members: “Yes”]

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, if you can give me a moment I can explain it. I really appreciate the Members’ concern -(Interjections)- please give me a moment. I am pleading with you.

Honourable members, as the Minister of Health has explained, there was a debate on harmonising all the votes of the Ministry of Health so that they are channelled through National Medical Stores. And we did that and adjusted it with the Shadow Minister of Finance and that was reprinted and we left it with the clerk. And that is the same case with the Ministry of Education because in the figures that you were given, the tax element of the figures was not added and consequently what the Chairman read excluded the tax. So, what we did was simply make an adjustment of adding tax figures to the total so that when you are reading for approval, all that is added. And that information was put on the desk for distribution. So, I am sure that members - 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, what we can do to accommodate them is to stop here and adjourn. Tomorrow we are supposed to deal with Gender, but I think we should start with this item and finish it and this way, our papers will look clean. Otherwise, crossing and then writing this – we need to give you time overnight to complete these forms. 

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, for that matter, I do appreciate and I think that should be the way to go, but I would like to request that on the issue of Vote 114 for the Cancer Institute, the Ministry of Finance should sort this out because even if we return tomorrow, my committee is not in agreement with what the Ministry of Finance has done. We had agreed on Shs 3 billion and according to what we see, it is Shs 2 billion. For that matter, we are not ready to accept this. (Applause) So, when they are coming tomorrow, they should come with clarity on this.

THE CHAIRMAN: And for cancer, these are matters we have been debating here, urging Government to facilitate the Cancer Institute and then they come and reduce?

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I want to make this clear that for the Cancer Institute, they have deducted one billion shillings and they have added it to Mulago for the purchase of specialised equipment. We understand the problems in Mulago but the fact that the Cancer Institute has its own vote now means that it must not be underlooked.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Chairman, on the government side, I would like to request that the Ministry of Finance, the line ministries and the Committee of Budget take off time tomorrow and harmonise these figures. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Tomorrow I want to start reading these figures.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Chairman, I wanted to request that we go to Gender and when they have been able to reconcile this, then they will come and we shall pass their votes. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok. It is up to them. 

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think this is the cost of bringing the corrigenda late. As we have insisted from the beginning, once the committee has considered a ministerial policy statement without the corrigenda, it is up to the minister to come here and convince us to adopt the contents of the corrigenda. What we have been doing since Monday is that the minister brings up the content of the corrigenda before we come to this stage and I was expecting the minister from the other side to come up before we go to committee stage. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No! In the past, what has happened is that even after the Committee of Supply, you again find alterations in the Appropriation Bill - because the Appropriation Bill should only just be carrying what we have rather than changing from Committee of Supply. So, I think what we should do is to adjourn. Let us resume the House. You go and sort out your business.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the budget proposals for the Ministry of Education and Health and has deferred the decision until tomorrow. I beg to move.


MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I beg that this report from the Committee of Supply is deferred until tomorrow when it will be discussed. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, as I have indicated, our plans were that tomorrow we start with Gender but this has caused us a problem. I do not know. Do we start with this or we go with Gender.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, to avoid any further problems, I would suggest that the minister should not even stick to tomorrow because I am sure; I have already seen the Bill. The Appropriation Bill has got different figures from what the corrigenda is saying. So, to avoid these problems, I would like to appeal to the minister to be ready so that even when we come back tomorrow we do not get problems. We can look a these figures on Monday. That is my proposal, Mr Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is on record that I announced in this House that there was corrigendum No.1 from Ministry of Finance and it is clearly stated that it is copied to the Minister of Finance and to all chairpersons of parliamentary sessional committees. However, what I learnt today is that very few people have received this communication. Even chairpersons do not have it apart from me as the chairperson of the Budget Committee. I only got it from Budget Office.

Two, it is not only the sector for social services. There are also other sectors which are affected. There is Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Works, the Inspector-General of Government and the Uganda National Roads Authority. 

I request for your indulgence that tomorrow, Friday, the various committees whose sectors have been affected sit and harmonise because this corrigenda came after committees had already written their reports, looked into the work plans, the procurement plans, the equipment plans and this corrigenda is going to affect that. There is need for harmonisation before we come back to the House to consider the Appropriation Bill. I thank you, Mr Speaker.   

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I was rising on a point of clarification for the two issues. As the Minister of Finance now goes to meet with the Budget Committee and the affected committees, I would like the Ministry Of Finance to put into consideration the aspect of refunding the Shs 10 billion meant for HIV/AIDS and Malaria drugs to the Ministry of Health, which was diverted into buying shares. Finance must refund it this financial year.

Two, we should take a firm decision on where the Uganda AIDS Commission gets its money. We insist that Uganda AIDS Commission should not use Vote 014 of Ministry of Health. They should either go to President’s Office or create another vote. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, when you see something changing at the last minute, there must be a big problem. As committees, after the Budget has been read, they give us figures and those are the figures where procurement plans are. Then you come here and the figure has changed! Does it mean the procurement plans have been adjusted? If they have not been adjusted, what happened? 

I am suspicious of Ministry of Finance - this method of changing things is a process of retaining money within their ministries so that ministries do not perform and they are blamed for non-performance. If there is a punishment, you should give a punishment to the Ministry of Finance now – immediately. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, from what has been said, it appears tomorrow we will not be able to transact because we may say that we go to Gender, and again corrections may come. So let us give you tomorrow so that on Monday, we start with committee of supply on this one then we can go to Gender. But on Monday we shall start in the afternoon and this is delaying us. My concern is that this has been happening every year and it should stop. 

MR SEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the developments today are indeed out of the ordinary. We are starting a new trend that has not happened before in this Parliament. We have a situation where before we pass the Budget, we are already undertaking corrigenda. And in the circumstances, would I propose that the minister withdraws this corrigendum and we proceed with the old estimates. Then at an appropriate time, he can raise them. 

On this, I am looking also at the Budget Act - the period within which we have to pass the Budget is well-known and in that regard, if the minister can concede, let him withdraw and we go with our old estimates. At an appropriate time, we can consider the corrigenda. 

THE SPEAKER: I think, since we have agreed that we are not proceeding, let them go and make the corrections. But they should take note that we do not approve of this. Every financial year we have this! This should be the last time it happens.  The House is adjourned to Monday afternoon.

(The House rose at 5.51 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 31 August 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)
