Wednesday 23rd  August, 2000.

Parliament met at 2:39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

ASCERTAINMENT OF QUORUM.

122 Members were ascertained as being present.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am sure that most of you have seen an article in today's New Vision newspaper, with the headline "Ayume names dodging MPs". I sure you read that. I would like to clarify. First of all, the Chair did not name dodging MPs yesterday. Initially, time was given to Committees to concentrate on Committee work.  People who were recorded as having signed in the register, but when it came to the head count were recorded as absent, were actually attending to Committee work. Some of them, obviously Cabinet Ministers, were attending Cabinet, and that is the information which we got yesterday. So, to say that some Members were named as having dodged yesterday's Plenary, is not correct.  

Secondly, when I was told that some Members of the press wanted to get some information as to who signed the registers and did not attend, I directed that this information should not be released, because it was only for our internal verification. But how it got to the press is another problem.

LT.COL.MUDOOLA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to know how we are going to proceed, in view of what you have said and what has appeared in the papers. Also, there were some people who were attending Committee sessions and did not sign the register. The public will take it that some names were called and those Members of Parliament were not there and they did not sign the register. How are we going to proceed like this?  Supposing I am going to attend the Plenary but I have a Committee meeting, should I not sign the register until I am going to attend? But if I do not sign, it will appear as if I am not going to attend the Plenary. How are we going to proceed with this? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have explained that. In yesterday’s case, some of you were actually attending Committee meetings. A lot of work is now coming from the Committees and the Plenary will continue to handle that work, until a particular Committee wishes to be allowed to handle it's Committee work. That is how we are going to proceed.

MR.CHEBET MAIKUT: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I seek guidance from the Chair with respect to our method of voting in the House. I know that there is modern technology now available to conduct voting in a more civilised manner. Can I therefore seek your guidance as to whether it is not possible to install the electronic voting system in this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: We are considering that.

MR.LUBEGA WAGGWA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for hon. Chebet Maikut to dress like that, as if he coming from Kapchorwa where it is very cold? - (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: He is not in order.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I seek guidance from you on the issues you raised with regard to your communication from the Chair, as a result of what was erroneously printed or published by the New Vision newspaper. I would like to know the best way of disseminating information on Members present and Members absent. We are supposed to be 279 Members in this House. If the few who are around or who happen to be within the precincts of Parliament are scandalised by F.M radio stations or newspapers, what can be done to also mention those 200, 160 or 150 who may not be within the precincts of Parliament? 

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, Article 83, 1(d) of our Constitution states: 
“(1) A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament-
(d) if that person is absent from fifteen sittings of Parliament without permission in writing of the Speaker during any period when Parliament is continuously meeting and is unable to offer satisfactory explanation to the relevant Parliamentary Committee for his or her absence.”  

This seems to be a mandatory provision. I would like to know how it is brought about. How is this effected, because there a number of Members of Parliament I have never seen here?   

MRS.MPANGA:  Mr. Speaker, arising from what happened yesterday, I would also like to seek clarification. The fact that we do not have a parliamentary association that can talk for us, the fact that we have been scandalised on all the FM. Radios and so on, I think there is need for someone to explain the duty of Parliamentarians. We are public officers and we are public people. We have many other calls other than being in the Chamber all the time. For example, yesterday, we had a workshop on girls’ education, and I had agreed, long time ago, to be a discussant at that workshop. Was that part of public duty? Was I out of this Chamber just because I did not want to be here? 

I think we need to clarify to the public so that they fully understand that besides being in the Chambers, we have Committees and we have other public duties. We have Ministries, we have constituencies and Ministers visit our constituencies, the President goes to our constituencies, and when they do, we have to be there.  We are also social people. We lose relatives and we lose friends. Sometimes, once or twice, we may not be here, unless it becomes perpetual, I do not think we should have been publicised like that. Otherwise, we are going to be intimidated, and I think the independence of Parliament is going to be encroached upon.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr. Speaker, I want to add on to what hon. Mpanga has said. What she has described seems to be only limited to a Member of Parliament who has got a problem or who has gone for burial and so on, but I may come here, sign that book and sit here for about two or three hours and then go away. My going away does not mean that I am going back to my bedroom. I may be going to see a Minister or a Director. We are not really Kindergarten children. So, what hon. Mpanga has said -(Interruption)

MAJ.KATIRIMA: Mr. Speaker, I listened to hon. Karuhanga very attentively. Is it in order for an hon. Member, like hon. Karuhanga, to allege that some Members of Parliament have never appeared in Parliament, without naming them so that it goes on the records of the House? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we had passed that, you should have raised your point immediately. Hon. Members, on the question of absence from the House or from the sittings of the House, you have a clear provision in our Rules of Procedure as to what you should do when you are going to be absent from the House. You should seek leave of the Speaker. I think that is very clear and we do not really need to go into that. But once you are in the House, there are times when you have some other business to attend to, and leaving the House does not necessarily mean you are absconding from proceedings of the House deliberately. You may go because you have some other engagement or some other equally important business to attend to, maybe related to the work of Parliament. I think our rules have got some degree of flexibility. This problem came about because of first ascertaining quorum.  I am optimistic that this matter will soon be solved and we shall be able to proceed without too much hustling and so on.

MR.MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, the word “naming”, used by New Vision, may have been used without understanding that, in Parliamentary language, it has a special meaning. Any foreigner or anybody who is not knowledgeable may believe that the word referred to what you actually meant or the result of what actually happened yesterday. Therefore, may I request you, at least for the benefit of everybody, to explain what the word ‘naming’ means, because what happened yesterday was not naming. Thank you.

MR.MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the House may now be aware, among those people who were named, Benedict Mutyaba, Engineer Ndawula Kaweesi, and others were included. My problem is actually the kind of reporting we have, because I have read the Monitor article, which says that I was one of the people who were not around. But then there is another article entitled, MPs disagree on UTL loan, and they quote me. I cannot understand how a responsible newspaper can, in one article, say a Member of Parliament is not around and is dodging Parliamentary work, and then in another article they say, the Member said this and that. I do not understand it. Isn’t there anything we can do as Parliament to educate our colleagues on actually how they should conduct themselves in their reporting? This is very clear! However, this has not come out on the radios. On the FM radios we have been painted as people who steal public funds, people who want to enlarge their stomachs at the public’s expense. I think that is wrong.  

Our friends should also study how other Parliaments in the world act. A Member of Parliament, like my colleagues have said, does not have to sit here every time Parliament is sitting. I can come here on a matter that I am interested in and contribute and then go away and do some other work. I can go to the library. What people should look at is what contribution a Member’s work has made overtime, because a Member does not contribute one day in Parliament. If he is not around for one day, it does not mean that he has not contributed. I think we should gauge a Member over time. Where a Member has substantially contributed, it is very bad to say that he is a dodger.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I thank you very much. Those of you who were in the NRC remember when we wrote the Media law. The proposal we had was totally unacceptable to the NRC. But also, what was apparent when we were re-writing the law on the media was the total inadequacy of the journalist profession. It practically did not exist. It is not the fault of the journalism profession that it is a young profession. As you all know, the journalists usually are the first ones to suffer when you have got a wrong Government. In fact, until fairly recently, it was highly risky to be a journalist. Consequently, you might not attract the best people in the profession. 

With the advent of the Movement Government, however, they encouraged the profession –(Interruptions)- this is true, by the way. I can speak with authority, having been a teacher for over 20 years. One of the most popular professional courses at Makerere is Mass Communication.  So, I would like to plead with my colleagues, this is the price you must pay to be a democratic country. There is no way we can have a profession that was in the doldrums and suddenly you want them to be like Ted Koppel or like Dan Rathers of CBS or what have you. We must understand the problems even the journalist profession has. It is also true that we should have workshops and seminars at which politicians and journalists can meet –(Interruption).

MS. BYANYIMA: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for giving way. I am trying to follow your argument about the previously risky profession of journalism. I just want the hon. Minister to tell us, in his scale of things, how risky it is also to be a Minister and whether in that respect it is attracting quality -  (Laughter).

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, I must submit that I do not understand the question posed by the previous speaker.  Maybe after this, we shall have a chat so that I can be in a position to understand. I think the most important point was the last statement I made that, maybe we need workshop interactions at which we can learn from one another. I thank you.

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This issue we are discussing is very grave. A lot of potential competitors of these newspapers are already making photocopies of this list. Therefore, I would like to propose that the Public Relations Officer of this Parliament writes a full brief or explanation that can be put in all these newspapers, explaining the situation. It should also be aired on the radios. I would like to propose.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I did not get an answer to my question. An hon. Member wanted to challenge what I said, and I feel that I should explain better so that you can also give me an explanation. Following the court ruling the question of quorum has become a significant point, which this House must take into account. I sit with Members who are always punctual and present and I always see some faces of those who sit opposite me. There are some faces, however, that I do not see, and these are people who should be here to give us the necessary quorum for us to transact business. 

I would like to know whether those Members who are permanently absent write to you, and do they have permission to be absent? If they do not have permission to be absent for fifteen consecutive sittings, the Constitution categorically and clearly says that they must vacate their seats. I want to know what steps you take when such a Member does not sign the register and does not turn up or when he signs the register and does not show up.  Am I supposed to be here and have my reputation as a Parliamentarian blasted in public because MPs are not attending Parliament? 

We are 120 now, where are the 159 Members of Parliament?  As far as I can see, they have not been sitting near me for a long time. So, where are they? I would like to know whether they get permission from you. In my Committee meeting the other day, I sat with the first Deputy Prime Minister from 10.00 a.m. to 11.30 trying to get quorum.  The same Members who always attend the Committee meetings are the ones who came. What happened to the others? Mr. Speaker, do they have permission from you not attend to Parliament when they were elected to be here? Must I be the one to carry the burden on their behalf, without knowing whether they have permission from you or not?

THE SPEAKER: Let me answer you before I respond to hon. Mwandha’s issue. Ordinarily, and as per our Rules of Procedure, any Member who wishes to absent himself or herself from Parliament does so with leave from the Speaker. I think, that should be done in writing. Now, this does happen quite often. Sometimes I have no way of finding out who is not in the House and when they are not in the House. But you are quite right that it is stipulated in the Constitution that if you absent yourself for a certain number of times, then you qualify to vacate your seat. That can only be if the relevant authority, who can initiate the process, has been moved.  So far, that has not happened. 

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I want to know who this relevant authority is, because they say if the person does not attend for 15 continuous sittings, that person shall vacate office. It is a constitutional obligation that that person goes. They should apply to the Speaker for leave of absence, which means that the matter is deposited in your office! So, I would like to know how you effect this constitutional requirement, and how many people have applied to be absent. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, I do not think it is fair to say that I could give you a list of names of people who have sought permission of the Speaker to be absent from the House. Do you seriously believe I can do that? What I know is that, responsible Members of Parliament always do seek for permission from the Speaker. If you are not in that category, that is not my problem. 

Hon. Mwandha, your question was on the word ‘naming’. I quite agree with you that ‘naming’ in the parliamentary language has a different meaning from usage of the word in other circles. In parliamentary language, it is part of the disciplinary procedure taken against a Member of Parliament, who has engaged in an irrelevant discussion and has been asked not to do so, and he continues. The Speaker would ‘name’ that person. It is part of a disciplinary measure being taken against such a Member of Parliament, and therefore, my understanding would be that the newspaper was using it in a different manner from what it is normally used for in parliamentary language.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE BUDGET FOR THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSION FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2000/2001

THE SPEAKER: I am told that hon. Ben Wacha is now here.

THE VICECHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wacha Ben): Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am here listed as the one to present this item, but I am not well. So, I have asked hon. Adolf Mwesige, who is a member of the Committee, to present it. 

MR.MWESIGE ADOLF (Bunyangabu County, Kabarole): Mr. Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the 2000/2001 budget estimates for the Parliamentary Commission.  

The Parliamentary Commission approved, at the end of 1998, a three-year modernisation plan for the Parliament of Uganda. This was reviewed after 18 months, with a view of progress towards achievement of the set goals and to enable re-prioritisation. The review indicated that many activities had been achieved. The review also revealed a need for additional physical, organisational and human resource elements. Strategies for developing the above were developed and implemented, and anticipated outputs were achieved.  

The Parliamentary Commission agreed that a second modernisation plan be formulated, covering the period 2000/2001 to 200l/2003, which process has already began.  

During the year 1999/2000, the Commission’s main goal was to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the Parliament of Uganda in its legislative, representative and oversight functions. The Commission adopted a two-pronged strategy to achieve this goal. One, the use of local budget resources, and two, continued solicitation for donor support.  

Activities carried out during the Financial Year 1999/2000:  
The Commission carried out public investment programmes (PIP) and non-PIP development related activities during the Financial Year 1999/2000.

(A) Development Budget Activities Using Local Budget Resources:  
Under the development budget activities, the Commission carried out the following:  

(i)Rehabilitation of parliamentary buildings:  
The Ministry of Finance provided Shs.2,677,669,000/- for the above purpose. The funds were released and Shs.2,192,602,909/- has been paid to the contractor for the reconstruction of the third floor, which was officially handed over to the Speaker on the 5th of June 2000. The balance of Shs.485,l066,091 was advanced to the contractor for phase III works on the on floor.  

(ii)  Renovation of the North Wing:  
All the five floors of the North wing have been rehabilitated. Rooms have been availed for Committees, Committee Chairpersons, Clerks to Committees and other support staff.   

(iii)Purchase of vehicles:  
A 26-seater mini-bus, at a cost of Shs.79,719,425/- was purchased to ease transport of Committee members travelling as a group on parliamentary duties.   

(iv) Purchase of a generator:  
Shs.153,702,542/- has been paid to M/S General Machinery Limited for importation, supply and installation of a heavy-duty standby generator, set for the parliamentary complex.  

(v) Purchase of furniture:  
Shs.43,680,000/- has been spent to acquire furniture for the newly rehabilitated third floor.  

(vi) Purchase of equipment:  
Shs.28,117,901/- has been spent on the procurement of various items and equipment including computers and accessories and an air conditioning unit for the recording room.   

(vii) Laying of telephone cables to North and East Wings:
Shs. 16,467,550 out of Shs. 20,024,550 has been paid for cabling up telephone sockets of offices in the Northern and Eastern Wings of Parliamentary Building. The second phase, covering expansion of the PABX capacity and installation of telephone handsets will be dealt with during the Financial Year 2000/2001.

Unreleased Development Budget Funds:
Shs. 422,103,000 for the non-public investment plan development budget activities was not released by the close of the Financial Year 1999/2000. Of this, Shs. 200 million was for payment of VAT on procurements and the balance of Shs. 222,103,000 should have financed other urgent procurements, especially furniture for offices of Members of Parliament. This act contravenes Article 155 of the Constitution and the Administration of Parliament Act, 1997. Consequently, despite the availability of space for shared offices for Members of Parliament, the offices cannot be used without furniture.

    (B) Recurrent Budget Activities
Shs. 22,005,806,528 was released by the Ministry of Finance by the close of Financial Year 1999/2000.  Members of Parliament were paid all their accrued allowances, arrears of contribution to international parliamentary organisations were cleared, and no domestic arrears have been accumulated.

Human Resource Management
Sixteen new Members of staff were recruited and put on the payroll of the Commission during the financial year 1999/2000. The Commission was also able to sponsor five members of staff for different courses.

    (C) Donor-funded Activities During the Financial Year 1999/2000
The listed international donor organisations contributed to the development of parliamentary activities during the financial year 1999/2000. And on behalf of the Committee, I take this opportunity to thank them.

    (i) USAID funded the following activities: 
    • Development of Parliament’s own website
    • Creation of email addresses for each Member of Parliament and the parliamentary staff.
    • Strengthening of Parliament’s Public Relations and Information Office through the provision of furniture, computer hardware and software, enabling the following products to be operationalised:
    • The Parliamentary Directory.
    • Visitors’ guide to Parliament.
    • Children’s guide to Parliament.
    • The Parliamentary Staff Bulletin.
    • Development of a simplified electronic Bill tracking system designed to enable Members of Parliament to electronically track the progress of Bills presented to Parliament.
    • A short-term consultant was engaged to work with the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to review and make recommendations for review of our Rules of Procedure.
    • A performance/organisation review of the Parliamentary Research Service was carried out by a USAID funded consultant after six months of operation.
    • Training workshops for the Parliamentary Research staff and the Clerks in various subject areas.
    • A weeklong workshop for Members of Parliament on public budgeting, resulting in the establishment of the Budget Analysis office within Parliament.
    • A British management consultant was, in May 2000, attached to the Parliamentary Commission for three months to push forward the implementation of the consultant’s recommendations, which included the establishment of the Board of Management, improvement of procurement facilities management and financial management systems within a corporate framework.

    (ii) Department of International Development (DFID) – UK:
The following activities were successfully carried out using the DFID grant of £312,375 to the Parliament of Uganda.
    • Procurement of furniture and equipment for ten Committee rooms, offices of all Clerks to the Committees and the Parliamentary Commission Secretariat. The purpose of the activity is to strengthen the Committee system in Parliament.
    • Sixty-four volumes of books and journals have been acquired for the Parliamentary Library.
    • A DFID funded consultant carried out an organisational review of Parliament as an institution, with the objective of improving the institution’s efficiency and effectiveness.
    • Two joint planning missions were carried out by two British Consultants, aimed at developing a modular in-house training capability, directed to the evolving needs of Members of Parliament and Staff.  Consequently, a parliamentary studies programme was designed and conducted by British consultants for Members of Parliament.
    • A one week training programme on effective procurement management for Parliamentary Heads of Departments and Sections was carried out, followed by a six-day training programme for the same target group.
    • A four-week course for the Under Secretary on Parliamentary Administration at the Royal Institute of Public Administration.
    • A week-long management training workshop on the fifth annual conference of Parliamentary Librarians of Eastern and Southern Africa for the head of the Parliamentary Library and his deputy.
    • One week study visit to the House of Commons Library for the Director of Library, Research and Information Services department.
    • A consultant from International Records Management Trust conducted a review of Parliament’s records and made useful recommendations for reform.
    • One-week attachment for Clerk Assistants to the House of Commons.

Budgetary Estimates 2000/2001:
The 2000/2001 budget of the Parliamentary Commission was negotiated between the Commissioners and the Minister of Finance before submission to the President as required by the Constitution. This move was taken to narrow any areas of differences, which could have arisen, between the Commission and the Ministry of Finance. 

As a result of the initial negotiations, the Commission submitted a detailed and realistic budget, which was meant to cover areas of its programmes initiated as far back as 1998, which have not been covered. It was also meant to cover areas to be embarked upon by the Commission. 

I was informed that the Commission and the Committee met with the Minister of Finance and I understand that they did agree on the figures, which the Commission submitted, but this report was drafted before the final meeting between the Minister and the Commission.  So, the figures that I am going to read were proposed by the Minister of Finance, and I think have been revised, and the budget of the Commission has been reinstated as it was proposed.  

The areas affected by the suggested cuts were the following:
 
    (A) Capital Development Budget Activities:
    1. Rehabilitation of Parliamentary Buildings: 
The following activities have been categorised as emergency works and must be undertaken. They have been identified, costed and authorised for implementation during the Financial Year 2000/2001.
    • Rehabilitation of the Independence Arch.
    • Rehabilitation of the water tower.
    • Rehabilitation of entrance canopy to the main lobby.
    • Rehabilitation of foot bridges connecting to north and south wings.
    • Rehabilitation of the two Floors of the East Wing.
    • Professional fees for project consultants.

A total of Shs. 2.7 billion was submitted to the President, however, the Minister proposed to provide only Shs. 1.6 billion, representing 57.7 percent. This is emergency work that must be carried out if the safety of Members of Parliament and staff is to be ensured. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the original figure of Shs. 2.7 billion be restored to enable this activity to continue.

2. Non Public Investment Plan Activities:
(i) Activity 121 – purchase of Machinery and Equipment:
This is estimated to cost 667,450,920/= and will promote extension of a local area network to all offices, promote security and safety of persons and assets within the premises, and promote dissemination of accurate information. It will also expedite production of the Hansard and other Parliamentary reports and ensure hygienic premises.  Out of the 667,450,920/-, the Ministry of Finance proposed to provide Shs. 145,000,000.  The Committee recommends to the House that Shs. 667,450,920 be provided to enable this once-for-all activity to take place.

(ii) Activity 142 – Purchase of Cars and Pick-ups.
Five double-cabin pick-ups were budgeted for to facilitate work in the departments of Sergeant-at-Arms, Library, Research and Information Services, Legislative Counsel and one each for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.  These would cost Shs. 195,140,375. The Minister proposed to provide Shs. 115,140,375, which will only cater for departmental vehicles.

The Committee recommends that the Shs. 195,140,375 be  restored to enable the purchase for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker’s pick-ups, which are meant to be lead/escort vehicles as per their terms and conditions of services.

(iii) Activity 191 – Other fixed assets
These assets included furniture for the North and East wings, the 3rd floor (Members’ Lounge, 2 private lounges, private dining room, room 9, Speaker’s Bar), one new lift for the North wing, and repair of one lift in the South Wing.

The Commission submitted a budget of 885,051,333/=. The Ministry of Finance, however, proposes to provide Shs. 300,000,000. The proposed provision is only 35.1 percent of the Commission’s submission and this is definitely inadequate for this activity. The Committee recommends that the original sum of 855,051,333/= be  approved by the House.

(iv) Activity 391 – Other goods and services
This is meant to facilitate the purchase of carpets for the VIP room, Speaker’s and Deputy Speaker’s offices, offices and committee rooms in the North and East Wings, corridor for the North and East wings plus electrical fans and wall clocks for committee rooms.

The Commission submitted a budget of 334,810,392/= for this activity. The Ministry of Finance proposed a provision of 200,000,000/=, which is only 52.3 percent of the Commission’s submission. The Committee recommends the provision of Shs. 334,810,392 to enable the areas under consideration to get a face-lift.

(v) Activity 411 – Taxes
The Commission submitted a budget of Shs. 382,730,729 for VAT on procurements. The Minister of Finance proposes to provide Shs. 200,000,000, which covers 52.3 percent.  However, with the increase in procurements by the Commission, the Committee recommends that the figure of 382,730,729/- be approved.

(iv) Consultants
In the Commission’s budget for the rehabilitation of Parliamentary Buildings, Shs. 519,000,000 was budgeted for professional fees for Government hired consultants on the rehabilitation of Parliamentary Buildings.

The Minister makes no provision for this activity for the Financial Year 2000/2001.

The Consultants have not been paid any professional fees under Phase 11 works, which they are entitled to under the contract agreement.

The Committee recommends that this amount be provided to avoid a breach of contract and contradicting the Government policy on clearing domestic arrears.

(B) Recurrent Budget Activities during Financial Year 2000/2001
The Commission intends, during the Financial Year 2000/2001, to focus on enhancing the overall management and organisational capacities within the various departments of the Parliamentary Service. This is intended to ensure that the management of the Department and the services they offer are properly co-ordinated to promote cost effectiveness and efficiency.

The Commission intends to achieve the above through:
1. Organisational Programmes:
    • Introduction of results oriented management approach
    • Strengthening and empowering the Board of Management.
    • Streamlining the role of the Parliamentary Commission to enable the Commissioners concentrate on policy formulation.

2. Human Resource Management Matters:
    • Development of a manpower plan for the Parliamentary Service.
    • Introduction of a new staff appraisal instrument.
    • Review of the Parliamentary Service Staff Regulations, 1998.

    2. Functioning of the Committee system.
- The Commission proposes that with effect from July 2000, a sitting allowance be re-introduced for Committee business.

Areas affected by the cuts in the Recurrent Budget
All the programmes under the recurrent budget were affected as follows:

1.  Programme 01 - Headquarters
The Commission submitted a budget of Shs. 3,520,324,950 but the Ministry of finance proposed to provide Shs. 2,495,385,044.

2.  Programme 02 – Parliament 
Out of Shs. 20,031,005,700, the Ministry of Finance proposes to provide Shs. 18,705,807,592.

3. Programme 03 – Office of the Speaker.
Out of Shs.472,221,426, the Ministry of Finance proposes to provide Shs. 385,330,000.

4. Programme 04 – Office of the Deputy Speaker.
Out of 394,251,984/-, the Ministry of Finance proposes to provide Shs. 300,282,000.

5.  Programme 05 – Parliamentary Commission.
Out of Shs. 200,813,214, the Ministry of Finance proposes to provide Shs. 113,194,364.

Recommendations:
The Committee wishes to note that, Financial Year 2000/2001 is a year of increased political activity and a year of transition from the 6th to the 7th Parliament. It is therefore crucial that adequate funds are provided to enable a smooth transition.  

The Committee further notes that there is an increase in the staff and there is expanded space that needs to be catered for.

The budget that is submitted by the Commission covers not only the activities of the Legislature, but also the personal emoluments of some Members of the Executive.  This budget, in addition to the requirements of Members of Parliament, also caters for salaries, allowances and mileage of the sixty-one Ministers. This makes the Commission’s budget appear inflated.

In conclusion, the Committee recommends that the Parliamentary Commission’s budget, of Shs 24,618,617,274 for development expenditure be provided for to enable the smooth running of the institution and to facilitate emergency work on the rehabilitation of the Parliamentary Buildings.
I beg to move.

(The full report of the Committee is to be found in Volume I, Sessional Committee Reports on the 2000/2001 Budgetary Proposals)

DR. NKUUHE JOHNSON (Isingiro South, Mbarara): I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for work well done. 

I will go straight to the discussion, focusing on the big picture. What is the big picture of this Parliamentary Commission, what should they be doing? In fact, what is the big picture as far as an MP is concern? The three roles described on page 1, that is legislation, representation and oversight, as far as I am concern, are our roles. If we do not do well in all the three, then we have no business being here. 

What has the Commission suggested for an MP to achieve these three roles? They say, in paragraph three, that during the year 1999/2000, the Commission’s main goal was to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the Parliament of Uganda in its legislative, representative and oversight functions. So, the words are efficiency and effectiveness. 

Have we been effective as MPs and has the Parliamentary Commission helped us to be effective? I think, largely, we can say yes, because when we look at what we are supposed to do, most of the time we have kept the Front Bench on their toes. They have also benefited from this. We have passed a lot of legislation. This is an individual effort. You can judge yourself and find out whether you have represented your people effectively. I cannot judge that.  So, as far as effectiveness is concerned, we can say we have scored more than 50 percent.  

Now we come to efficiency. Efficiency is very hard to measure. How many laws have we passed, how many did we want to pass? How fast did we pass them? That is where we have a problem, and that is where the Parliamentary Commission has a challenge. They have to make sure we are efficient in whatever we are doing.  

I would like to congratulate the Parliamentary Commission. They have invested very well on our behalf, to improve this place and to make it a better place to work in. I only wish we had a bigger Chamber, so that we have a bit more space. I do not see it in the plans here. If you look at the bigger picture, we need a bigger Chamber. We are not likely to decrease in numbers. For those of us who may be  planning to come back here, I do not think we shall be less than 278, if anything, we may be more. At least we shall be the same number, and definitely we cannot fit in this Chamber. 

We live in a modern world. Today the New Vision reported and the Monitor reported, but if this was read only in Uganda, it would not be a problem, but these papers are read everywhere. I wish the newspaper people could also realise that they are not just writing for the Ugandan audience but they are writing for the World Bank, for the Americans, the Australians, and wherever. So, this is a challenge. Those people now think we do not do our work, when in actual fact, the papers are misrepresenting the picture. But this is part of this knowledgeable society we are living in now. 

You can see from page 4 and 5 that we got a lot of money from USAID and from DFID, especially USAID, for a lot of these improvements. And you can see where it is going. Development of Parliament’s own website, creation of E-mail addresses for each Member of Parliament, strengthening public relations, development of simple electronic Billing system, consultants, seminars - all this is knowledge. That is the way the modern world is operating. Unfortunately, that is where most of the money is. It is as if we have been cheated, but actually that is the way it is, that is the way the modern world is moving.  It is a modern world, a knowledge-driven world, and unfortunately, we have to live in that kind of world.  

I would like to congratulate a lot of the MPs who have taken advantage of the facilities downstairs. And I want to challenge the Ministers that you will be endangered if the MPs continue at the pace they are going. 150 MPs have trained in the use of computers, but I do not know how many Ministers have trained. That is a challenge to the Ministers and congratulations to the Members of Parliament.  

On page 4, the first bullet says: “development of Parliament’s own website (www.parliament.go.ug)”. This means that anybody in Greenland, Australia, Hong Kong can see what is happening in our Parliament by just opening that on the Internet. How many of our Ministers can open this website and actually check what is going on? It would be embarrassing if a Minister goes out and an MP from a foreign country can tell you what is happening in your Parliament and you are not aware. It can be very embarrassing. He will have read it from the Internet and for of course you will be away. So, that is a challenge.  

The other issue is the e-mail addresses for each Member of Parliament. Every Member of Parliament here has an e-mail address, but the people down there are complaining that many MPs do not check their e-mail addresses. Everybody reads that a Member of Parliament has this address and -(Interruption)

PROF.BUKENYA: I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that some of us have had e-mail addresses in our houses for the last 10 years. Therefore, I have my own communications in my own house.

DR. NKUUHE: Thank you very much, that is very good. In fact, the more people have these in their homes, the better. But the problem is, that the computers down there are getting filled by people who send you messages. They think you are reading them and you are not reading them and deleting them. So, each one of you has got a mailbox and these mailboxes are full. We urge people to use these ones so that you empty them, so that they can send more mail, because the system is getting clogged –(Interruption).

CAPT.BABU: Mr. Speaker, whilst other e-mail addresses can be reached at any point in the world, I have asked Dr. Nkuuhe before, whether I can go to my telephone and check my mail in Parliament when I am not here. So, we would like to have that facility so that, even if I am in London, even if I am anywhere, I can check my mail, like hotmail. So, let it come on line, so that we can see how far we have gone.  

DR. NKUUHE: I thank you very much for that question -(Interruption)

MS.NANKABIRWA: Thank you, hon. Nkuuhe. What makes you think that Ministers are computer illiterate?

DR. NKUUHE: No, I did not say they are illiterate, I am just saying, when you look at the proportions, over 50 percent of the MPs are computer literate and about 20 percent of the Ministers are. But if you are challenging me, that is very good. That means -(Interruption)

MR.KINTU: May I know from hon. Nkuuhe whether Ministers are not Members of Parliament?

DR. NKUUHE: Anyway, I think I have raised the point. When I say Members of Parliament I mean those who are not Ministers and when I say Ministers, I means those Members of Parliament who are Ministers. So, I think the point is met.  Finally –(Interruption) 

MR.WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Nkuuhe for giving way. I would like to inform  hon. Nkuuhe that, much as Ministers may not appear downstairs, they have alternative means of accessing the facilities that you have. Secondly, the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications is actually working on a policy of information technology, whereby all Ministers and Members of Parliament together, are going to benefit.

DR. NKUUHE: I would like to say hallelujah to that, because I was looking forward to that. 

As I conclude, I would like to say that, on the three roles, legislative, over-sight and representative, we are doing well. I would like to thank the Parliamentary Commission for enabling us to do well, but there is still a challenge because we still cannot link with our constituencies. It is now possible and also cheap to link to your districts. If only the Parliamentary Commission could look into this. The investment needed is not very much.  So, I will recommend the following to the Commission: 

They should focus more on policy and leave administrative matters to the administrators, as they have pointed out. They were doing a lot of administration, which was good, but I think they should focus more on policy matters.  

They should examine the possibility of setting up an information committee that will be part of Parliament. The way information is headed, we need some sort of co-ordination for this.

-There is also a need to formulate a policy that governs the resources that we have downstairs. Sometimes some of these things you find on those computers are really embarrassing. We have to have discipline, because when you have been using that facility, anybody who goes there can know where you have been visiting. And you find sex.com, you find spareparts.com, you find all sorts of embarrassing things. Each one has to discipline themselves, we cannot put rules, but –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, your time is up.

DR. NKUUHE: I would like to end by thanking the Committee and the Commission. I hope that I have challenged you to use the facilities that we have downstairs to our benefit.  I thank you very much.

MR.OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the report of the Committee on the Parliamentary Commission. 

First of all, I would like to congratulate the Sixth Parliament for having thought it wise to create this Commission. Indeed, this Commission has facilitated the work of Parliament to a great extent, and I would like to say that this foundation should be strengthened, so that the Seventh Parliament comes and builds on what the Commission has already started. The Commission has fought a big battle to get rid of the Ministries, which have been within this Parliamentary Buildings for many years, and that has given rise to the North Wing. I would like to congratulate them for that.  However, I would like to propose that those offices be allocated to districts, if we cannot have offices for individual Members of Parliament. At least, a District should have an office, where the chairperson of the parliamentary committee of the district could assemble with his colleagues to do some parliamentary work relating to the district. Computers could also be provided to such offices. We have only 45 Districts, so 45 well furnished offices could give an opportunity to the parliamentary groups from each district to perform.

Having said that, allow me to look at other over sight functions of Commission. When you look at the persistent lack of quorum, which has been part of the working of this Parliament, I would have thought that the Commission would have worked together with the chairperson of the caucus to mobilise Members of Parliament, so that whenever the House is in Session, we could have quorum.  We should not have waited for a court ruling to tell us what it means to be in the House, either at the beginning or up to the end of a Session. 

Those of us who come and sit here try to perform our duties, it does not mean that we have nothing else to do. We also have other things to do. Maybe the Parliamentary Commission could come up with a disciplinary committee, where certain issues, which I see as rather odd and absurd, could be addressed, for example, when a Member of Parliament is given the Floor, he articulates issues and then walks away. At the time when the response to the issues is being given, such Members of Parliament are no where. So, sometimes you ask yourself was the question or were the issues, raised on the Floor of Parliament, for people on the galleries or was that MP supposed to get a response, which can be used effectively to either promote or develop the issues raised. These are some of the weaknesses that I have seen in the workings of the Commission. This can be looked at. 

The other aspect is the internalisation of the Rules of Procedure.  I know it is not the job of the Commission to make Members of Parliament understand and internalise Rules of Procedure, but it is incumbent upon us, as Members of Parliament to internalise the Rules of Procedure. This would make the work of the presiding officer, that is the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker, easy. Sometimes we deliberately delay the House by not following the Rules of Procedure. The Commission can point this out, either through a circular or other communications. These are issues that may sound rather absurd, but I would like to leave them on record.

With regard to the financial allocation, the chairperson of this Committee, represented by hon. Adolf Mwesige, mid-way in his presentation, stated that all the funds, which was requisitioned or presented originally in the budget, and which had been cut, have been restored. If that is true, then the record, which was being read, would not be correct. I would like to propose that later on, hon. Mwesige, in his capacity as the chairperson of this Committee, should correct his presentation. We should not be given the impression that the Ministry of Finance only hoodwinked us. They will tell us that we are complaining, when they have already given us all that we asked for and, actually, our record is stating that what we have been given is much less. I feel this is important, and since the chairperson is consulting with the Minister responsible for Finance, I hope they are reconciling the figures.

Lastly, I would like to register appreciation for the donor support fund. We have received a lot of support for development of our infrastructure from them. Indeed, our library is quite modern. So, we should register our appreciation to USAID and the British Government. 

As this is going to be the last budget for the Commission in the Sixth Parliament, shall I propose that, when approved, the whole of it is released to the Commission so that when you prorogue Parliament, we do not come back to look for our domestic arrears. Domestic arrears are actually never paid. This is an appeal and I hope the Commission will look at it.  I thank you.

MR.MWANDHA JAMES (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to support the Motion for adoption of this report. 

First of all, I want to congratulate the parliamentary authorities for the renovations that have been carried out in this complex. Some of us who have been in this Parliament for some time, have known the sorry state in which Parliament was. The third floor was a no-go place. Now it is so nice that many of us are tempted to go there even more often than may be necessary. Of course, the lift has been working for some time, which has enabled many of us move around. We hope that Parliament, from this money, which is going to be voted, will be able to fix the lifts in the Northern Wing of this Parliamentary Complex. It is extremely difficult for some of us now to go to Committee meetings on higher floors, and also to go to the offices of our commissioners, who I understand are now on the fourth floor. I hear that the Speaker’s office is also going to move maybe to the fifth floor. So, there is absolute urgency to get the lifts on that side fixed, so that it is easy for many people, who have difficulties in moving, to access all these places and be able to perform.  

I also want to congratulate the Parliamentary Commission for the facilities that have been provided to facilitate our work. I am particularly happy with the research and library division. Many of the young men and women that have been recruited in that place, within a reasonably short time, have been able to grasp the essence of their duties and they are delivering. So, you now get researched reports on all sorts of subjects, and you are able to come to this House and contribute in a more positive way. So, I would like to congratulate the Commission for this facility. Some of us who have been here longer, remember that at one time, even Committees could not get secretaries and some Members had to be secretaries of their Committees. Now with the recruitment of more staff, at least the Committees I go to have secretaries provided by Parliament. This eases the work of the Committee quite considerably.

All this would not have been possible if we did not get the support of our friends and supporters like USAID and DFID. To them, I would like to say thank you. I think we need to congratulate ourselves, as Parliament, for having passed the Act that set up the Parliamentary Commission, and for having put in place a group of committed Members to be in charge of that Commission. These people have done a good job. Mind you, they had no previous experience to learn from, and I think in the process, they have been able to do as best as can be done. And to them, I sincerely want to say thank you.

I see that more renovations are going to take place, I would like to hope and pray that more accessibility is provided to Parliament. At the front of this Parliament, and also in various places, we could improve on the accessibility. I hope that as we go on renovating, some of us will be consulted so that we can give advice, because we know what it means to move in certain types of situations. And I wish the Commission could find some little money and buy at least two wheel chairs to be placed in the foyer of the Parliament here in the South Wing and also in the North Wing. This could assist some of the people who may need to be wheeled around as they go round the Parliamentary complex. You find a lot of these services provided in public places in other countries, and I think, as Parliament, we should show an example.   

Again, as a person who has an interest in this field, I want us also to provide accessibility to our colleague who is visually impaired. You know that Parliament produces so much literature and that person also needs to prepare her own work. It is absolutely important for us to have facilities here to enable that particular Member of Parliament to have access to information as easily as possible. I am sure that once that facility is made available here, even other people can use it. Therefore,  in conclusion, I would like to request that more and more should be done to improve accessibility in Parliament.  Thank you.

MR.ANDRAULE AWUZU (Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Committee for this precise and good report. Secondly, I want to thank the Commission for a job well done during the last financial year. Just as my colleagues have said, the face of Parliament has changed, and we should all applaud them for that.  

I am going to contribute only on one item, which appears at the bottom of page 10. The last paragraph on that page reads as follows: 
“The budget that is submitted by the Commission covers not only the activities of the Legislature, but also personal emoluments of some Members of the Executive. This budget, in addition to the requirements of Members of Parliament, also caters for salaries, allowances and mileage of the sixty one (61) Ministers.”  

I think this is really irrelevant, because the 61 Ministers, even the three who are ex-officio Members of Parliament, according to the Constitution, are all Members of Parliament. So, there is no question of saying that it caters for a budget of 61 Ministers, because we are all Members of Parliament. A resolution was passed here in this House that we be paid in Parliament. 

Secondly, it gives a wrong impression that Ministers are being paid twice. This is not the case at all, because we get all our emoluments here in Parliament. Ministers do a lot of work, they spend a lot of their meagre resources, for example, using their telephones at home and so on to do Government work, for which actually we are not paid at all. Therefore, I believe this paragraph is irrelevant, and it should not have appeared.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.KANDOLE CLEMENT (Kyaka County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the report, and I also thank the Commission for the job done so far. However, I would like to state that I am not extremely impressed by the report, because I do not see a critical analysis of the budget of the Commission as we have seen in other budgets that we have already handled.  The common phraseology is “the Committee recommends that the money be reinstated”, but the Committee is not looking critically at what has already been spent and what the Commission has used the money for.  

I would like to turn to page two. When you look at page two, when they talk of purchase of vehicles, they are talking of buying a 26-seater mini-bus Mitsubishi at almost 80 million shillings. I do not understand it! I have had an opportunity to travel in that mini-bus, I think it is the worst you can have for this price. There is no air-conditioning. There is nothing special! So, I do not understand why one could pay 80 million shillings for a second hand vehicle. It is either second hand or reconditioned. The Commission would have got something much better for this price, and I would have expected the Committee to come up with some explanation about this kind of spending.

If we turn to page 9 of the report, I again find myself a little bit lost. The report is talking about functioning of the committee system, and the Commission proposes that, with effect from July 2000, a sitting allowance be introduced for the committee business. I understand this to mean that as a Member of Parliament sitting on a Committee, I would be paid extra money. This allowance was being given before, but at some stage, it was consolidated into one salary. The Committee has not helped us explain whether we are not running into the danger of double payment. This should not have been left in passing, because as a Member, I would want to be assured that when I am getting extra money, it is not going to result into other problems. This money was actually being given before, but it was consolidated into a salary. Now if we go back to it, what will the implications be? I would have also expected the Committee to look at that and probably guide us on the implications.

On page 10 of the report, I find a series of spendings, and it is a lot of money. I would like to be guided, especially on the 200 million shillings that is being spent on the Parliamentary Commission. What are the details that are embedded in this kind of spending? I need to be guided. 

Lastly, I also need to be guided as to whether it is the Commission that is responsible for proposing Members of Parliament to represent Parliament in different forums. It is always the same people bouncing back again and again to represent Parliament, I do not know what criteria are normally followed. Is it the Commission that chooses? If it is the Commission, is it doing it for particular individuals? Is it our a Commission for the whole Parliament? What is it? I need some guidance. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.BITAHWA SAMSON (Igara West, Bushenyi) Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I only want to point out a few issues, which I think are very important, but were not reflected in the report. 

First of all, I would like the Committee to take it as a matter of urgency to expedite the renovation of the offices for Members. Most of us actually do not have offices anywhere, and the work that is expected of a Member of Parliament is very difficult without an office.  Even the LC.111 chairmen are much better than Members of Parliament are because they have offices. We cannot conduct business or carry out fruitful discussions on the street or in the corridor. So, I request the Committee to take this matter very seriously and expedite the question of accommodating Members of Parliament. 

Equally important, I think the Committee should look into the possibility of providing room for visitors from our Constituencies. They eagerly come to visit us here in Parliament, and we just stand in corridor, we do not know where to accommodate such important visitors. Most of them come with problems and have to be attended to, but it is very difficult to do so in the corridor. Visitors coming to see MPs should also have the privilege of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              being accommodated.

I wish to agree with my colleagues who have commented on renovating the Chamber. Our Chamber is very old fashioned, no wonder it was built during the colonial days. Future plans to renovate it should be more representative of the Ugandan situation and should be modern.

I notice that the system of head counting is difficult.  It would be much more convenient if introduced a system of pressing an electronic button so that the numbers can be reflected on a screen. It is much easier for the Speaker and for the Clerks to obtain the right number of Members  present rather than taking a long time head counting.

Furthermore, I would like to say that the Chamber is too small for us, and this has been mentioned from year to year, many times. Sometimes, when the Chamber is full, it is too hot. Perhaps it would be much better if there was an air-conditioner. This should not be difficult. Most Members are forced to go to the corridors when it gets too hot in the Chamber.

I wish also to say that there is a bit of insensitivity in considering persons with disabilities. Hon. Mwandha has already mentioned the sorry estate of the lift. It is very old. It is often out of order, and there is no provision for persons with disabilities to get access to the building or to climb up to higher floors. This should also be taken as a matter of urgency. It would also be very helpful if a toilet for persons with disabilities was considered, because it is extremely difficult for some of our Members to move in these very small toilets, which are sometimes not very clean. It is a bit insensitive of the Committee not to consider this issue.

Lastly, I would like to comment on the general inconveniences caused during renovations. It is good that the independence arch is going to be renovated, but I hope that it is not going to take a long time. Last time when there were renovations in this House, it took a very long time, and it was very inconvenient for Members of Parliament. We had to always dine outside and come in time for debates because the restaurant was under renovation. The present renovations are also very difficult for Members, because we have only one entrance, which is often congested. The parking area is not enough. If we knew how long the renovations would take, we would adjust conveniently, but sometimes we are held in suspense and we do know how long the renovations will take. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MRS.JANAT MUKWAYA (Mukono South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand here as the Member representing Mukono South, and I want to congratulate the Commission for a job well done. 

I was very excited when I appeared before my Committee in a very conducive environment, and it was more exciting when I visited the chairperson of my Committee in an office. We must all rejoice for creating an environment that we shall have championed. But I must also register my appreciation to Government for having responded. Our past leaders created this building and it would have been very naïve of us if we did not renovate it. So, within one year, so much has been done, and we only pray that Government shall provide the required monies to complete what has been put in place. My people in Mukono South are very happy that we actually did this at the right time.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.BAMWANGA STEVEN (Ndorwa West, Kabale): Thank you very  much, Mr. Speaker. I also rise in support of the Motion and to hail the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the 2000/2001 Budget Estimates for the Parliamentary Commission. Since this 6th Parliament came into office, this building has been in a very sorry state of disrepair, and until we achieved our autonomy, no body cared about the welfare of the MPs both in the House and in our constituencies. I would like, therefore, to congratulate this 6th Parliament for having gained our independence and for getting back the Parliamentary Building for the exclusive use of the Members of Parliament. This has helped Members of Parliament carry out their jobs in an efficient manner in a one-stop centre. 

If we had fully operating offices with furniture, I am sure the question of quorum would have not arisen. When people operate in downtown corridors, they cannot have enough time to concentrate on the work of Parliament, because of the insecurity in those downtown areas. So, if Members of Parliament could share offices, we would be able to operate late in the night and be able to prepare ourselves before we come to the Parliament to debate these issues.  

As this Parliament is in its last year of operation, I think the few achievements that have taken place since the Parliamentary Commission was formed, should not be looked at as mean achievements. There is a lot of rehabilitation going on in the Parliamentary Building, but when we came to this Parliament, there was nothing on the ground.

On the purchase of a minibus, I think the price of 79 million shillings is rather inflated, considering that a 50-seater Isuzu Coach costs about 100 million shillings. So, I think we need to find out whether this minibus also came through Jiefang or other suppliers who gave Parliament a raw deal?  

One time I visited the Canadian Parliamentary Centre and Members of Parliament there all have offices in the centre. They had a canteen and other facilities. The report says that they were trying to look for support using both local sources and also donor support. It is important for the Parliamentary Commission to seek assistance to help MPs perform their political and constitutional responsibilities. 

When we go to our constituencies, although the people who gave us votes know that the President of this country is His Excellency Museveni Kaguta, to them, the area MP is actually their President because they live and stay with that MP. When they have got burials, when they have got anything to address concerning schools, road networks, they address all these problems through their MPs.  Therefore, we are always exposed to danger, in case the Government fails to deliver services. So, I wish to ask the House – (Interruption)

DR. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Bamwanga, for giving way. Apart from the Member of Parliament being regarded as a President, they also expect him to donate, as the President does whenever he moves around the country.

MR.BAMWANGA: Thank you very much. Actually, I was about to come to that point. As Members of Parliament, we are all equal before the President. Every time the President goes upcountry, he may donate 10 million shillings to one constituency and then leave out the other neighbouring constituency looking on, as if it is a fatherless constituency. We have got a saying that, if you have twins, you must treat them equally. So, in future, when the President is making donations, it is important for him to treat all the constituencies equally.  We do not have enough funds as a country –(Interruption).  

Prof. Apolo Nsibambi: Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Member for giving way. Whenever you go to any area of Uganda, you will discover that they all have different endowments and problems. Therefore, it is very difficult to have a standard answer. If you take the problem of drought as an example, it has now afflicted us differently. So, if you are Head of State or someone else, and you have scarce resources, I do not think that you would have a standard answer. The matter is contextual. I thank you.

MR.BAMWANGA: Mr. Speaker, while I agree with the Prime Minister that Uganda and Canada are not comparable in resources and development, each country has got its peculiar characteristics and problems. While Canada gives about 200,000 dollars as a Constituency Development Fund to each Member of Parliament, at least if you gave us one million shillings per constituency, we shall appreciate and share our poverty. We are not saying that we should get equal treatment like these developed countries. So, on the question of the development fund, I agree and I know that we recently decentralised the Capital Development Fund, but this money has not been put to good use in the respective constituencies. But if we had a small constituency development fund, going to each Member of Parliament, I am sure a lot more would be done, as Members may have witnessed during the joint fundraising in support of Members for Parliament. We have been able to develop and build schools and health centres through fundraising. If we had little money from that fund, it would go a long way in helping our people.

I would like to end by thanking our external partners, like USAID and DFID for extending support to this Parliament. I am sure this money was coming before we came to this Parliament and even before this Commission was formed, but I think this money was finding its way somewhere else. So, we must thank the Commission and congratulate this 6th Parliament for having started a culture and legacy of good governance and accountability.  I thank you.

MS.BYENKYA BEATRICE (Woman Representative, Hoima): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I wish to join my colleagues in thanking the Committee for a job well done.  I also wish to thank the donors for the contributions they have given us. This has enabled us do a good job in the Library and renovate the structure.

I wish to express my disappointment in the work of the Committee because they omitted a very important department. It has not been emphasised, but it is very important, and that is the Department of the Sergeant-at- Arms. I thought, with the establishment of the Parliamentary Commission, the functions and the relevance of the Department of the Sergeant-at-Arms would be highlighted. Apart from ensuring that there is security around the Parliamentary Buildings, the Sergeant-at-Arms is supposed to be responsible for the general cleanliness of the area, and he is supposed to oversee any renovations or constructions that are taking place in the Parliamentary area. Those are some of them. 

Just to say that the Department of Sergeant-at-Arms will be facilitated with a double cabin pick-up, to me, makes it appear that the relevance of the department is not being looked into or the Commission is not well informed on what the department really does. So, I appeal to the Committee – I do not know whether it is too late – to really provide for something more relating to the Sergeant-at-Arms. They do not only need a double cabin pick-up, they really need a lot more. For example, if we look at just the bathrooms on the ground floor, is that the state that we wish them to be in? That is just one of them.

The air conditioning inside here is not favourable, especially for asthmatics. They keep walking out, and that is not comfortable. So, the Department of Sergeant- at-Arms should really be strengthened, because it is one of the most important departments of Parliament.

We have Shs. 43 million and more for the purchase of furniture. I just wish to be informed. Apart from the chairs, tables and carpets, what other pieces of furniture was purchased for the newly rehabilitated third floor?  I thank you.

MS. BYANYIMA WINNIE (Mbarara Municipality): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to congratulate the Committee for writing a very good report. I thank the Commission for the work they have done to modernise the facilities of this House and to enable us to perform in our duties as Members of Parliament. I thank the donors, in particular, the United States Government and the British Government for the support that they have given to us in the previous year.

I am particularly pleased about what has been done to develop the staff of Parliament. I think the staff have come a very long way in knowing and performing their duties. I am particularly interested in the research services. I have used them a number of times. I think the staff there are improving in their work, but still a lot of work needs to be done to assist them to give us quality research in a timely way, so that we can use it.  Sometimes, they are not aware of other resource centres that could be helpful to them when they are trying to respond to our requests. So, establishing linkages with other resource centres in the Ministries, in the non-Governmental sector and in academic institutions is very important. Putting in some more resources in developing our staff, particularly the research staff, would be money spent for a good cause. I also think we must continue looking at their terms of service and their remuneration. We should give them the best remuneration, even better than the public service, because they will give us a service that is commensurate with how we reward them.

I support everything that was said about increasing access for people with disabilities. Definitely, we have to ensure that whatever money we have, we always put aside some to make this House friendly to all MPs, including those with disabilities.  

When I look at the figures in this report, I want to raise one or two questions. I think it is important that we use these resources, which we get to modernise our Parliament, very frugally. I now wonder whether a 26- seater mini-bus could cost almost Shs.80 million! This is the price of a bus, and I know a Member of the Commission who owns a bus. Surely, he could have advised them to buy a bus instead of a little mini-bus. What happened here?  Look at these figures closely, are we spending this money in the best way possible? -(Interruption)  

MAJ.KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, besides that 26-seater, the price for the purchase of a generator was put at Shs.153,702,542. I wish we could know the size of this generator. It could be a turbine! I would not want our hon. Commissioners to be misled in the very misuse we have been questioning the Executive about.  Thank you.

MS. BYANYIMA: When you look at how the money is being spent, actually, you can see that most of our own money, from our own budget, is spent on physical things. And by the way, it is understandable, our money is spent on chairs, carpets and so on, but money from the donors is spent mostly on acquiring knowledge. I think we ought to think about this division. Hon. Nkuuhe talked a little bit about this. You see, this is a knowledge-led society now, and knowledge costs money. Knowledge is a way to the future. We should not spend all our money on chairs and carpets and forget that, when we sit in those chairs, it is skills we want to have and we have to pay to learn those skills. So, I am begging for a little balance in how we allocate our meagre resources. We have to put aside some for good infrastructure, but we must also put aside a considerable amount into building our knowledge capabilities.

I come to the cars and the pick-ups. I see that the pick-ups are for various departments, Sergeant-at-Arms, Library and Research. I see that one pick-up is a lead escort vehicle for the Speaker and another one for the Deputy Speaker. I have spoken in this House before about the leadership culture we want to develop in our country.  When I have had the good fortune to travel to other Africans countries, I have been humbled to see how modestly other leaders manage their duties. So, I wonder what impression our Parliament wants to create!  Do we, representatives of the people, want to live modestly like the people or do we want to arm ourselves and show the people that we fear them, and have big motorcades to protect us so that we can show them that we are big and powerful? What do we want? I would discourage a heavy escort for our Speaker and Deputy Speaker. If he has been safe - (Interruption)

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform my colleagues that the hon. Speaker comes from Koboko.  When travelling to Koboko, the Speaker has to go through an area in which Kony sometimes operates. I do not think it would be fair for the third highest person in this country to be captured by Kony because we want to be modest.  I thank you.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, the issue may not necessarily be Kony, because if Kony wants to shoot you, he can shoot you with your escorts. The issue is that the traffic in town here can be very nasty. If the vehicle of the Speaker does not have a lead vehicle to clear the way, the vehicle can actually get stuck. This goes for both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. So, with due respect and due modesty, I think the provision of a vehicle, only one lead vehicle for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, is very reasonable.

MR.NDEGE: Recently, a Head of State came here with his wife and they brought their own vehicles, helicopters, and escorts. This shows that they are responsible and their society is responsible for them. We have our own problems in Uganda, and by the time they decide to give our Speaker a lead car, I think people have looked at the security point of view. So, we should not always say we cannot. By the time somebody has decided, he did not just dream about it, he thought about it and then looked at the pros and cons. I think he deserves it.

MS. BYANYIMA: I thank the hon. Members for their information. My time is running out, and with all due respect, I still hold my view. I am more inclined to wanting our leadership in general to tone down their security detail. Tone down the ostentation and live according to the pocket of the people we purport to represent. I conclude by calling upon - (Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for hon. Byanyima to say that we just purport to lead, when in fact we actually do lead in a very honourable manner? I am sure hon. Byanyima herself is a bona fide leader of the people, not only of Mbarara Municipality, but also of the whole of Uganda. Is hon. Byanyima, therefore, in order to suggest that we merely purport to lead?

THE SPEAKER: She is not in order.

MS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the words ‘purport to lead’. 

I call upon the Attorney General and his office, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and the President's office to follow the right example of the other Ministries. They should also vacate the rest of the Parliamentary building so that we can take it up, renovate it and have all our offices ready. If not for us, but at least for the Seventh Parliament. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am tempted to give an opportunity to any Commissioner, if she or he wishes, to say something.  Otherwise, I am also tempted to give an opportunity to the Minister of Finance, if he has something to say. I will then call upon the Mover too wind up. 

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda North, Mbarara): Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Members for the overwhelming support they have expressed for the budget of the Parliamentary Commission. 

The bulk of this budget is really allowances for Members of Parliament and salaries for the big staff, who we recently recruited, in order to cope with the size of the Parliament. We are grateful for your advice. You have been helping us. Your criticism has, from time to time, been of varying degrees and supportive, notwithstanding a few sticky criticisms here and there.  

I am sure Members of Parliament, who have worked in Government departments, know how they operate. I want to comment on only two major issues. Money cannot be spent from a public purse unless the procurement process goes through the Central Tender Board. This generator worth 153 million shillings and the 26- seater mini bus worth 80 million went through the Central Tender Board process. I do not know the size of the generator, but the documents went through the Central Tender Board. No funds would have been released without a note from the Central Tender Board. So, on the whole, we thank you and we request that you pass this Parliamentary Commission budget, so that by May, before we leave, we can leave this Parliament different from the way we found it. 

Hon. Janat Mukwaya expressed her thanks after she went to her Committee and found the conditions far, far different. We intend to move on, we intend to come in with very serious and radical measures, but of course, within the limits of the resources that are available, so that this Parliament can really be an institution that we can be proud of. 

We also want to thank Government for responding and vacating the North and East Wings. We are very grateful because, I think, this is the only Parliament on the Continent where Members are on the streets because they do not have offices. By the next calendar year, by February, the Ministries that are still on the West Wing should be re-located elsewhere, so that all Members of Parliament can sufficiently be accommodated. If furniture is bought, using some funds from the budget, two to three Members will share an office. So, if the two floors, which are still occupied, in the North and East Wings are vacated, I can assure you, we shall have a Parliament that will help even the Executive, to transact business in a more cordial atmosphere. So, we appeal to you to pass this budget and we move on.  I thank you.

MRS.MUSUMBA SALAAMU (Bugabula South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just want to respond to one question raised by hon. Awuzu, as to why the comment about Parliament picking the Ministers’ bills was necessary. It is only because of misrepresentation. We have a feeling, as a Commission, that the Ministry of Finance is not looking at the fact that we are taking on two arms of Government, the Executive and the Legislature. Therefore, the Commission’s budget has to be that size because it is abnormal to have the Executive paid by the Legislature. It is really abnormal! 

We are always misrepresented as an arm of Government that  takes the biggest chunk of the budget, when actually, we do not. So, we are only putting the whole situation in the right perspective by saying we are running two arms of Government in the same budget. So, I want my colleagues not to take it lightly because we are actually doing that. I wish it would be normalised so that the Executive gets paid at the Executive, and we do not even want to know how it is done. But now that it is done here, we have to talk about it, because it is a big chunk of our budget –(Interruption) 

PROF.NSIBAMBI: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was realised that, Ministers are Members of Parliament and therefore, it is in order to pay them as Members of Parliament. But it was also realised that they should have a Ministerial allowance, which we have not been paying them. So, I do not see the problem, because at the end of the day, we are getting the money from the same place. So, I do not see the problem. I thank you.

MRS.MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, I am only saying that, this is the state of affairs. It is not a problem, but it must be understood as such, so that we are given adequate resources to meet the required need. Thank you very much.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I only want to give two comments. But let me begin with the comment by hon. Musumba. We all know that it was agreed that Ministers should be paid and treated as Members of Parliament, because they are first and foremost Members of Parliament, anyway. The budgeting process is done in a such a way that we calculate the number of months that Parliament is going to sit and look at the allowances,  and we also calculate the salaries. This is what gives column two of the budget in the recurrent and development expenditure, which is column one. The wage structure gives us the salary and allowances and column two, and this is done in line with all other Ministries. So, Parliament is treated as an entity that includes all Members of Parliament. Therefore, we are budgeting for 279 Members plus the staff of Parliament. Therefore, giving them more resources or less resources does not arise, because the calculation and the budgeting is done like it done with all other cost centres. And they are 95 in total. 

I also want to comment on the contradiction, which seems to have raised from page 3, paragraph two. We are told that the Ministry of Finance contradicted Article 155 of the Constitution. Article 155(2) of the Constitution says: 
“The head of any self-accounting department, commission or organisation set up under this Constitution, shall cause to be submitted to the President at least two months before the end of each financial year, estimates of administrative and development expenditure and estimates of revenues of the respective department, commission or organisation for the following year”.  

Now, Article 155(3) is the crucial one. It says:  
“The estimates prepared under clause (2) of this article shall be laid before Parliament by the President under clause (1) of this article without revision but with any recommendations that the Government may have on them.”   

Seriously, that is what the Ministry of Finance, on behalf of the President, does. We make comments on these estimates. Now, these comments, which we make, should also be looked at in line with Article 93 of the same Constitution. Article 93(a)(ii) reads: 
“93. Parliament shall not, unless the bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government- 
 
    (a) proceed upon a bill, including an amendment bill, that makes provision for any of the following- 
 
the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction” 

The contradiction I want to raise here is that, while we make comments on the budget raised by self-accounting units, we make these comments in line with the resources that are available. Parliament, therefore, should be advised. Probably they should pass a budget that is in line with the resources available, because if you pass a budget that requires resources that are not available, then there is a problem. How will resources be accessed in order for them to be spent? Parliament cannot spend more and increase the charge of the consolidated fund, unless these funds are actually available in the Ministry of Finance. I think, in the course of this year, we may have to look at the two to be able to reconcile and see what should happen. 

I will give an example in my second comment, on the recommendation at the end of the report. At the end of the report, the Committee recommends that the Parliamentary Commission’s recurrent budget of Shs.24, 618,617,274 be provided for, and Shs.5,292,000,000 be provided for development expenditure. Ministry of Finance said that the only available funds we could raise are 22 billion shillings for the recurrent budget and 2.5 billion for the development budget. That is where the issue now comes in. Parliament has got to pass this budget as the recommended budget provided by the Commission. Finance is saying that, if you pass it as it is, we shall have a problem of raising this extra two billion for the recurrent budget and an extra 3 billion for the development budget. The issue is, if the two are not raised in the course of the year, what will actually happen? We shall have a problem raising this money, and one may even say we shall have a supplementary budget.  But a supplementary budget means you must have actual resources for those funds unless you are talking of a judiciary issue. If you are not talking about a judiciary issue, then you have a problem of raising the funds –(Interruption). 

MR. BAKU: Mr. Speaker, taking into account the explanation of the Minister on this matter for the proposed budget recommended by the Committee, and then the comments of the Ministry of Finance, if we pass this report we shall pass the budget. But which budget will we be passing, the one submitted by the Committee or the one the Minister of Finance has commented about?

DR. NKUUHE: I would like the Minister to clarify to me, why, when we are reading supplementary budgets, the Ministry of Finance always gets its full share and other Ministries tend to be cut.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I raised this issue when I was contributing on the subject. Hon. Adolf Mwesige, representing the chairperson of this Committee, in his presentation, stated that the Minister of Finance has approved the whole budget, and that what we are approving is the whole budget. But now the Minister is telling us something different. Could the two reconcile their position, otherwise this House cannot pronounce itself on this presentation. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, reference has already been made to the manner in which the Parliamentary Commission’s budget was presented in accordance with Article 155 of the Constitution. Under that Article, the President is allowed to make comments on the presentation of the Parliamentary Commission and other self-accounting commissions. Now, when the issue comes here for debate, I think the debate would be premised on the basis that the Parliamentary Commission presented a budget and the President made comments on that presentation. I find problems understanding why you think there is some contradiction with that position. Is there any contradiction?  It is now for you to take the decision.  That is my understanding. That decision takes into account whatever comments the President has made.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was commenting on these figures because this is a proposal by the Committee. We are about to adopt this report,  however, the passage of the budget and the actual figures will be reflected in the appropriation bill, and will actually be the final budget. I am only commenting on what has been proposed in relation to the comments and in relation to the Constitution.  

Hon. Okumu Ringa is saying that the first part of the report says that Ministry of Finance released all the money for 1999/2000. What we are now commenting on? Where are the comments for 2000/2001? That is my understanding and I hope the chairman will elaborate.  

Finally, I would like to say that the Ministry of Finance has the will to give all the money that is budgeted for and requested, but the economy has no capacity to give all the required resources to the Ministries as they request. Otherwise, we would always give all the money that is requested. Since we cannot have that kind of money, we are sometimes forced, in the middle of the year, to use other means. I will give an example of last year.  While we were budgeting last June, we had hoped to raise 1.085 trillion shillings, but it came to our notice that because there were some shocks, by January we realised that we could only raise 985 billion. That meant that across the board, all the budgets had to be slashed.  Now, if we can raise more than we have budgeted, then all Ministries will get more, but if we discover that we are going to get less than what we had budgeted for, then of course, we spend less. Hon. Members, we are operating a cash budget, therefore, we have got to spend what we can collect, other than that, we would be actually telling lies because we cannot spend what we do not have. We can only spend what we have and what we collect. 

I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Members of  this Committee for this report, which was comprehensive. I believe we shall keep in harmony as we finalise the budgeting process and as we bring up the appropriation bill.  I thank you.

MR. ADOLF MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Many of the questions raised by the Members have been answered by the Commissioners and by the Minister of Finance.  Just to emphasise, the budget of the Commission is necessary. The items that they have budgeted for include the rehabilitation of the Parliamentary Buildings, the independence arch, the water tower, the purchase of machinery and equipment for security and production of the Hansard. And they also include the transport facilities for heads of departments and the office of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and the assets such as furniture. All these items are absolutely necessary. I think we must budget for them. The budget as presented by the Commission is a realistic budget. 

I was informed that there has been a dialogue going on between the Committee on Legal Affairs, the Commission and the Ministry of Finance. I was informed that a consensus had emerged, and that the figures reported on page 11 of the report, had been agreed upon by the Commission, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Ministry of Finance. That is the position that I know. We had expected the Minister of Finance to harmonise his figures to reconcile the figures that he had cut with these figures, which have been presented. But a meeting was held and the Minister of Finance pledged to reconcile his cuts with the figures that were requested by the Commission. So, I am surprised to hear from the Minister of Finance that this is not the position.  

With those few comments, Mr. Speaker, I beg that the report of the Committee be adopted. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before I put the question, I would like to inform you that we have maintained the quorum. 100 hon. Members are still present in the chamber. I now put the question that the report of the Sessional Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the budget for the Parliamentary Commission for the fiscal year 2000/2001 be adopted.  

(Question put)

99 Members voted for the adoption of the Motion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before I adjourn the House, I would like to inform you that tomorrow there will be a seminar, I think, in the Conference Centre, and you are requested to attend. I think, you have already got the programme and, therefore, you know what time you will be there. So, the House is adjourned to 2.00p.m on Monday, next week. 

(The House rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 28th August, 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)
