Wednesday, 23 August 2006
 
Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to express regrets that we have started late. This is because I have been away in an important meeting. Together with my Deputy Speaker we have been attending a meeting, which we have just finished and that is why we could not be here to start on time.

We have visitors here, children from one of our schools, as soon as I get the details I will introduce them to you - but you are most welcome! 

Honourable members, I see we have a problem of producing the reports of committees on the Budget on time. Yesterday we had only one report from Local Government and today I understand there is only one report. I understand the problem is that the initial stage of the Budget was handled by the last Parliament in April and May, and then we set up new committees, which came at the second stage. A number of Members are new and I think that explains this delay, but I hope next time we shall not take all that much time. I expected the committees to have finished these reports by now.

We have agreed with the Opposition that in dealing with this budget, detailed debate will ensue on three committee reports, namely: Agriculture - an important subject – another one is Works, and I think Local Government. That is the position. 

2.50
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Mr Speaker, at the time we came to consult we wanted to clarify whether the position that had earlier been communicated stands. But recognising the time constraint we had agreed not to go for the ten reports as the original proposal, and when you asked us, the only three we could immediately give were those –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you are still thinking about others?

PROF. LATIGO: Yes, we will give them to you by the end of the day.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Then after they have identified the reports, I suggest that these reports will be laid on the Tabled here with a brief summary of the contents of these reports so that you do not have to read from page one to ten. You will only represent it and it becomes a document of Parliament, give a brief explanation and then Members in their free time will be able to read them and if they have any comments, they can make them.

After the budget process is completed, committees will be free to requisition time to come here to discuss policies and the workings of various ministries. This could be by the committees to the Opposition side. Time will be availed to these committees and whoever wants to go in detail to deal with these policy matters of ministries, but we have to process the budget first. The committee should know that monitoring the performance of any ministry does not stop with the Budget it is a continuous process, which you will do throughout your term of office. Therefore, feel free anytime to raise matters affecting your sector, which falls under your committee.

Presently in the Gallery this afternoon there is a group of 60 scouts from Transvaal District, Kenya. These are children from Kenya who are here on an education tour, please, join me to welcome them. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)  

MR KAGIMU: Actually, Rt hon. Speaker, I would just like to congratulate you upon your success on the petition, which had been argued against you. Congratulations!

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for that, but what I can say about the petition - if I have to say anything - is that the petitioner, who is the publicity secretary of the Democratic Party, I understand he is pursuing a law course in one of the universities here. While pursuing law courses they have what they call moot courts where academic questions are raised and people start practising. I think the petitioner wanted to take advantage of that, since he was a candidate, and take the moot question to a court of law. Using these lecture notes, I think he prepared the petition, but anyway for the record, I won the petition without stepping in court. Thank you very much.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2005/2006
II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2006/2007

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

2.55
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker, thank you my colleagues. I am happy to continue from where I left off yesterday. I was saying that I will give you a brief overview of the policy statement of the Local Government for this financial year, and this will be from the perspective of the Opposition. I expected copies of this to be in the House but like you explained earlier there are some logistical problems. We hope that copies will be available to Members in due course.
  
Meanwhile, on the division and mission of the ministry of local government meanwhile, division to have democratic and accountable local governments capable of delivering efficient and sustainable service to the people thereby bringing about socio-economic transformation in the country is definitely not pertaining in practice. This is because implementation is not keeping pace with the realities on the ground. The doctrine of decentralisation was to devolve functions, powers and responsibilities to lower administrative units. 

Whereas at the political and electoral level much can be said to have been achieved since the introduction of the policy in 1992, the process has been dogged by funding and administrative gaps. As a result, many districts are now encumbered with debts. Being bodies corporate, litigations may arise due to defaults thereby crippling the functioning of local governments. 

Many areas of the country also complain that services do not reach them hence the clamour for their “own” districts. We will, therefore, want a stringent mechanism of report-back and follow-up on all transfers from the centre. This will ensure that funds, hence the services, are reaching their intended destinations. 

Policy framework

Mr Speaker, Parliament raised some queries on the indicative budget estimates for financial year 2006/2007. However, the answers were shrouded in the usual evasive nomenclature such as capacity building, transparency and accountability.

Local Government revenue

The ministry recognizes, as one of the major challenges, the declining local revenues for local governments against an ever increasing cost of service delivery. Instead of providing practical solutions or remedies, the ministry has opted to engage in endless studies that duplicate each other with no breakthroughs.

Currently, some development grants like LGDP and PMA require co-funding. Due to the shortfall in revenue, we urge that the centre provides for this. For greater relief, we recommend that an agreed proportion of some taxes like road licences, court fees, passport fees and so on be ceded to the districts to strengthen their shaky revenue base and enable them meet critical demands, particularly counterpart funding.

Graduated Tax compensation

The abolition of the dreaded graduated tax was actually in the Opposition Manifesto of 2001. It was a careful thought out tax policy, which the Government merely high jacked along the way because of its appeal to the citizens, without an appreciation of the mechanics of its implementation. The tax was first cosmetically handled by reducing it to Shs 3,000, which was less than the cost of collection, with the result that the local revenue was wiped out from the hands of most districts. After the debacle, the tax was just abandoned. Local governments are now left to grope about in the dark, so to say, because the centre has not come out with an alternative. It has also failed to fulfil its promise to compensate local governments Shs 80 billion of revenue lost when graduated tax was abolished.

Our initial intervention would have been to raise VAT by 1 percent, which would more than cover this deficit. Then progressively, we would cede a small percentage of the already high fuel tax to continue to meet the obligation. In the longer term, we would then extend stand-up funds to the districts that would have identified partnerships in viable development projects or activities. In Arua for example, the local government could team up with BAT in joint ventures to develop the tobacco industry in the district. The same can be done for cotton, tea and such other crops in their respective areas. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to remind my honourable colleagues that when His Excellency was campaigning in Yumbe District, he encouraged them to grow mangoes, which would eventually be processed. Mangoes have been grown but up to date the people of Yumbe are still waiting. So, we urge local governments to study this area concerning mangoes so that they can enter into partnerships with viable investors –(Interruption) 

MR OLEGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way. I wish to inform the honourable member that nothing of the kind was said and no mangoes have been grown. The mangoes we have are just growing naturally and no others have been grown. Please, keep the House informed.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, allow me to proceed.

Creation of new districts:

This subject is a delicate one because many have come to consider a new district for their area a fulfilment of many dreams and a kind of panacea for their ills, even when such a decision is lacking in rationale. Gradually but surely the trend of the district unit is now the county. More and more counties are becoming districts. As I am familiar with my region, I always try to give examples from there. Adjumani, Yumbe and Koboko in West Nile are some such examples. We now have 22 districts in total, which were counties previously. If we consider the days of 76 districts - as of now I have lost count because everyday we tend to get new districts - but if we have 76 districts, this computes to about 29 percent of the districts being former counties.

Mr Speaker, a great error was made at the beginning of the decentralization policy to leave out the county, which since colonial times has been the basic unit of administration. As far as possible, the demarcation of the county was to create a cohesive unit both geographically and ethnically. If government recognized this and now envisages that every county can become a district then to deal with this recurrent problem once and for all it should come out clearly and state as such. Such a position in turn will give further consideration to the configuration and functions of the regional units.

Meanwhile, we in the opposition are cognizant of the fact that sections of our society will continue to feel marginalized within their current administrative settings, be it variously due to non-service delivery or even on ethnic grounds. Our view is that the present methods of creating districts are haphazard and unsustainable. The granting of districts have often been electoral promises where votes are at stake and the “district” bait comes in handy with varying successes. To this day, we still hear cries for “the district that you promised us during the campaigns ….”  Kagadi, Obongi, Serere and Kiyunga can testify to this. If these ones come on board, the percentage of districts that were former counties will increase to 33 percent. 

Mr Speaker, what is the health of the recent districts? Not well. They are unable to recruit staff because of inadequate funds to pay wages. Competent people are also reluctant to work in remote, poorly serviced places, which characterise many new district headquarters. When I was going through a newspaper, which was on the tabl,e an article by one Mr Gerald Tujikwe who is a development consultant based in Kampala caught my eye. 

Allow me very briefly to quote two small paragraphs. This paper is called “Policy Review Newsletter” and is a publication of Uganda Debt Network, volume 6, issue 4 of June 2006. Mr Tujikwe says, “Further, our politicians should desist from making policy pronouncements that are not backed by factual findings. Pronouncements need to be based on research and not anecdotal evidence. We should not for example in the future wake up to see new administrative units being created without any justification and plan how they will function and survive and the impact they will have on our national coffers. While it might be reasoned that creation of new districts has potential of increasing accessibility to services by the local people, there is no concrete plan in place by our policy makers to make this a reality. Formation of new districts seems to have been created out of a quest to boaster political weight. We are likely to see new districts operating as cells and some advocating to be reinstated unto their parent districts. One can argue that enhancing economic growth and household incomes through increased production and productivity can be achieved without necessarily creating and operationalising new districts.”

MR WAMBUZI: I would like to inform my colleague and Shadow Minister for Local Government that actually the word “district” in the real sense in other countries is a much smaller county. In the UK for example, a county is much bigger than a district. Therefore, when we use these words, we should be careful because districts in UK are much smaller than counties where counties swallow the districts. We must be careful in using this sort of language so that we do not mislead our voters. I beg to inform you, old boy.

MR ARUMADRI: My old boy knows that our setting is not exactly like that in the UK. For example we have different resource bases and the police response in the UK is about five minutes or less while here we are talking of years. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, allow me to continue. 

To foster all further proliferation of districts based on short-term political expediency, we propose as follows:
1.	The institution of a genuine national dialogue with the National Planning Authority for the review and implementation of the lower level governance system for the country, addressing in particular key weaknesses of decentralisation such as “ethnicisation” and localisation of the Civil Service, undermining of personal and professional growth and national exposure of civil servants, blotted Public Service, non-remuneration of some of the elected local leaders, rampant corruption and the decline of patriotism, nationalism and national cohesion.  

	In other words, Mr Speaker, what we are saying here is that a Ugandan can now go to his local place of birth for kindergarten, primary, secondary and university education like Nile University in Arua and is then employed by the Arua District Council. One does not need to cross the River Nile to come here and such a one lacks exposure. Therefore, the “ethnicisation” of the creation of districts is pushing Ugandans towards this kind of arrangement and we object to this.

2.	Establish clear, transparent criteria for the creation of districts and ensure that districts are financially viable and sustainable. In other words, districts should not be expanded beyond the scope of the economy and that the units themselves must have the initial economic base. We also see merit in the observation of the Uganda Local Government Association (ULGA) when they note, “It may be necessary to strengthen the sub-county as a basic unit for service delivery since it is closest to the people and generally ensure ethnic homogeneity.”

3.	Critically consider the nature and role of districts in a regional tier based local government system. 

In our view, the regional tier arrangement seems to have been rushed -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, why don’t we use the right term? If you take this Constitution here there is no such thing as regional tier. What were created were regions and regional governments. This term has misled many people and I think it is the right time now for us as legislators to use the terms that are in the Constitution. We did not create a regional tier but a regional government. What was done was to recognize big areas that are bigger than districts and put them in the Constitution. 

Before that the bricks that were making Uganda were only districts before you come to the entire country. Therefore, it was deemed necessary to recognize other bigger areas like Buganda and put them in the Constitution. Before that an area like Buganda, which starts from Tanzania and ends in Jinja at the Nile, was not recognisable in the Constitution. Therefore, what were created were regions and regional governments.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your wise counsel. As I was saying, in our view the regional government arrangement seems to have been rushed as if to beat some deadline. There are already dissenting voices from those who were deemed to have agreed to form regional governments. It is clear that some of the entities want more than just a regional arrangement. 

We in the opposition, therefore, recognize and support the aspiration of the people in respect of the federal system of governance as contained in Justice Odoki and Prof. Ssempebwa’s constitutional reports. Consequently, we propose as follows: 

1.	Institute a genuine national dialogue for the establishment of a federal system of governance with a restructured local government system that will give the people maximum autonomy in the conduct of their affairs and maximize service delivery, eliminate duplication and minimize the size and cost of public services.  

2.	Ensure that the federal units created are subordinate to the national Constitution.

Pensions and gratuities:

We in the opposition recognize that local governments have difficulty in paying salaries. Pensions and gratuity arrears have now compounded the problem. The centre must quickly find a way out to stem the growth in pension arrears. We accordingly propose that pensions that have been accumulated over the years be converted into treasury bills or government bonds so that they earn interest for the beneficiaries and the beneficiaries can use them for investment as collateral or in exchange for funds. 

The Government has a choice to avoid this embarrassing accumulation of obligations to its people by prompt settlement of pensions and indeed all other domestic arrears.

Other issues to note:

Mr Speaker, many citizens regard a presidential pledge as gospel truth. However, the experience is that these pledges only help to raise false hope, as often they are not fulfilled. Those made in the districts have left many local governments in the lurch, from the construction of markets to the payment of district debts and indeed the granting of new districts. Many of these pledges remain outstanding and they can only serve to diminish the honour of the Presidency. 

Our view is that the President should take advice not to pronounce on matters that require prior technical evaluation. Meanwhile, no further pledges to local governments should be announced before the outstanding ones are cleared.  

Mr Speaker, we understand that the President has 109 advisers. We in opposition want to add our voice to theirs so that we come to 110 advisers for His Excellency. 

The Local Government Finance Commission

Lastly, Mr Speaker, the Act of 2003 creating the Local Government Finance commission was emphatic that the commission would be an autonomous organisation carrying out functions spelt out in Article 194 clause 4. In practice, however, the commission still operates as a department of the Ministry of Local Government with the latter exerting a firm grip. Due to this stifling relationship the commission could only achieve about 60 percent of its targets.  

We urge the Government to respect the Constitution and allow the commission to carry out its mandate without undue influence. The Ministry of Local Government should also not try to duplicate or hijack the functions of the commission otherwise the very existence of the organisation will come into question.  

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the smooth functioning of the local governments and associated national institutions is critical to the devolution of power from the centre to local levels, for effective participation of the people in the management of their local affairs, for the effective use of national resources and delivery of services to the people and for the general well-being of the country and its development. It is our hope, therefore, that the issues we the opposition have raised are examined by government and the party in power with the seriousness expected of them for the people are watching. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you have heard from both sides, that is the report of the committee and the views of the Opposition on the subject. If you have any contribution, make it now so that we can dispose of this report.

3.21
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Local Government in the Opposition, officially known as the shadow minister, for presenting this alternative view. I hope that the Government headed by President Museveni will pick some of these proposals so that it can help to improve the lives of our people. 

Mr Speaker and distinguished members, the minister has stated it very clearly that a great error was made at the beginning of the centralisation policy by leaving out counties, which since colonial times have been the basic unit of administration, in an attempt to create districts. This failure to recognize the original geographical establishment is what led the people of different parts of this country, especially Tororo County, to demonstrate. 

There are people of unique cultures, backgrounds and with respected identity and they have the right to enjoy their location right where God put them. By holding a rat in front of President Museveni we protest the Government’s plan to redraw the boundary of Tororo County, which was created even before Uganda came in force, and create part of it to be a district. As I speak, Tororo District councillors from Tororo County and Tororo Municipality have walked out of Tororo District Council. Later I will come up with an appropriate motion that government officially suspends sending of resources to Tororo District until this matter is resolved. We cannot be part of a district called Tororo when our people are not getting service delivery, the roads are not worked on, teachers do not get salaries on time and people cannot access water and other services. 

In Tororo as I speak, the lives of most of us leaders are in danger as we are supposed to be killed. We reported this matter to the Police –(Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you my colleague. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much and I would like to draw the attention of the Speaker to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda so this House is not misinformed. Creation of districts is done according to the provisions of the Constitution, Article 179(3) and (4). If I may go through (3) and (4) maybe you will change the tone of your argument. I quote (3) which states, “Parliament shall by law empower district councils to alter the boundaries of lower local government units and to create new local government units within their districts.”  

Clause (4) states, “Any measure for the alteration of the boundaries of or the creation of districts or administrative units shall be based on the necessity for effective administration and the need to bring services closer to the people and it may take into account the means of communication, geographical features, density of population, economy viability and the wishes of the people concerned.”  

If there is any district that has been created out of this then let us cancel it. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, for purposes of record when you stand to make a point you should introduce yourself so that your name is captured on the Hansard.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Byarugaba. This is exactly what FDC and the opposition is saying: follow the Constitution. If you follow the Constitution then you will realize that there is a county called Tororo County and this county has its demarcations. Tororo County is the host of the current Tororo town and you cannot remove it from Tororo County –(Interruption)

MR OTAALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to inform my colleague from Tororo County that the matter he is presenting here is distorted because we cannot go by old boundaries. For example, it would be erroneous for Uganda to begin claiming the old boundaries, which extended to parts of Kenya. The boundaries of Tororo County and Tororo Municipality were established long ago and it is imperative that we respect these boundaries because they were established by law.  

Secondly, what my colleague is presenting is just a political sentiment and he is geared towards derailing this august House. I would like to tell him that we need to observe harmony among our people other than inciting disharmony and hatred among the people of Tororo.  

I would like further to inform my colleague that there is already in existence a district called Tororo so it is really very erroneous for him to begin pushing for the creation of another new district called Tororo. All of us are very aware Tororo District is in existence so I do not know what my colleague is talking about.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to advise hon. Dr Otaala that I know he is a very good doctor of medicine but he should go and read the Local Government Act commonly known as Cap 243 and the Constitution of Uganda particularly on the boundaries of Uganda, creation of new districts and alteration of boundaries. Also, go and make reference –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, is your submission on this subject simply fear that this may happen when actually it has not happened? Is it a problem or is it something, which you fear may happen in future?  

MR EKANYA: What about?

THE SPEAKER: Tororo Municipality being curved out.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the matter is very serious. Some of us and the elders of Tororo have tried our level best to appeal to our people not to take the matter into their hands but as I speak today the councillors have walked out of Tororo District Council. I have also failed, as I cannot control any action by the Tororo District Council. I want to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to ensure to protect the people because if somebody can go to the extent of putting a live rat in his or her mouth then the next option is that either you die or you live.

MR KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to confirm to this House that he is inciting the population he represents?  

THE SPEAKER: I think the honourable member is simply making a report of the facts that have come to his knowledge. However, I think this issue is likely – only when there arises a substantive motion to handle this will we be able to deal with it.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for your assurance and I hope the people of Tororo County have heard that through your wise leadership this matter will be resolved.

One of the issues that the Opposition has raised and which government really needs to resolve is the question of pension and pension arrears. You are aware that very elderly people who fought during the world war, including those from your constituency, were promised in 2001 that government was going to honour this pledge. Most of them sold their cows and goats and moved to Bombo so that they could register and so their records could be verified. However, nobody from Acholi, Kisoro, Masaka, Tororo or even Mbarara has received money. 

Of recent these elderly ladies and gentlemen were advised that they now need a letter of administration from the Administrator-General. Actually some of them came to me – I remember a certain elderly man who was going to pay fees told his son, “Now my son, the Government is serious; they are now talking to Kony so they are going to pay our money. If they can talk to Kony even our money will be paid.”  The Mzee convinced his son and yet the money has not been paid. He is in Mbale trying to process his paper from the Administrator-General but to our dismay today there is hardly money in the budget. 

Why can’t the Government come out very honestly and say, “We have failed to pay this pension”? Maybe the Opposition government will be the one to handle it in future. Maybe people should concentrate on agriculture and other income generating activities!

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you hon. Ekanya for giving way. I would like to inform this House that there is provision of Shs 51 billion for pensions within the budget. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Hope Mwesigye whom I respect very much. What is the total arrears? Is it only Shs 51 billion? The arrears are over Shs 400 billion and here you are, talking of Shs 51 billion!

MRS MBAGUTA: Mr Speaker, I would like to say something about the Shs 51 billion for pension arrears that has been allocated in the budget. Pension arrears for the civil service are allocated Shs 3.8 billion and the teachers Shs 3.6 billion. The widows and orphans hon. Ekanya is referring to have Shs 5 billion, which are old pensions. There is Shs 21 billion for veterans and Shs 10 billion for East African Airways. This is a step in the right direction. I would like to inform the honourable members that government decided to find a loan to settle the balance of these outstanding arrears. Thank you. (Applause)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to rest my case on this pension issue. Could the Minister be kind to tell us what the total arrears are? I am very much aware that government attempted – it is good that we put facts clear - government attempted in good faith when hon. Dora Byamukama moved a motion here. The Government tried to negotiate with the World Bank to look for a loan but it has failed; government has failed! 

Please, be honest and admit that you have failed to get the loan. Admit that the arrears are growing day by day. It is over Shs 400 billion. Admit facts! Otherwise, if you do not admit it, tomorrow we may hear that arrears are now in trillions. Tell us and let it be on record. What are the total arrears?

MRS MBAGUTA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The total arrears are Shs 320 billion. I have indicated that we have been allocated Shs 51 billion. I have also indicated that there is a move to get a loan to clear the outstanding balance. (Applause)  

THE SPEAKER: Before we get another contribution, allow me to welcome pupils from Morolem Girls’ Primary School in the new district of Abim, Karamoja region. You are very welcome. (Applause)

3.38
MR EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government and the shadow minister for their presentations. 

My concern is on the paper presented by the shadow minister of local government, particularly on the creation of new districts. I think we should not stifle the creation of new districts by simply claiming that they are created haphazardly. One honourable member corrected us here: districts are not being created haphazardly because it is the mandate of Parliament to endorse the creation of these new districts. 

I will give an example of my own county. It is not President Museveni who is inciting people to create Serere district. This is a demand driven by the people of Serere. I also put it to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government that Serere people are badly demanding for a district because they feel that way, services will be brought nearer to them.  

The district of Serere will comprise of two counties, Serere and Kasilo. Mr Speaker, Kagwala port is more than 80 kilometres away from the centre –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that we have not yet consulted on this matter. I think it is premature for you to raise it up on the Floor of the House at this moment. I represent the people of Kasilo. There is need for us to consult before we start talking of Serere district. The issue of the district - if the people want a district they will definitely do it through consultations. It is not through an individual’s personal view. Therefore, hon. Otekat I think we need to do more consultation on this matter. I do not want to antagonise and cost you anything in Serere. 

THE SPEAKER: As you talk about Kasilo, we have in the Gallery other guests from Australia. They are training farmers in biodynamic farming in Kasilo County, Soroti district. You are welcome.

MR OTEKAT: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Okupa for the information. However, I am talking from an informed point of view. The people of Serere are demanding for a district. I represent the people of Serere -(Applause)- because for me not to air the views of the people of Serere is doing them a disservice. The people of Serere are demanding for a district. I have also brought this out in a number of for a, including the NRM caucus. The people of Serere are demanding for a district! Therefore, I would like to clarify and say -(Interruption)

MS AOL OCAN: Mr Speaker, I refer my honourable colleague to Article 179(4). Even with the districts we approved recently, we talked a lot about taking services nearer to our people. However, we normally forget the economic viability. It is the role and responsibility of this honourable House to help guide our people who need districts. My district of Gulu actually needs five other districts. So far we have only Amuru. We need maybe four more, if it is to just demand without considering some of the clauses in this Article. The economic viability is what disturbs very many of us while we demand for districts. Are those districts economically viable? This is what we always forget whenever we say our people need to be rich.

It is true we need to create employment opportunities for our people; we need services nearer to our people but we must also weigh the administrative costs and the economic viability, which we normally tend to overlook in Article 179(4). Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we going to spend all this time on the creation of districts, as if it is the only subject?

MR OTEKAT: Mr Speaker, allow me to wind up on this by thanking the Members. I would also like to inform my colleague that Serere is a highly viable county, surrounded by a lake, and it has many resources to support itself as a district.  

I would also like to stress it to the shadow minister that the newly created districts are sustainable. In fact, the newly created districts are doing better than the older ones. Probably we need to create even more because they are doing much better than the old ones.

Finally, I will talk about the issue of graduated tax. In fact, I had expected the shadow minister to tell us their alternative. What would be their viable alternative? The Government has already raised VAT by one percent. If we are not going to get a very viable alternative for graduated tax, the issue of graduation tax compensation is going to drown local governments. I should request the shadow minister at an appropriate time to advise the Minister of Local Government on the ways of raising more revenue since graduated tax is no more. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.46
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was a bit disturbed by the presentation made by the shadow minister when he started alleging that the creation of new districts was used to get votes. He even went ahead to mention Kagadi District where I come from yet the creation of this district was demanded way back in 1989 when I was still in senior four. It is not a recent thing for people have been demanding for it. It is very economically viable. I am afraid that if we continue pushing ourselves to the issue of economic viability, I will be tempted to think that even Uganda itself would not be viable. We are still taking loans! If you continue looking at it from that perspective, you are taking us away from reality. 

Let us talk of issues that are on the ground. Our people are demanding for these districts because they want services delivered to them. Take an example of Kagadi district, which people are demanding for. It is a fertile area with many resources. There are very many people in Kagadi. We just need this district to develop our place such that services may go down to the people. Besides, we have oil -(Laughter)

 Mr Speaker, I think the shadow minister should get his facts right and stop throwing darkness into our eyes. We could talk about creating no more districts but that is not an issue. He is not going to stop people from eating rats. In Kagadi, we do not have a culture of eating rats; otherwise, my people would have eaten a good number of them. We do not want to demonstrate. All we want to see is this district coming. Therefore, when he comes here and starts telling people that the President is making pronouncements, I think –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much. I would like to help you. Maybe you did not get a copy of my shadow minister’s statement. He said that the trend of the creation of new districts is now in terms of counties. In fact, he is even proposing that we should consider making every county a district, in which case you would not be crying the way you are crying for Kagadi.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, if the shadow minister had presented his matter the way the Leader of Opposition has explained it, I would not have been complaining. It is like he wanted to influence the Members to have a negative attitude towards the creation of Kagadi district and yet it is an urgent matter in our constituency. We are not demanding for any other thing. All we want is a district. 

3.52
MR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Wopuwa who presented yesterday, as well as hon. Arumadri who presented this afternoon. I must say that I am disappointed with the alternative policy measures the shadow minister presented to us. You hardly get anything, which you can take on substantively, to advise government. Therefore, I would like to appeal to him and the entire opposition to do better. When you give us policy alternatives, they should be rich in substance, other than mere critiquing. 

I come from Kanungu District, which was created about five years ago, having been curved out of Rukungiri District. We have done many studies regarding the development indicators, to see whether after five years, Kanungu, which was Kinkizi County, has gone a step up in terms of the quality of life for its people. I want to tell this House that there has been significant improvement in terms of health, education, poverty and very many others. Therefore, this Parliament should know that indeed the creation of new districts is not bad for this country.  

As hon. Byarugaba said, there is a criterion prescribed by the Constitution. I challenge the Opposition, like he did, that if there is any district in Uganda which has been created and the process is not in conformity with the provisions of the Constitution, then you stand up to be counted and we debate it. 

I also want to challenge the districts in the country that if there is a district, which has been created and it is not wanted by the people then they should tell this Parliament.  If a district has been created and the people do not want it, then they should tell this Parliament. Let us not debate for the sake of politicking. Let us rather look at the real issues on the ground. 

One of the important factors we should consider is the increase of our population. Mr Speaker, I am an expert in demographic studies and we know that the population in Uganda is increasing at a rate of 3.3 percent per annum. This translates into 1.2 million people per year. Therefore, we do not imagine that the county is still in the 1960s. The population has changed –(Applause)- just as the size. Let us not be narrow-minded. We must look at the broader issues. When we talk of service delivery, we also look at the population –[Mr Fungaroo: “Point of Information”]- I am informed on these issues. However, let me just take it. (Laughter) 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member that the position of the shadow cabinet minister on this paper does not say that districts should not be created. It rather questions the way these districts are given. For instance, I come from Obongi County. If I demanded for a district status, I would do so as a person and not a system. It is the manifesto and not the constitution that guarantees this. The people of Obongi voted me on condition that I give them a district. 

Look at the results of the elections! President Museveni got a few votes in Obongi. Under that arrangement, the people of Obongi may not qualify for a district because Museveni will ask them, “How do you ask for a district when you did not give me the votes?” The President will not live forever but Parliament will. Thank you.

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Member on the Floor is alleging that the President told the people, “If you do not give me votes I will not give you districts.” Is he in order? We know that when people want a district, they ask the Ministry of Local Government. When the President was campaigning, he never promised anybody a district because this would breach the Presidential Elections Act. Is he, therefore, in order to allege that our President promised districts in return for votes? 

THE SPEAKER: No. I think this arose from the shadow minister’s report. He said people were trading in districts during the campaigns. I think this is what he was alluding to. However, is it your position that the President promised districts to his voters?

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, a manifesto is a promise that says, “If you elect me, I will do this and that. If you do not elect me, I will not do it.” Therefore, my position here is –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, hold on. Is it your position that in his manifesto the President promised people districts? We are not talking about manifestos. Let us address the issue of Obongi. Was that the promise?

MR FUNGAROO: The promise of the President arises from the basis of the observation that there is a genuine need for a district.

THE SPEAKER: No, no.

MR FUNGAROO: It is tied to the elections because of the timing. Why do you talk about it as a condition for the votes? Obongi has been there for a long time, just as the President has been. The issue is not arguing against the provision of the districts. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, as I said, my understanding was that he was referring to what was stated by the shadow minister in his general statement that sometimes promises are made during elections for the creation of districts. I hope you are not saying that in the case of your constituency there was such a promise. 

MR FUNGAROO: There was such a promise. If you looked at the President’s manifesto, you would –(Interjections)- yes, there was a promise. 

THE SPEAKER: To substantiate, could you bring the manifesto and show that promise to the people of Obongi? This is what they are asking you. Are you talking generally?

MR FUNGAROO: I promise to bring it tomorrow. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, we have spent a lot of time on the issue of districts. We are not creating districts now. When time comes for resolutions to be brought here that is when we will address the issue in detail. The point has been made. If you do not have other issues, let us finish with this. Honourable member for Lubaga –(Interruption)

MR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I was still on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: Haven’t you finished?

MR BARYOMUNSI: No. Let me wind up. The honourable member interrupted my speech when he rose to give me information, which I did not appreciate. Presidential candidates make all sorts of promises. You very well know that even when counties are promised new districts, the issue eventually comes back to this Parliament. That is why I challenged Parliament that if there is any district, which has been created and the process is in conflict with the law, then we should say so. Whether it is Besigye or President Museveni who makes the promise, eventually it comes to the Parliament. This Parliament is at liberty to either reject or create the promised districts. You are a Member of this Parliament so you should bring those arguments here. 

Lastly, I would like to make one observation on the functioning of local governments. I have observed that over time, local governments especially at the lower level of sub-county, LC II and LC I, the councillors are not doing very well in mobilising their communities for development. In the past, it was easy to enforce discipline in terms of health and children going to school. However, these days, for various reasons, the local councillors and local leaders do not adequately perform their duty of mobilising their people. I request government to come up with a community mobilisation law which we should pass, to empower the local leaders to take charge in terms of mobilising the people for development. I thank you very much.

4.02
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for his yesterday’s presentation. I also thank hon. John Arumadri, the Shadow Minister for Local Government, for his presentation. 

Mr Speaker, reading through the document that was presented by the chairman yesterday, I failed to grasp the sector objective of both ministries. It did not come out. For that matter, if the objective does not come out it is hard to relate the activities to anything, it is hard to say whether the activities were actually focused or whether it was a merry-go-round doing so many things but not focused to any objective and for that matter I found it hard to whether or not as requested by the chairman to consider and approve this budget.

Mr Speaker, what we have before us is a list of activities which the chairman is calling achievements. I find it hard to consider such things as achievements because normally an achievement is related to an objective. My objective –(Interruption)

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Beti Kamya for giving way. The clarification I would like from hon. Beti Kamya is that, to my knowledge, the Minister of Local Government and that of Public Service and all the other ministries sent to Parliament over 300 copies of policy statements. So, every Member received a copy of these policies, which are very elaborate, they set out the vision, the mission, the mandate, objectives and key functions of all the ministries.  

So, I would like hon. Beti Kamya to clarify whether or not she has actually studied these documents which every Member of Parliament is supposed to study and then come and debate from an informed point of view. Thank you.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Hope Mwesigye. I will give you the clarification if that is what you wanted. I did receive the document that the honourable minister is talking about but the job of the committee is to scrutinize these documents. It is the job of the committee to relate the activities here with the sector objectives. How can you convince us to approve this budget if you do not tell us that these activities are focused on the sector objectives?  

Mr Speaker, I will give you an example of what is listed as achievements: For the financial year 2005/06 - you look at page 14 section 3.5 - they held a golden jubilee celebrations. It is listed under achievements. You find in another place, page 27 section 5(c), “The commission coordinated four meetings of the local government budget committee; the commission completed a study.” These activities if you list them as achievements, I find it hard to first of all understand them as achievements and also to relate them to a sector objective –(Interruption)

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you very, Mr Speaker and Members.  It appears the hon. Beti Kamya does not appreciate that also Members of the opposition are in these committees. May I know, is it really in order for the honourable member to deny fellow colleagues and assume that the report was made by Members from the opposition? Thank you.

MS KAMYA: If that is information, I will go back to my presentation.  Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, you had asked me to give information. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The process that we are going through as committees and Parliament did not start today; it started with the previous budget when Parliament approved money for certain activities. If this year those activities that were approved to be done the previous year have been done, what should we call them then? Are they not achievements? That is what has been reported in the various policy statements as achievements because money was appropriated, Parliament approved it, it was disbursed and activities have been actually effected. That is what is being reported, Mr Speaker.
 
MS KAMYA: Thank you very much, hon. Dombo Emmanuel.  Maybe that is how the NRM understands –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this Budget Act has been used for quite some time and there were ways of presenting these reports from the committees on the budget. The matter was reviewed as to how reports are going to be presented and in the last Parliament I think the Budget Committee agreed on the format of the report so that it is not a composition one is writing but it is sort of a report in a certain format. 

Maybe what you are saying that the format does not give the necessary - that is different but we agreed that there will be a format, which will be used by the committees, and this is what is happening. But we can definitely make improvement if Members think it requires improvement but this is the format which - the chairman of the Budget Committee can explain.  Can you elaborate on this?

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for that guidance. Before the committee started their deliberations, I personally signed a letter to each of the committees outlining how the reports should be presented and the committees received this. I confirm that they all received these instructions and they worked according to the instructions. In fact, I am happy the Local Government Committee followed that very strictly to the latter. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I am really shocked by the fact that issues are being raised, which issues are actually in the reports. I may take a very simple example of the question of pensions. The hon. Minister was being taken to task here to state what is the total pension arrears, while if you look at the report on page 8 it is all stated there very clearly and we had indicated it actually even in our report which we presented to you and sent to the President that the pension arrears are supposed to be spread out into various years in future so that they are all covered expeditiously.  

I am requesting members to read these reports and internalise them before they give views on the issues pertaining to these reports, other than mere sentiments. I was shocked to hear the honourable member from Tororo talking about councillors from another constituency running away from a district council. I do not think this is what we are talking about here. We are talking about this report and nothing else. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: This is a good observation. Please, take time to study what is in the reports. Sometimes we ask about some issues, which have been clearly explained in the report.  

MS KAMYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is that the committee did not care to inform this House how much of the sector objectives have been achieved –(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, You have ably guided this House on how the reports are presented. Is it in order for the honourable member to continue accusing the committee of incompetence when you have argued it properly?

THE SPEAKER: I think what you should do for her is to clear what is in her doubt. It may even be in the report. Maybe she has not read it.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise counsel. I think the Speaker has guided us well when he said we should review the format. Assuming my objective was to be a Member of Parliament, if I do not make it to Parliament and I instead start telling people how I held a rally, did this and the other and all other activities not related to whether you come to Parliament or not, everybody will wonder what achievements I am talking about.  Therefore, we have to relate these achievements and activities to the sector objectives other than just moving around. (Laughter) 

I would like the chairperson of this committee to clarify the issue of local governments.  The letter that was written to the President by the Katikkiro of Buganda totally rejected – I think that letter was laid on this Table sometime back - the issue of the regional tier, as it was called then – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. In this black book (the Constitution of Uganda) there is no such a thing as tier. If anybody points out that term, I am ready to offer him money. It is misleading. I want to explain it so that people are not misled. What happened in amending the Constitution was to recognise bigger areas that were not recognised in the Constitution. For instance, the Kingdom of Bunyoro is bigger than a district. Therefore, we attempted to describe Uganda in terms of districts and regions. It was a significant achievement for these areas to be recognised as regions. It is after you have been recognised as a region that you start demanding for a federo. If you are non-existent and hence not recognised, you cannot make any such demand. If you knock on my door and you are not in this book, I will ask, “Who are you?”  

Buganda is now recognised as a region. When it knocks on the door and demands this, I will open the book and say, “Yah, you are in this book. What are you saying?” Let us really appreciate what we have so far achieved. For instance, in Buganda, the government that will be formed is a legal entity.  It will be able to demand and even sue for what has been lost. Otherwise, without that recognition, you cannot make any demands. 

Let us explain things as they are in the Constitution. What was created were regions. For instance, Buganda, from Mutukula to Jinja, is a recognisable entity and it could even own property. But before that recognition, you cannot own property or land. If somebody trespasses on that land without a legal entity, will you be able to sue him in court? 

Otherwise, many statements are misleading.  I think we need to have a workshop so that we read this Constitution line by line. We can amend whatever is wrong. Recognising a region is creating a bigger brick because by 1965, the bricks were these small ones for Mukono. Creating a region, which is essentially bigger than a district, makes it a legal matter. That is an achievement. Please, let us appreciate these things and be able to explain them to others. Otherwise, if all of us fell in the trap by creating terms that are not here, then that becomes a problem.

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Mr Speaker, I think this is the second time you are drawing our attention to the correct interpretation of the Constitution. However, the way I look at it, I think there are certain words, which have been coined and are not understood by the general public. For example, the word “federo” has become part and parcel of our language. When we talk about federo, people know what we are talking about.  When you talk about “ebyaffe”, people know this is the return of the property of the Kingdom of Buganda. 

Until recently, even today when we talk about “ekisanja”, people know the context in which it is being used. (Laughter) I think I will just only bear with you that for the time being, we are in a learning situation.  There are many of these things, which are really said with very good intentions, not with negativity, but within a context that the general public understands.  

I appreciate that we need to have sometime off so that we as leaders are able to really come up with clear guidelines concerning the people we represent regionally. But I think that was the context in which –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: A region is a territory and refers to the boundaries. Federo would mean how you run that area; is it dictatorship or democracy? Therefore, federo refers to how you govern people in that region. However, you need a territory before you can govern it. You cannot talk about democracy when you do not have a territory. You refer to Uganda as democratic because there is a territory called Uganda. The two things go together and you cannot have democracy without a territory, just as you cannot have federo without a territory. First secure the territory and then decide on the services you are going to provide. I think we need to explain these things. The explanation is lacking. Maybe we may need to have a programme to explain these things and then a lot of confusion that has been coming up may be lessened.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: We entirely agree with you. But we being shadows, in shadowing government we tend to follow them. On Page 16 of the NRM Manifesto, which I have, section 1.8’s title is actually “Regional Tier”. Since they are the party in government, if they say “regional tier” we say “regional tier”. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I am sorry to have taken this time, but I think I need to explain what was being done. The term “tier” in Luganda means “madaala”; you have the first tier, second tier, third etc. Before the amendment of the Constitution, if you had to use “tier”, we had only district tier and then the central government. To deal with the demands that were being made, it was necessary to create a bigger thing that did not exist. I think this term was used to explain what was being done. I will give you money if you show me something called a tier here. It is not here, and I am talking about the Constitution, I am not talking about manifestos.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I was talking, if I sounded negative about local governments I am sorry. I did not intend to sound negative. I was just seeking clarification from the chairman of the committee, and in my reference to regional tiers I was actually quoting the letter of the Katikkiro. I did not fully understand what you meant by your guidance on the terminology of the territory of local governments. 

My question was on the position of Buganda. They did reject regional government. If you define me as Beti, a woman from Bunyoro, I may find it difficult to associate myself with that definition. I may find it difficult to associate myself with that territory or with the management of that territory of Beti. I think it is in that spirit that Buganda wrote that letter. My question was, in operationalizing the regional government, how far are we on the issues of Buganda having written that letter specifically to the President?

Mr Speaker, finally, we have talked so much about the districts so I will not spend too much time on this. Yesterday, I heard the chairperson of the Committee on Local Government saying that getting grants from the central government by the districts is actually re-centralizing the regions, bringing them to the centre. They have to run to the centre for their capitalization and their grants. 

My concern is that, the Minister of Local Government came here and passionately made a case, indeed as we have also heard from the Floor, for creation of more districts. With the concern of the committee that the creation of non-viable districts is causing re-centralization of these districts, are we going to see the ministry coming back to say “No, we do not want this because it is not centralized.” It is here in the report, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

4.27
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank the chairman of the committee who presented the report yesterday and also the shadow minister for local government. In this august House, regardless of which side you are seated, I think we realise that there are pertinent points raised by the shadow minister for local government. We should look at these points very carefully without taking sides.  

Mr Speaker, when he talked about the creation of new districts, whether you are Movement, DP, CP or whatever political ideology you have, consider the district where you come from when you clamour. When the shadow minister said that the system used to create these districts is rather haphazard, I think he had a point. It is this point that I would like this House to consider and give particular examples.  

Mr Speaker, you come from the same district I come from, Masaka District. Masaka District originally comprised of Sembabule, Rakai, Kalangala and now Lyantonde is gone. On the issue of pensions, there were former local government employees working for greater Masaka District, now after the creation of these new districts these former employees still come to Masaka to claim for their pensions. It is a burden for the bigger districts from which these new districts were created to pay the pensions.  

As I speak now, Mr Speaker, you know very well that Masaka is under threat of being auctioned because of the pensions of the former employees. Former employees who are now in Rakai District, Sembabule District and Kalangala District come to Masaka to claim their pensions.  

Mr Speaker, another point is, when you are creating these districts, especially in Buganda, we have what we call Masaza. When you create Kabula District, for example, and you want to claim some sub-counties from Masaka and put them under Kabula, there are some elements, which you have to look at. Kabula has got owesaza who is very different from Pokino (Chief) of Masaka. So, when you get a sub-county or two sub-counties from Masaka and add them to Kabula, which has also another chief, I think –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. We recently created Lyantonde District in this House and actually even hon. Beti Kamya and others in the Opposition supported that resolution. Lyantonde District comprises of Kabula County only. There is no sub-county whatsoever that was got from any other county or any other district. I would like the honourable member to clarify which sub-counties he is talking about.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Mr Speaker, you know very well that Masaka District itself refused the two sub-counties of Kyazanga to be taken to Lyantonde. We had to struggle for that.  What I am trying to say is that, when you create these new districts, especially in Buganda, try to look at the set up of the Masazas. It is not good to create another district from Kayunga, for example, and you add it to another sub-county in Kyaggwe. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I just want to request my colleague to help some of us who do not understand. He is using words, which he should be able to explain to us, to enable us also follow clearly and help him in the debate. Thank you.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Mr Speaker, “Essaza” is a county; Masaza are counties. Normally somebody is appointed by the Kabaka to look after essaza on his behalf. So, what I am trying to say -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe these ssazas are like counties in England. You may hear about Yorkshire, Lancashire; these are counties.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that clarification. I hope Members understand. The point I am trying to make is that, when you create these new districts, the Ministry for Local Government should put this into consideration. I do not know about others, but I heard even the Tororo people have the same problem.  

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, last week I was in Sudan as part of a search and history. When my great grandparents from my father’s side were moving, every hill they would reach, they would name it Toro, Toro. So even in Sudan, among the Loto, another Teso Atekere tribe, there are hills there called Toro. If you go to Katakwi, you find Toroma Hill. You come to Tororo, you find Tororo Hill. These are very important ancient historical sites. Tororo Hill is within Tororo County and, therefore, to attempt to create a district for Tororo County and remove this rock from the people of Tororo, you will be removing them from their historical life.  You are really making us physical human beings without the physical existence from our great grandparents. These are very important cultural and historical aspects that government should take seriously.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ekanya, you have made your case.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The point I was trying to draw attention to is that, when districts are being made, these considerations should be put in place.  

Secondly, I think this House should also move and say that when new districts are created, they should take over the assets and liabilities of the people who have been working at the district. What we do not want is for a new district to be created, for example Kabula, and then you find the former local government employees still go back to Rakai to draw their pensions. This has become very difficult for the old districts.

Mr Speaker, some people did not understand when the shadow minister said –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, my Colleague, for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. I am personally against the issue of districts. Because of collective responsibility I accept, but it is really a problem. The problem is with us Members of Parliament who always ask the President, the Minister of Local Government, name it. Last time from the Opposition side, from FDC, I even got a letter thanking me for having created Maracha District. The other time it was from hon. Ekanya from Tororo. 

My appeal to Members is that, let us see the problem of creating new districts. Mpigi District has three sub-counties. Anybody intending to create a new district from Mpigi District, I will oppose, and maybe I do not know -(Interruption)

MS NAJJEMBA: With due respect to my colleague from Mpigi, I think when you are a Member of Parliament you represent the people who voted you. We do not come here and ask for things that we are not sent to ask for. If the people of Gomba say that they want a district, I will definitely come here and say, “We want a district.” I am sure the honourable member from Mawokota should support me if I come and say the people want a district. That is what they want! 

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Have we not exhaustively dealt with this issue? There are other issues. I want to close the debate.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Well, Mr Speaker, I am glad that my colleague, hon. Peter Mutuluuza, supported me. That is why I said that when in this august House, we should not think about the ideology or the side you are seated on. We should look at the economic viability of the new districts we are creating and the burden that we put on the old districts out of which these new districts have been curved. 

This current financial year, for example, in the chairman’s report it says they are going to recruit 40 CAOs and 45 deputy CAOs for the new districts. That means you will have to put RDCs, DISOs, Members of Parliament. Sooner or later, this House shall not be able to accommodate us. The more districts we create the more Members of Parliament, the more CAOs and the more district services. That is administration expenditure, which is really proving to be a burden to this country.

Lastly, as we go to approve the budget, the most important thing I want to point out is that, the new districts should bear the burden of their employees. This burden should not be left to the old districts. Thank you. 

4.40
MR LIVINGSTON OKELLO–OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a pensioner. I represent the feelings of the pensioners. The idea of paying pension is that a public officer who has retired should live on it for at least 30 days, but what we get in this country cannot last a week. When we are talking of pension arrears, we should not forget the pensioners who no longer expect any arrears and are getting peanuts. 

I have been to the Ministry of Public Service a number of times. You find old women walking with sticks sitting there day in day out. Really, should we treat them this way? These are the people who served this country for a very long time honestly, without stealing anything. Corruption had not yet been discovered (Laughter) These are the people who are now getting very terrible treatment. Really, Mr Speaker, we should do something. 

In America, I would not line up; even where there are lines, I would be called a senior citizen. It took me 28 years to get the little money I am getting now; 28 years suffering to serve this country and at the end of the day what you get cannot last a week. Supposing I had nothing else and that was the only source of my livelihood, I would have been dead a long time ago. This matter should be –[Ms Mbaguta: “Point of information”] - honourable minister, if you could give me time. I know the information. What the minister is trying to tell me is that recently they increased pension, but it is still nothing. If you have somebody who has served for 30 years getting less than Shs 100,000 in this country and you expect that money to last one month, you are joking. We should really take care of the people who have served this country diligently, honestly and very dedicatedly. I think the matter of pensions should be treated with urgency now.  

My second point is about the creation of districts. This thing is now unstoppable because politically it is lucrative. It is paying, so nobody can stop it. Until we on this side are on the other side, it will not be stopped. In the meantime, therefore, I want to suggest a solution. We would save a lot of time in this Parliament and a lot of taxpayer’s money if the Minister for Local Government did us a favour and came here with one motion for this Parliament to convert all the remaining counties into districts. It should have a timescale - so many will become districts tomorrow, so many will become districts in December - so that we do not really waste taxpayer’s money on talking about the same thing year-in year-out. If that is now the fashion or the method of work in this government, let us go by it, but the wastage of time –(Interruption)

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Mr Speaker, I want to inform the honourable member holding the Floor that creation of districts is demand driven. You cannot enforce a district on a county or to areas, which feel that they do not need to have a district. We cannot say that the minister should come here and bring a blanket motion to make all counties districts.  That is the information I want to give.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I am grateful for the information, but –(Interruption)

MS MBAGUTA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the honourable member is misleading the House on the quantum of pension. I am going to use him as an example, since he is a senior citizen; with your permission, Sir. Since he retired at the commissioner level, I would like to say that pension is a factor of the length of service, that is, the 28 years of service plus his last salary.  There is no way pension of a retired commissioner can be less than Shs 700,000. I am not quoting his, but I am giving the average. That is not small pension.

Secondly, he says pensions are very small. Pension is a factor of the salary. The salary you receive on the last day is the one, which influences what you receive as total pension. A public officer has a choice either to commute the pension or to get the pension on a monthly basis. This is what we mean. A pensioner who has been a public officer may choose to get a lump sum two-thirds in advance and then what remains is divided in the 12 months and it is received. That is a choice given to a public officer and, therefore, the one-third cannot be full pension.  

Mr Speaker, I had an issue to raise to the shadow minister –(Interruption)  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable minister for pensions. We were commissioners together, we were colleagues but she is now my boss, slightly ahead. My pension is less than Shs 700,000, it is Shs 638,000. It is less. It is not true that all commissioners’ pensions are beyond Shs 700,000, and I was at U1. I am not talking for myself; I am talking on behalf of Ugandans who are suffering.  

The other piece of information was from hon. Kiryapawo. You see, food is cooked on demand. We have a canteen here and food is cooked because there is demand, but I can decide not to go there to eat. At home if I do not feel like eating, I will not eat. So, I am saying, put all the districts in the pool for those who are ready to eat, so that we do not waste time by coming in bits and pieces everyday to create districts.  

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I will talk about transport related costs. Yesterday the chairman of the committee lamented here that the transport costs are over Shs 80 billion for one ministry in one year. These transport related costs are getting out of hand -(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, I am concluding. I wish I could be allowed to conclude.  

The way seminars, workshops and conferences have become a method of work in this country is responsible for transport related costs. Literally every week, there are vehicles travelling from upcountry for a workshop in Mbale, Kampala and in where, look, why don’t we regionalise to cut down on costs? Why don’t we regionalise say you people in the North come to Lira or Gulu, people in the east come to Mbale, Buganda come to Kampala, the other one go to Mbarara or Fort Portal? We would save a lot of money. But there is something else in it because all seminars must be in particular hotels and not just in Kampala but generally in particular hotels. Why do we not split out whatever the business this thing is doing? Really, the transport costs in this country are alarming. 

In 1994/95, the Inspector General of Government made a recommendation to government that all government vehicles should be sold off. This was done, but there are now more government vehicles than were in place at that time. And bigger ones with bigger capacities to consume fuel! What is happening, Mr Speaker? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am going to take two on this side and then two on the other side then we close.

4.52
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for the strategic recommendations they have given notwithstanding the fact that the shadow minister had also been able to add into that process. When we talk about decentralisation, all of us, as Ugandans, will agree that it is a well-intentioned policy with the rationale of taking services nearer to the people, enhancing democratic participation and fostering accountability. But one thing, which is very challenging and yet within the framework of decentralisation is the convergent point of all ministries in executing services to the poor people in this country. 

The most frustrating thing is the non-functionality of decentralised governments in Uganda. And I can tell you that this has gone ahead to affect Northern Uganda most because of the non-functionality of the system and structures we have put in place in the framework of decentralisation.

By the corruption survey of 2003, the districts of Northern Uganda were poorly performing in the confidence of decentralisation. Apac District was the third most corrupt, Lira was fourth, Gulu was fifth, Kitgum was seventh and these are the districts which are badly affected. And if the functionality of these districts are that a challenge, then empowering the people of Northern Uganda is even more challenging than a reality. So, the commitment by this Parliament to empower the people of Northern Uganda has greatly been affected by decentralisation because most funds have gone to waste because of the ambiguity we have in the policies. 

When I talk about delegated responsibilities at district level, the activities executed by the executive committees, the boards and commissions are indeed delegated responsibilities. But our policies have not provided a framework within which they are accountable to the council because in essence the recommendations or resolutions executive committees, statutory boards and commissions make are on behalf of the council. But why are their recommendations not taken back to the council for purposes of accountability on the decisions they execute on behalf of the council? 

And these are issues of functionality. Councils are not receiving information on how finances have been dispersed and how they have been utilised. But the Ministry of Local Government has got a mentoring budget. So, where is this mentoring budget going? The mentoring itself is on paper. So, as far as operationalising the mentoring process in local governments is concerned, the journey is yet far from easy.

When it comes to minimum assessment for the LGDP programme, districts and the Ministry of Local Government simply buy the resources from the central government. You agree as a district to give representatives of the central government who participate in these mentoring processes 20 million and in turn exchange with 200 million. This is practically what is taking place. So, when we are talking about decentralisation, we need to put in place effective systems and policies that are going to warrant the aspect of strengthening accountability. 

I had earlier on alluded to the fact that we do not have a strong perspective in our laws on how the local community can participate within the framework of decentralisation. Whereas if you look at other laws of decentralisation, you find that the whole chapter is dedicated to community participation. So, when we are talking about harmonising the participatory planning guide, it should be backed up by the laws. And I think these are some of the gaps, which I have been able to see in implementing decentralisation policies. 

Mr Speaker, the capacity of the technical staff in local governments is yet another issue. The enforcement of the leadership code which the Ministry of Local Government seems to be alluding to is also another big issue. 

The achievement of training objectives actually in local governments is where you can get free money, but I do not think any government in the world has got free money. There is money for work. But where the technical staff in local governments term it as “free money,” - and I can see in this paper huge amounts of resources have been committed to the capacity building programme, a sector which is highly abused by the technocrats because they term it as “free money.” So, how far are we going to enhance that we plan for training programmes and indeed achieve the training objectives? 

One time I was privileged to participate in the dissemination programme of enabling the local community to understand what decentralisation is all about, and we were facilitated by officials from the ministry. If I had powers I should have arrested that facilitator. I had simply gone to “eat” money because I could not see the training objective being achieved. And why was it so? Probably I could see far better because I had participated in strengthening the decentralisation programme with USAID and I was in a much better place than the government officials to facilitate a training programme. There are so many other issues, which are not going to be comprehended within the framework of decentralisation and more especially if local governments exist for executing services to communities.

The civil society operations are also executing services to the community through contractual obligations.  The private sector is also involved in executing services to the community.  Why not strengthen the framework for public private partnership as the only strategy that has worked out everywhere, where there is decentralisation in enhancing quality services to the local communities?  And I think this is the way to go.

MR OTEKAT: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable Member that in as far as capacity building is concerned, the capacity to build new private government partnership has gone over 80 percent.  And that is why most of the districts in Northern Uganda are incidentally performing very well particularly in that area. 

And I also want to inform you that the areas of Gulu and Pader, which you are counting, were not in that order of fifth and sixth in corruption.  In fact Gulu was among the best districts in terms of performance during last year and the previous year. So, the performance that was poor in Northern Uganda was primarily in the area of local revenue and that is why the Committee on Local Government has brought to the House the issue of raising compensation for graduated tax of local governments from Ugshs 25 million to Ugshs45 million.  It was that problem, which was biggest in Northern Uganda.  That is why the performance was not as good as in other areas.  

In other areas like Eastern, Buganda and Western, the performance in other taxes was relatively higher. In Northern Uganda, the performance in local revenue was lower because people were in camps.  So, their performance did not dwindle because of corruption; it dwindled because of lack of local revenue. Therefore, we need to support government to raise the compensation from the Ugshs25 million which has been proposed by the Ministry of Finance to Ugshs 45 million.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR EBONG:  Mr Speaker, I submit from a very firm perspective having been the speaker of Local Government Council and a policy analysist. When I give these statistics, they are indeed very credible.  When we talk about public private partnership, we are yet to realise the proactive strategy, which has worked out as a case study in any part of this country.  If you were to cite where it has worked out - I know the districts which are doing very well within the framework of decentralisation: Kabale, Mbarara, and Mukono. But when they give these statistics on performances of the districts in the North, I am very authentic in what I am giving and you can consult books and you will come back to me and tell me, “Indeed you are well informed.”  

But maybe lastly, if we are saying that we have limited capacity at district levels, you can see the many court cases which districts are involved in.  Actually we need to carry out a study on the impact of court cases on the resources we are sending to local governments because you find that a lot of resources, probably over 30 percent or more that should have benefited the ordinary people of this country go for compensation in court cases and these are all indications of limited capacity.  

When we are talking about limited capacity, then it must start from the process of recruitment and maybe the way to go is to ensure the participation of the civil society and other stakeholders like in other boards and commissions.  It is opening up the way - putting in place structures for participation at committee meetings will be very, very relevant.  Thank you, Mr Speaker once again for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, thank you very much.

5.05
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge District): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I have two issues to raise from the document of the shadow minister.  Yesterday there was a debate at the time when you adjourned. It was out of the cry from the other side to always give us alternative policies. But, unfortunately, we never see much of these alternatives apart from re-okaying the campaign slogans.  

I note two issues here in his document.  One is about presidential pledges.  He is so bothered and actually feels sorry for the President for promising what he does not fulfill.  I think this is a misrepresentation of the facts. There are no presidential pledges; these are government commitments.  The President is the head of government; he commits his government well aware of the resource capacity after having consulted extensively with his ministers.  If the President goes to Kisoro and they say, “We want a road.” You want him to say, “No, you will not have a road because we cannot afford it.”  And every year, even these budgets we are passing here will go along way to close in the gaps of the presidential commitments.

Mr Speaker, relevant ministries take up these commitments, it is not the presidency, for example, and the minister is here she should tell us.  It is not the ministry for the Presidency that goes around fulfilling what he commits, no.  If he promises a road, the Ministry of Works should be there.  I have seen this in our district and in many other districts.  However, those that have not been fulfilled, will be fulfilled according to schedule, it is not that they are empty promises; it depends on the kind of context you want to put it in.  And we should encourage the President to commit his own government such that his ministers fulfill those commitments.

My second point, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I thank my colleague for allowing this information. Nobody is against presidential pledges perse; it is his prerogative.  But presidential pledges, which have not been looked into how much they are going to cost the economy, are what we want to stop.  

Mr Speaker, for the last five years of the Seventh Parliament, I sat on the Committee of Works, we tried to tabulate the amount of money in presidential pledges on roads alone, and it added to more than US $ 1 trillion.  You can check the record.  More than US $ 1 trillion on roads! When will these pledges be fulfilled?  We are only saying, let us be realistic.  If your children ask for something from you, do not bring heaven down to earth and say, “Your daddy is a poor man, we cannot afford this for the time being.”  I think that shows leadership.  This is the information I wanted to give.

Mr Speaker, for the last five years of the Seventh Parliament, I sat on the Committee of Works, we tried to tabulate the amount of presidential pledges on roads alone, and it added to more than US $ 1 trillion. You can check the record.  More than US $ 1 trillion on roads! When will these pledges be fulfilled?  We are only saying, let us be realistic.  If your children ask for something from you, do not bring heaven down to earth, say, “Your daddy is a poor man, we cannot afford this for the time being.”  I think that shows leadership.  This is the information I wanted to give.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you honourable minister of the shadow government but I do not think that is different from what you have put here. I was trying to tell you that what you call government pledges are not government pledges. He realises the problems that are presented to government.

Now you talk of roads, it is not the President who declares that let there be no road such that when he comes, he promises a road. These are petitions to government - they are issues, so whether he commits himself that government will in the long run do it, that problem will still be there. It depends on the context you believe in and take it to be. But I do not think that by the President committing himself to making a road worsens the situation. It instead gives government a challenge to fulfill it and in the end, it is the people to benefit.  We shouldn’t castigate our President for being responsive and for shouldering the burden of the citizenry.

My second point, Mr Speaker, -(Interjection)- very good, someone adds it, for having a vision which bothers many of you.   I do not want to debate it because last time we debated it here when we were creating Budduda, Bukedea and Lyantonde. We had credited the merits of having new districts but unfortunately our colleagues continue to distort facts. They emphasis economic viability and wrongly state in their documents that “look at the health of the new districts,” new districts are vibrant. 

My district is an example, go there and look at the indicators, the road network has improved because planning has been brought at a much lower level. Yes, there are costs associated but they are worthy meeting. But it is wrong for the shadow minister to state here as a way forward that we should have the institution of a genuine national dialogue and establish a transparent criteria, as if our Constitution is not clear.

In his second bulletin, he says, it may be necessary to strengthen the sub-county as a basic unit but when you create a district you are actually strengthening a sub- county.  In this year’s budget, the Minister of Finance made a provision for building the capacity of sub-county chiefs. These are not political leaders but change agents. Sub-county chiefs are not based at the district, they are based at the sub-county and by doing that it is directly building the capacity of a sub-county as a service delivery unit.  So, apart from the political motivations that drive us, we should be responsible enough to appreciate that districts as the Member from Budaka said, are driven by the demands of those who want to be served and the criteria of creating them has always been followed without deviating from the procedures. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.13
MR: KITATTA ABOUD (NRM, Bukoto County West, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to react to the point raised by my colleague, hon. Nsubuga Birekeraawo, about pensions, which are being carried by old districts.  I think he should support the recommendations of the committee.  

If you can refer to page 11, No.8 where they say, “Government should consider the amendment of the law so that it takes over the responsibility for pensions of all local governments.” So, he should recommend that let there be a law so that that burden of pensions being carried by old districts is over.  I strongly recommend that law to be there so that the burden is carried by the central government.

Secondly, I do not know whether some Members have experienced this, about pensions for widows and veterans but some of us have - let there be a clear policy as to where these people are going to get their pensions from, either from the Army or districts because the widows are usually tossed here and there. When they go to their districts, they are told that their pensions are at the Army Headquarters, and when they go to the Army Headquarters they are told that their pensions have been sent to the districts. So, maybe this should be looked into so that a clear policy is known to us in order to guide our people.

There was also a point, which was raised by my colleague hon. Nsubuga Birekeraawo about Bukoto West, which I am glad to represent. The people of Bukoto West have their problems. For instance, Mr Speaker, you are aware that it is only 1km from Kalegere to Lyantonde Hospital.  A patient from Kalegere can be rode on a bicycle to Lyantonde Hospital. Hon. Nsubuga is saying that that person should travel 70km to get medical services from Masaka - that is what he is actually suggesting.

My colleague’s constituency is surrounded by swamps, so his people –(Interruption)

MR BIREKERAAWO: When I raised the point of the new districts and mentioned the two sub-counties, which the honourable member represents, I mentioned the most important point of being a county and I said that originally Kabula is a separate county. When it comes to Mengo, I said if people are demarcating districts, they should have consideration of the Masaza or counties. 

Secondly, in any case the referral hospital we have whether you are in Lyantonde the new district, Kalangala or Sembabule is Masaka.  So in the end you end up coming to Masaka.  These new districts created cannot even afford a referral hospital or even a dispensary.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. member, I do not see why you go into this issue of Kabula because the minister has already told us that that district is only one county of Kabula, so what is the problem?

MR KITATTA: I wanted to give him some other examples because he talked of Pokino and so forth.  Mr Speaker, you are aware that Kalisizo and Kyotero sub-counties, which are in Rakai, are part of Pokino’s area and those people pay their homage to Pokino but get their services from Rakai, and I do not see any problem.  

Another example is that one of the regions on the side of Dioceses: We have got West Buganda Diocese, which covers the districts of Sembabule, Rakai etcetera although the Bishop is in Masaka.  So that question of saying that Bukoto West cannot be part of Lyantonde because it is part of the Pokino’s Saza - we already have other areas which are under other districts and yet they are under the Pokino’s Saza as you call it.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.19
MR STEPHEN WASIKE (NRM, Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Mr Speaker, I have two issues. One, we are going to distribute equalisation grants in the budget.  Article 193(4) of the Constitution says, “Equalisation grant is the money to be paid to the local governments for giving subsidies or making special provisions for the least developed districts and shall be based on the degree to which a local government unit is lagging behind the national average standard for a particular service.”
  
Now what is happening is that equalisation grants are not going for particular services but are just going generally.  I wish to make an appeal to the Ministry of Local Government and that of Finance to distribute equalisation grants in line with the provisions of the Constitution - to equalise a particular service by which that district is lagging behind the national average standard for a particular service.

My second issue, Mr Speaker, is we have concentrate on rural development and forgotten about urban development.  The last time we had a city created in Uganda was over 40 years ago.  If we are talking about creating districts, why can’t we also talk about elevating municipalities to cities? Let us have Entebbe, Mbarara, Gulu and Jinja as cities while Busia and Hoima are turned into municipalities –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a law which was passed here on how we determine municipalities and cities. You have to look at it before you can recommend cities to be all over Uganda.  

MR WASIKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  When you look at this law, that is the third Schedule of the Local Governments Act, we shall never have a city or a municipality until 35 years from now.  It is my appeal to this Parliament that we amend that law and have districts, cities and municipalities created.  Mr Speaker that is my submission.

5.22
MS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. With due respect to your jurisdiction I wanted to bring it to your attention. First and foremost, when you give equal opportunities to members on your right and your left, the members on the left being in the numbers that they are, are more privileged than we are.  So, we should share opportunities according to our numbers in terms of proportions otherwise we are jealous.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for a good report. I also want to thank the Minister of Local Government for the policy statement that we all got and read in time.  I would like to respond to the issues raised by the shadow ministers.  

First and foremost, hon. Beti Kamya on the format, which she clarified very well, I will just gloss over it.  She raised an important issue of measuring success according to the set objectives but she run short of saying that you cannot measure the objectives unless you use tangible measurable indicators.  Now on the format that we use and the amount of space and time we have in the committees and on paper, the committee members could not have put objectives and then showed indicators of how to measure the success or achievement of those objectives. But I thank you because you clarified it very well.

Secondly, I wanted to pick on the issue of mangoes that the shadow minister for local government referred to and which I have heard being mentioned a number of times.  I do not know why the mango tree and its fruit does not seem to have respect from certain Members of this Parliament because Uganda is endowed with a number of good plants which bear fruit and which are economically viable?  

I know that the President has taken interest in identifying economic opportunities, the kind of crops that we can grow including fruits and economically uplift the well being of our people. Mangoes are one of those that the environment in Uganda favours their growth.  We all know that from different parts of our country mangoes have always grown wildly. 

Now our scientists have improved their capacity to yield bigger fruits, more economically viable fruits, which are marketable both locally, within the East African region and even across the oceans.  We have good mangoes, some of us are growing mangoes and we know – I can give an example of 200 trees of mangoes that I grow in Nyabushozi, which are giving me good income.  So, I have never understood why the mention of mangoes - these important traditional indigenous plants of this country has always been ridiculed as if it does not make sense for our people to grow mangoes as an economic activity - as a viable fruit that could benefit the income of the households of the people that we represent.  

Mr Speaker, I thank you and my colleague hon. Ekanya who wanted to give me information but I also wanted to refer to his debate about Tororo County which we have heard a number of times. I do not see anything wrong with creating districts even if they are from a county as long as they bring services closer to our people and are employing Ugandans; Ugandans are getting incomes - they are getting jobs and services.  If we were employing Australians in these districts then I would appreciate the concern. 

But I have a concern in some areas where we have had some people coming here as investors and employing people from those countries, but these local districts of ours are employing our fellow Ugandans.  They are creating opportunities; they are viable and people are demanding for them.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Hope Mwesigye):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Let me take this opportunity to thank the chairman of the committee and all the committee Members for the work well done. I thank the shadow minister for Local Government and Public Service for the constructive criticism. I also thank all the Members that have so far contributed to this debate. 

In the paper given by the shadow minister on page 4 - unfortunately there are no pages, but on page four, he refers to the weaknesses of decentralisation.  Among other things, he talks of localisation of civil service and many other things. 

I would like to state categorically that the creation of local governments is a creature of the Constitution as the Speaker rightly guided this House. Article 179 is clear and that is the formula that is followed. None of us in the cabinet or even the President creates districts; you, honourable members, create districts.  All we do as the Executive is to process and present the proposals to you. If you approve, the districts are created, if you do not, they are not created.  

Having said that, there is a human right that is referred to as the right to self-determination.  I do not know whether or not the shadow minister confused that right with the issue of ethnicity. People have the right to self-determination and therefore, some of these districts you talk about as small are viable all the same. Remember there are also those kinds of rights which people are entitled to and which they must be helped to realise.

Decentralisation as a policy is not an end in itself and it has led to very many benefits.  At the moment many countries are coming to Uganda to study the process of decentralisation as a success story -(Applause)- therefore, the policy is not weak at all. There is already an evaluation report on this policy and I can highlight some of the aspects that have already been achieved.  

The issue of good governance, the return of sovereignty to the people – in Article 1 of the Constitution, to let the people participate in the their own affairs, to manage their affairs, to govern themselves. I think all of you appreciate that the process of electing leaders right from LC 1 to the highest level has built the capacity of our people to be competent within our communities. Therefore, the policy is very strong.  

Consider also the issue of service delivery. With decentralisation, we have managed to achieve a more efficient and effective service delivery process and mechanism. I am sure you will all agree with me on that, including the opposition. 

The other matter is that there has been great impact on poverty eradication. Consider our indicators - safe water coverage, roads, schools, health and many other things. You surely realise that things have improved much faster than when the country was still centralised.  

In fact the next step now- and I will request all of you, Members of Parliament, to co-operate with government- is the issue of production of increasing household incomes within our constituencies and communities. This will enable the fruits of decentralisation to be fully realised.

MS BETI KAMYA:  Mr Speaker, no one in this House doubts the benefits of decentralization. We are all for it but the purpose of this debate and what was presented by my colleague, the shadow minister, is also heckled by the report of the chairman of the committee. 

On page 31, he says, “It was noted that whereas the Un-Conditional Grant was decreasing, the Conditional Grant was increasing yet most districts have even failed to cover their Wage Bill.  This is a negative trend, which leads to re-centralisation.” We know the benefits of decentralisation and we would like to keep them. However, what we would like to get out is the reversing of this decentralisation. As it has been said, this is mis-managing the implementation of decentralisation.  

Mr Speaker, we have had some districts bragging - forgive me for lack of a better word - that they are performing very well and they are happy.  But the chairman of this committee says there are irregularities in grants released to the districts.  While some districts are getting 500 per cent over what they budgeted for, others get 40 per cent under what they budgeted for.  Therefore, there is a serious problem of decentralisation. We would like to support the policy of decentralisation, but we also want to negate the effects of poor implementation, which are largely politicised by the people that talk about them. Thank you.

5.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of unconditional grant reducing every year is not true.  This financial year, we have budgeted for Ugshs 94.4 billion and last financial year it was Ugshs 100.5 billion. What appears to have come down is because the salaries of CAOs and Deputy CAOs have been centralized. 

We also have the salaries for town clerks, which are equivalent to Ugshs 2.9 billion and salaries for local administration police and local administration prisons, which are equivalent to Ugshs 9 billion. All these have been centralised.  When you add up all this, what we have budgeted for this financial year actually goes over by Ugshs5.8 billion. Therefore, it is not true that unconditional grant reduces every year. 

The second issue, which I would like to respond to, is on page 32, which talks about irregularities of the SFG funds. The figures given in that table are slightly erroneous. I have the correct position which clearly indicates that; for instance if you consider Adjumani, the budgeted figure was Ugshs 709.888 million. What was actually sent to them was Ugshs 674.427 million and not what was given in this report. I will present the details of these figures.  I thank you very much.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you hon. Kamya for the information.  My colleague has responded partly to what you raised but I was also building my case.  I was definitely going to address some of those issues.  

Mr Speaker, we as Ministry of Local Government are trying to consolidate and to deepen [Ms Beti Kamya rose on a point of clarification_]

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of clarification. Are you accepting it?

MRS MWESIGYE: No, Mr Speaker. The Rules are clear.  

THE SPEAKER: You see, when you raise a point of information or clarification and the Member on the Floor does not yield; it means it is not accepted.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Perhaps the induction course was not long enough. We are trying to deepen and consolidate decentralisation. In so doing, having done an evaluation of that process, we have come up with some important tools. One is the decentralisation strategic policy framework and the other is an investment plan for the next 10 years. I would like to ask members to acquaint themselves with these plans and documents because they are extremely important and they will also enable us to appreciate what the ministry is doing to address some of the weaknesses and shortcomings in what we have been implementing.

The committee and some of the Members raised the issue of graduated tax.  As far as I know, it was government, which abolished this graduated tax.  I do not think it was FDC or any other opposition party. Having done that, the issues –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: FDC was not in existence.  

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I oblige, it was never in existence and therefore there is no way it could have introduced that policy. We appreciate the point that in the budget we have less money for compensation for loss of graduated tax.  It is not true that we used to get Ugshs 80 billion from graduated tax. On average, it was normally around Ugshs 45 billion. We know that different local governments are facing problems because of that issue but Members also realise that this financial year, government had to deal with some issues, which are a one-time event. 

Consider, for example, the hosting of the CHOGM. We have been dealing with the issues of power generation. Therefore, we had to look at the critical issues first.  I would like to assure Members that as government we are working hard, together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In the near future, we will have a supplementary given to these local governments.  

Having said that, the Local Government Finance Commission is now working out alternative sources of raising local revenue.  A study will soon be completed. I heard people criticise studies, claiming we are doing very many of them.  It is true we are doing many studies because we are dealing with many complex issues and I think it is important for us to be scientific in order to solve problems. I should not assume that I could do this or that. You would still come here and ask us, “On what basis are you doing this and not the other?”  Therefore, studies are very important. I encourage Members to develop a habit of doing feasibility studies before implementing any projects.  

Therefore, when that study is ready and it will soon be ready, it will help us to identify other sources of revenue.  At the moment, we are trying out business taxes. There are also some other interventions that are in place. However, as members realise, compensation is not sustainable at all. That is why I would like to call upon you to work together when it comes to the issue of the NRM’s government rural strategy for household incomes, what we call bonna bagagawale.  We will count on you to work together with us, to increase household incomes. I should take this opportunity –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I thank the minister. Honourable minister, while we look for other options to fund local governments, let us use what is already provided in the law. Ask the Minister of Finance to implement what is provided in the law.  For example, under the Local Governments Act, all local governments are agencies of Uganda Revenue Authority and they are entitled to agency fee.  However, for the last so many years, the Ministry of Finance has refused to negotiate with local governments in as far as paying them the agency fee is concerned.  This would really help to reduce the financial burden the local governments have.  Thank you.
 
MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you very much, hon. Ekanya, for that information.  In fact, we are doing that right now. As the Ministry of Local Government, we are looking at the laws and opportunities already in place.  For example, we are looking at the Minerals Act.  Members may be aware that in 2003 we passed that law of sharing loyalties; 80 per cent for central government, 17 per cent for the local governments, and three per cent for the individuals on whose land the minerals are found.  Therefore, as we talk, we are trying to ensure that those loyalties go to the deserving local governments as well as the individuals.  In addition, we are also considering the game parks, as tourism and so many other things. We are moving in the right direction and I can assure you we will raise that money.  

Mr Speaker, we are also looking at the trade licensing regimes.  In fact, some of the districts have already started raising revenue from trade licenses.  You know very well that recently we passed the Property Rating Act. Commercial and industrial properties found in those districts, which are ratable will add to the revenue of those districts.  

Mr Speaker, yesterday some members sent me notes to inquire about the formulas of how revenues are shared.  I would like to draw members to section 85 of the Local Governments Act, as well as Schedule IV and the finance regulations to the Local Government Act.  The formula is very clear. In summary, every sub-county, for example, sends 35 per cent to the district and retains 65 per cent.  Of the 65 per cent it will actually eventually retain 30 per cent and send five per cent to the counties, five to the parishes and 25 to LC1s.  I encourage Members to get acquainted with that formula.  

The issue of new districts has been very well articulated and there is no question of half haphazardness whatsoever. The Constitution is clear, just as the Local Governments Act and this is what we have been following. The release for the new districts of Bukedea, Bududa, and Lyantonde do not appear in the bigger book where the figures are indicated.  However, these districts appear in our policy statement and Ministry of Finance has assured us that they are coming with a corrigendum to that book.  Therefore, the money for those new districts is available.  

In respect of Tororo, Kagadi and others, as I said my duty is to process. If hon. Ekanya is not ready to give me what I should process, I will not come here on the Floor of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to talk about the issue of Regional Governments. Article 178 is very clear and anybody who wants to change it will have to move a Constitutional amendment. The procedure is elaborate within the Constitution.  Therefore, on the issue of Regional Governments, which was unfortunately confused by my colleague on the opposition with federo, what we passed in this Parliament when we amended the Constitution was Regional Governments. It was never meant to be federo.  Whoever wishes to do that, the process is clear. One will have to originate amendments to the Constitution.  

Concerning how far have we gone, I would like to assure the Members that we have started the process. The Attorney-General recently told this House that 1st July meant that we could begin and continue the process.  The process has started and as we talk now, we have a paper before Cabinet. Once we have gone through the process of how that system of government works, we shall come here with the Bill, which I hope Members will support.

Mr Speaker, the committee raised an issue about the assessments done on the districts not being objective. We shall investigate and see how to fill gaps wherever they exist. 

Concerning the contracts committees, these have been replaced with the tender boards.  They are still very young. In fact, about six districts have not yet even constituted their contracts committees.  What I would like to say about that is that we should give them a chance. However, as government we are monitoring their performance. Help us to monitor. Where we see a problem, let us talk about it so that it is addressed.  

On Equalisation Grants, the committee recommends that the formula should be made. I should inform this House that there is already a draft on how to handle these grants. We have been in consultation with all the stakeholder ministries, mainly education, health, and agriculture. We will soon approve that instrument and inform you in due course.

Mr Speaker, the committee makes pertinent recommendations, some of which we are already implementing. We are handling the issue of finalising regulations that emanate from the Local Councils’ Courts Act. In fact, we will also be preparing, as part of capacity building - even though the opposition does not want to hear the word capacity building, accountability, transparency, perhaps also good governance. I thought you should have been very happy because those are the tools that you should use to check us so that we can be held accountable.  Therefore, in terms of that, we will obviously have to train the LCs in conjunction with the Ministry of Justice. This will help enhance their capacity to take on the mantle of exercising their judicial functions.  

Regarding the issue of legislative functions of the LCs, the committee rightly observed that very few local governments have originated ordinances and by-laws. This is very important and in fact, we are even thinking of how to help the LCs in terms of this strategy for increasing household incomes.  It is important for us to consider how we use by-laws and ordinances to support production and all these other issues that confront them on a daily basis.  

On Monday, we started an induction course for the local governments at district level.  There is a colleague over there from Maruzi who was talking of free money. I am not sure that we have free money in local governments. I am not even sure that workshops are translated into free money. However, we will investigate and if we confirm that this is happening, we shall find ways of tightening up.  

Mr Speaker, one of the honourable members raised an issue on community mobilisation law. Members, we are all members of our local government councils.  In fact, I would like to request you to regularly attend their meetings and perhaps help them with technical support, on how to originate some of these by-laws and ordinances.  

Regarding the creation of cities, the honourable member has actually been coming to my office every now and then. There is a law in place, called the Local Government Act. His argument is that it is very strict for it needs so many people to be in an area.  However, we will study that and see whether or not it is viable. In any case, even if we were to amend it, it is you who will eventually do it. All that the ministry will do is to study it and advise accordingly.  

Mr Speaker, allow me talk about the issue of sharing assets and liabilities. The Local Government Act provides for sharing of assets between the new districts with their mother districts. At that time, the assumption was affirmative action to the younger district, to enable them to stabilize, just like a parent may give you a house or a piece of land to his newly married children. However, since it is now an issue being raised, we shall study it and if need arises bring a policy to enable them share both liabilities and assets, just as it is done in company law.  

Mr Speaker, there was an issue of the relationship between the Local Government Finance Commission and the Ministry of Local Government as well as the Local Governments. I do not think that the situation is as alarming as is being presented. When I investigated this, I found out there was some disagreement on one or two issues and that is normal. We disagree here in this Parliament but we co-exist. Of course, we have started a process of improving those relationships and I can assure you we will have improved relations in due course. This is not a big issue. 

Mr Speaker, the other issue that we are looking at is in these workshops and seminars. In fact, I am also sometimes concerned. What we plan to do is to meet all the stakeholder ministries, mainly education, health and all those that have many programmes with local governments. When we meet with them, we shall harmonise and co-ordinate so that instead of – you find LCs in a workshop today from Kabale, then Mbarara, then Kampala and finally they end up in Gulu. A whole month ends when people are moving around. Therefore, we will have regular meetings to harmonise so that when a team is going, it takes different people on the same team, so that we save time and other resources. 

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance has talked a bit about SFG. I would also like to say that when I consulted, I found out that there was a problem. He will give you the actual figures. However, the principle is that, that is from the Ministry of Education. Maybe, they will have the opportunity to talk more about it when they respond to their policy statements. I was informed that sometimes when they send the money and the money is not used; they are supposed to return it, as you know very well. 

Therefore, the districts which returned that money but had started some obligations, maybe a classroom was half way finished, when they made a request that that fund be given back, the Ministry of Finance evaluated those requests and agreed to give them the money; after all it was their money. But perhaps, for one reason or another, they had failed to absorb it in time. Some of these may have been treated differently. It is their entitlement even when they failed to utilise it in time.

Lastly, I will talk about the issue of the capacity of the Ministry of Local Government. We are reviewing the structure of the ministry especially the inspectorate division, which is weak. There is no doubt about this. We have more districts than we had the time it was created. Therefore, we are reviewing the structure with a view of putting in the required human power. 

Mr Speaker, with that I thank all Members and I am confident that you will support our policy and vote. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Minister of Public Service, do you have some remarks to make? 

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Sezi Mbaguta): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to clarify the issue raised by the shadow Minister of Local Government on the blotted Public Service. It was not very clear to me whether he was talking about the district, public service or local governments.  Was he talking about the entire public service? The entire public service has been restructured and ministries now have affordable structures. At the moment, public service is at only 320,000 civil servants, of whom 129,000 are primary teachers. It was not very clear whether the blotted structure referred to the entire public service. 

The second issue is about the mobility of public officers from local government to the centre and from the centre to local governments. We see a trend where public officers move from the centre to the local government for employment and vice versa. That mobility is encouraged for all public servants. 

The issue of the pensions and pension arrears has been responded to. I would like to thank the chairperson and his team for giving us the audience and thrashing out some of the issues that needed further clarification. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr George Wopuwa): Mr Speaker, through you, I would like to thank honourable members for supporting our report. Many issues that were raised have been answered to. There was only one issue raised by hon. Kamya about the letter from the Katikiro. I have never seen it, it was not copied to me and I do not want to talk about it. I also thank members of the committee, the honourable ministers of Local Government and Public Service for supporting us. I request them to adopt our report and the recommendations contained. Thank you.
  
THE SPEAKER: I now the question that we adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I am told that tomorrow Thursday Parliament will have power from Umeme during the day, from 6.00 a.m. to 6 p.m. The evening load shedding will then start at 6.00 p.m. Therefore, with this advantage for the whole day, we should start the proceedings at 10.00 a.m. so that we work both morning and afternoon. 

As I said, I expect those whose reports to have these copies distributed to Members. Tomorrow we shall have just brief summaries instead of reading the entire report. I have seen a report, which is over 24 pages and we spent the whole day listening to it. However, if a summary could be given, then members will internalise it. If they have any question, they will be able to put it. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.03 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 August 2006 at 10.00 a.m.)








