Thursday, 22 August 2002

Parliament met at 2.15p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I regret to inform you that one of our colleagues, the hon. Zoe Bakoko, the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development lost her son on the evening of 16 August 2002. Master Roy Ekecu was in senior six at Nyenga Seminary. 

The information should have come to us on Tuesday but because the death and burial occurred during the weekend, we were not able to inform you fast enough. Nevertheless, we would like to offer our sincere condolences to hon. Bakoko and her family.

The second matter I wish to communicate is to inform you about the outcome of the elections for the leadership of the Standing Committee on Equal Opportunities. They have elected hon. Dora Byamukama as chairperson, to be deputised by the hon. Alex Ndeezi. This is a very important committee, which we expect to assist us to realise constitutional undertakings. I congratulate all of them and wish them very well.

The last matter on which I wish to communicate relates to the assignment given to the Committee of Works, Transport and Communications on Tuesday concerning the bus strike- the on-going dispute about the Baganda Bus Park tender and re-development plans. I want to take this opportunity to assure the House and the public that the committee will receive all those wishing to give information without any bias. 

Accordingly, the substantive chairperson of the committee, hon. Nathan Byanyima, has stepped down to avoid any possibility of conflict of interest since he is a bus owner. The committee will therefore be chaired by the hon. John Byabagambi, the vice-chairperson. 

The terms of reference for the committee will be as follows:

1. To examine the cause of the wrangles at the Baganda Bus Park by, among others, identifying the parties to the conflict, scrutinising management and operations of the terminal as well as the tendering process for the bus park.

2. To examine the tendering process for the proposed re-development of the Baganda Bus Park. 

3. To examine the overall proposal for the planning and re-development of the Baganda Bus Park taking into account the Kampala Master Plan in relation to the social, environmental and physical infrastructure.

4. To inquire into the reasons for the apparent inadequacies of the legal system with regard to these recurrent wrangle. 

5. To make recommendations to Parliament.

Honourable members, the committee has taken an overview of these terms of reference and they feel that the time given to them, to report on Tuesday, was insufficient. So, I have given them a month in which to report back to Parliament on this matter.  Thank you very much. 

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I reflected on that matter and it occurred to me that the most appropriate committee should have been the one on Local Government because it is the one dealing with local matters like city matters. That would not have pre-empted the problem of Byanyima having conflict of interest. In case it is unacceptable, they might co-opt the committee. But it appears as if Local Government is the most appropriate committee, although of course Works has also an interest in the matter. I wonder whether we could not assign the matter to the Committee on Local Government.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the past when there has been a common interest between two committees, we have asked them to work together. So, the Committee on Works can co-opt maybe 50 per cent of the members on Local Government and they work together.

MR ISAAC MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, you have informed this House of the unfortunate death of the son of one of our members. I move that this House be directed by you to stand and offer commiserable thoughts to the family of hon. Zoe Bakoko in respect of the death of her dear son. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded. It is a straightforward motion, in my view, therefore -(Interjection) - I am told we do not really have to go through the motion, but let us stand up for a moment’s silence in memory of the late master Roy Ekecu.

(Members stood to observe a moment of silence.) 

MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I rise to move that the House consider this motion without notice under Rule 41(b). This motion is in regard to a young woman called Amina Lawal from Nigeria who has been sentenced to death by stoning under the Sharia law. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You may proceed.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The young woman, Amina Lawal, was sentenced on Monday, 21 August 2002 under the Sharia law of Nigeria. She was guilty, apparently because she gave birth out of wedlock. She has been sentenced to death by stoning for adultery. Unfortunately, the partner with whom she conceived the baby has not been sentenced to a similar punishment.  

We know that Nigeria is a signatory to the Declaration of Human Rights Charter, the Convention of Elimination of All Forms of Violence Against Women and the African Charter of Human Rights, among others. The ruling by the Nigerian Sharia Court contradicts and contravenes the human rights’ principles laid down in the aforementioned charters and conventions.  

In light of these, I would like to move: 

That we, the members of this House, urge the Nigerian Government through the Nigerian High Commission of Uganda, to ensure that the rights of Amina are protected by allowing her to use the other three national courts of appeal in Nigeria other than the Sharia law, to seek justice; 

That we, Members of this Parliament, should implore the sentence by the Islamic Court under the Sharia law to be stayed until all other avenues of justice have been exhausted by Amina.

I would like us, Members of Parliament, to condemn the sentencing of Amina in the utmost terms it deserves. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do rise to support the motion moved by hon. Betty Amongi, as she has ably put it. 

My support is against the background that Uganda as a country has been very well known for fighting for the rights of maginalised groups, especially women. I find it right and fitting to make an expression as a gesture of goodwill towards that cause, so that we express our feelings towards the young lady who has been unfairly treated.  

I do support that justice should be equitable and fair to all, including women, because when you look at this case, like my colleague has rightly put it, it takes two to make a baby.  Even when it is handled artificially, still there is a source; it still goes back to some other individual. So, it becomes a bit inhuman to treat one party to the act by condemning her in a manner that is so dehumanising as stoning.

So, without wasting much time, I do support the motion and I call upon my colleagues in Parliament to take that gesture of goodwill towards this cause.  I beg to support. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. This House could run this country into a diplomatic problem if we are going to sit here and start making pronouncements about a sensitive issue of people’s religion and the way they want to be governed. What is the issue here if a country or sovereign state has agreed that that law should govern them?  

Two, this matter is still in court and there is an appeal. 

Three, are we by that motion challenging the very existence of Sharia law as a law? Are we saying that there is no justice under Sharia law? If so, do we have Sharia law in Uganda? Who are we to comment on a matter that is still going on in a sovereign state under a law that is a subject of active contention? 

Within Nigeria itself, the states that have adopted Sharia law are militantly preserving their Sharia against other states within Nigeria which practice the other type of law and religion. Madam Speaker, are we really not dragging this country into a diplomatic problem? 

I appreciate that I would not want my daughter or my sister to be stoned by anybody on account of a voluntary act of association with another person, whatever the circumstances, but I want us to look at the broader picture of where a motion in this House would stand vis-à-vis this position in an international framework. That is my contribution. Otherwise, I sympathise with the lady. I thank you.  

MR LARTIF SSEBAGGALA (Kawempe North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I am in total agreement with what the Minister has said. Sincerely speaking, I sympathise with the concerns of Ugandan women and men about Amina in Nigeria, but at the same time, I must speak as the Imam of the Parliament of Uganda. In that line, the issue is very sensitive.  

We all know that there are various states in Nigeria, and some of those states adopted the Sharia law. According to that law, which is not applicable here in Uganda, it is a law that is governing that country.  To me, I believe that if we sit here and start giving direction as to how the Sharia law should be implemented in those states in Nigeria, I think we shall not be fair.  

In the Koran, Chapter 24 verse 2 to 3, it clearly states: “(As for) the fornicatress and a fornicator, flog each of them, (giving) a hundred stripes, and let not pity withhold you in the matter of obedience to Allah, if you believe in Allah and the last day…” 

When it comes to stoning to death, it applies to those who are married. 

Indeed, as I have already said, we should as Parliament of Uganda restrain from interfering in a law which is recognised by the Moslems We should not sit here and direct as to how the Sharia law, which was adopted by those states in Nigeria, can be implemented –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague that the concept of non-interference in state matters ended when all African governments became a signatory to the AU – (Applause).  Second to that, Nigeria, Uganda and almost all African states are signatory to the International Convention of the Protection of Human Rights. 

In line with that, I would like to inform my friend that there is no diplomatic embarrassment or fear that this motion is going to cause problems between Uganda and Nigeria; you quote any law. I have been a member of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, we have been meeting most of these diplomats and we know that a protest of this kind has no impact.  

Last week, I had a meeting with the British High Commissioner and I talked about the manner in which they handle the visa applicants. It was a kind of expression of concern when we lost a Ugandan; and, therefore, this kind of diplomatic contact and expression is allowed in international organizations, Madam Speaker.  Thank you.

PROF. EDWARD MAKUBUYA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion for bringing it up. It may help us as a Parliament to clear our minds in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda: 

XXVIII. Foreign Policy Objectives:

(i) The foreign policy of Uganda shall be based on the principles of -

(a) promotion of the national interest of Uganda;
 
(b) respect for international law and treaty obligations; 

(c) peaceful co-existence and non-alignment; 

(d) settlement of international disputes by    peaceful means; 
(e) opposition to all forms of domination, racism and other forms of oppression and exploitation. 

(ii)Uganda shall actively participate in international and regional organisations that stand for peace and for the well-being and progress of humanity.  

(iii) The State shall promote regional and pan-African cultural, economic, and political co-operation and integration.

Madam Speaker, we may argue about the justification of national objectives and so on, but they are still there!  

Article 79 of the Constitution says: 

Functions of Parliament: 

79(1)	Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. 

(2) Except as provided in this Constitution, no person or body other than Parliament shall have power to make provisions having the force of law in Uganda except under authority conferred by an Act of Parliament. 

(3) Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote the democratic governance of Uganda.  

You may also want to refer to Articles 122, 123, which I will not read out but which talk about diplomatic representation, execution of treaties, conventions and agreements. 

My problem is this: in terms of Article 79, what function will Parliament be carrying out in passing the motion on the Floor? It is not clear whether this motion falls within the functions of Parliament. And frankly speaking, I sympathise with the situation very much, but I strongly oppose the passing of this motion, which does not seem to be within the purview of Article 79. Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members.

DR BULAMU: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your indulgence. There was hon. Lartif Ssebaggala on the Floor and then hon. Ekanya rose on a point of information and after that, the Minister for Education came in, and hon. Lartif Ssebaggala was not given the chance to conclude what he was saying. I want to know whether he is going to be given time to conclude, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let him conclude.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, it is my humble request to this Parliament to stay the motion for a while because if you look at the New Vision, where Amina Lawal’s case has been reported, the last paragraph says: “And a junior justice minister said the government would support Lawal’s appeal process”. Why should we intervene when the Nigerian Government is handling the matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my understanding of the request from the members was that they were urging the Government to keep all avenues open.  That is how I understand it.

MR ADOLF MWESIGYE (Bunyangabu County, Kabarole):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that this matter is degenerating into religion and some people are talking of diplomatic protocol. But, Madam Speaker, what is at stake are the principles of international law, and this Parliament cannot sit when the principles of international law are being infringed upon.  

Uganda and Nigeria, and indeed many African countries, are signatories to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and to the African Convention on Human Rights. If the court in Nigeria passed a sentence on Amina that is repugnant to the principles of international law, then this Parliament would like to urge the powers that be in Nigeria to adhere to the principles of international law to stay the execution of this poor lady. 

I am not saying that she is innocent. Under Nigerian law she might be guilty, but international law transcends municipal law. Therefore, we have to call upon the international community, and we must continue doing this as human rights lawyers, as Members of Parliament, that nations which accede to international treaties must adhere to the obligations they commit themselves to and the international instruments.

There are no longer borders as far as human rights are concerned. There is no state in the world, which can abuse the rights of its citizens in the name of sovereignty. Human rights surpass local interests and religious interests and, therefore, we should not mix up the members’ concerns for upholding of international human rights principles in Nigeria with religious parochial interests.  

I urge honourable members to support hon. Amongi’s motion that we urge the Nigerian authorities to do whatever is possible to stay the execution of this lady, and if possible amend the laws that are repugnant to the international principles of law. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR DANIEL KIDEGA (Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a Christian; my second name is Daniel. I am aware that there is no religion or practice whatsoever that condones adultery. Therefore, I urge members not to bring religion into this matter. 

As a Christian, I remember a situation in the Bible of a similar nature when a woman was brought to Christ that she committed adultery and was supposed to be stoned to death. Our good Lord told the members gathered that he who thinks he has done nothing like the same should raise the first stone. I also remember very well that our good Lord did not raise a stone.  

It is my humble appeal to the members here that we are talking about fundamental human rights; that is, the right to life. This woman is going to be stoned to death and she is going to leave an orphan. I urge members here present to support the motion, and we express our human feelings towards justice that must prevail or must be accorded to Amina. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

DR JONNY BULAMU (Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is no single person who does not realise that this is violating human rights. Human rights are in international law but there is an organisation, Global Parliamentary Association, trying to drum support from Parliaments to sign the right for an international criminal court. This means that much as international laws exist, you cannot stand in the Parliament of Uganda and dictate other sovereign countries’ laws. You cannot!  

Not a single one of us is not sympathetic, is not touched, but the best we can do is to use our activists’ organisations of human rights and women movements. It would be only the International Criminal Court and not our Parliament that should intervene.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to inform the honourable member on the Floor and the House at large that there is a difference between dictating and urging. This House cannot dictate anything to another state, but this House can humbly urge another state to refrain from doing a particular thing, and that is what the House is doing. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there should not be any mix-up on this matter. The motion was simply urging the Government of Nigeria to assist this woman get to all levels of justice in that country. We are not dictating. They are urging the Government of Nigeria to do whatever is possible for this woman.

MRS VICTORIA SEBAGEREKA (Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank all the members who are supporting this very important emotional motion. And I want to drum it into the heads of the members who are thinking that we are interfering, that we are just urging, we are just appealing, we are just opening doors to the international conventions that Nigeria is signatory to. If we keep quiet as leaders of this nation, as representations of the oppressed, we will not be doing our duty.  

The Sharia law is in some states of Nigeria while it is not in other states. Our newspapers, the Monitor, the New Vision, and all the papers have stated so. We would be burying our heads in the sand if we kept quiet about this very important motion. 

I want to also touch on an issue that touches on the fundamental violation of women’s rights, because this sentence is just directed on Amina Lawal. Whoever did it with Amina Lawal is at large and nothing is talked about him. We are running into a position of being intimidated by Sharia. 

I have all due respect for Sharia law, but justice and human rights are two different issues and we want justice to be granted. We have contacted some of the civic organisations; our religious leaders have condemned this act. So, I hope that Members of Parliament will support the appeal made by the mover of this motion. I thank you.

MR THEODORE SSEKIKUUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry I do not have the full wording of the motion on a piece of paper, but I think it was urging the Government of Nigeria. I fully understand that the undertaking is not with the Government of Nigeria; it is with the courts of Nigeria. And as we debate, an appeal was made to the Supreme Court. In that respect, our urging should not be to the courts. And this matter is still with the courts and they believe if the Sharia prescribes stoning, the cure for that treatment could still be found in the Sharia. 

This state in Nigeria adopted the Sharia when all of us were here; the whole world was aware of that. Now we are coming up over a resultant factor of that law? I urge members of this House that we do not continue to debate the matter as if it is forced on the Government of Nigeria whereas actually it is still with the courts of Nigeria. Are they procedurally right to continue interfering in the courts of law of a sovereign country?

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I welcome the motion and support it. In supporting the motion, I am supporting the universality of human rights. Human rights are universal whether we come from different value systems, but there ought to be some norms that we all respect. 

I also feel strongly against cruel punishments. This too is often provided for in many constitutions - protection against inhuman treatment - that even where people support capital punishment, that capital punishment is delivered in such a manner that does not amount to excessive cruelty.  

I am also supporting this motion because I believe in the due process of someone receiving proper hearing, and the opportunity to be heard and defended fully in any case against them. So, for these reasons, I do support this motion. 

However, much as those of us who are concerned by the way this woman is being treated are appalled, why aren’t we equally concerned about how a one Muhumuza of Ntungamo was treated? He was suspected and then killed as a criminal and dumped by the roadside. Was this the due process? Was this not a violation of human rights? Why aren’t we concerned about Patrick Manenero who died in CMI hands? Why haven’t we moved a motion here in defence of his fundamental human rights? 

I would like us to reflect on Operation Wembley and whether indeed it guarantees people their rights. While we are pleading for a woman thousands of miles away, let us not forget the responsibility we have for our own citizens who elected us. Thank you. I support the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I assure you that the motion, as I heard it, is not directed to the court; it is directed at the Government.

Secondly, for those of you who are lawyers, you know that sometimes there is what is called mitigating factors. You may be guilty, but they say, “but now there are some factors which we want to take into account which can make a difference.” Maybe an external voice will be a mitigating factor in this matter. So, I suggest that hon. Amongi, hon. Mwesige, hon. Bwambale and hon. Ssebagala sit down to draft the text of the resolution we want to make, urging and not interfering. And hon. Musumba, when you have given us some money for the schools, please sit together and have this motion drafted, because we are urging the Government and not interfering with the court process at all!

MR KATUNTU: I have a problem. The way the Chair is ruling tantamounts to saying that we have passed a resolution, but we have not passed it. So, what are they going to draft? I think the issue is still up for debate and we have not yet adopted that resolution –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why it is going to be drafted and brought back here for debate.

MR KATUNTU: And some of us are opposed to the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When they bring the text, we shall go into it again.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With all due respect to your ruling that the people you called should sit together and redraft this motion, I would rather the members who originally presented the motion on the Floor go out, and if they want, consult with other people and come out with a better draft. I have a feeling that the people you have chosen may not agree amongst themselves - (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, hon. Amongi did not tell us who her team was, but certainly, let us ask hon. Amongi and her team and all the friends we have named to sit down. So, we defer this matter. It will come back when we have got a text, because what you have is extremely wordy.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, hon. Ben Wacha is right to the extent that I do not support any motion along that line for the reasons I have given. They have diplomatic implications! Therefore, other people can have other opinions, but personally, what I can accept is, if any motion along those lines is drafted, for the Attorney General to study it first and then tell us whether we actually are in the purview of our mandate to pass such a motion, and that there will not be a backlash diplomatically. Then I would have no problem because I have told this House that I have a daughter whom I would not want to see anybody stone at any time. I thank you.

MR TOM BAGALANA: Madam Speaker, what has been debated is so much a legal matter that I cannot say much. But as a social scientist, I know what the instinct of sex is. It is a very powerful and irresistible instinct in all –(Interjection)- no, I am seeking clarification. It is so irresistible, and when I look in our laws, especially our sexual and marital laws, they are so punitive. So, if we bring this matter just to urge the Nigeria Government about the matter without urging our Government to look into our own laws, I think we would be harming ourselves. 

This motion should even guard our territory, because in the last Parliament, a honourable Member of Parliament was taken to Luzira over senseless matters of rape. He was going for hanging! So, not only that, but there are many things we need to revise that deal with our sexual laws; they are very punitive, not only here but also worldwide. The clarification I seek is; will this social aspect I am talking about be considered to include our boundaries?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, you have been a Member of Parliament and now this is your second term. If you are so concerned about this matter, why have you never brought a Private Members’ motion? You can actually still do it; and as a social scientist maybe you understand it better. Please bring a Private Members’ motion along those lines.

MR SSEBULIBA: Madam Speaker, is it in order, when you have made a ruling over this matter, for the matter to continue being debated?   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I do not want to go back to your ruling, but hon. Isaac Musumba has indicated that he is not going to serve on this drafting committee, and maybe there may be one or two other people who may not be interested in serving on the committee. Is it not better that we allow the people who are supporting the motion to draft their motion, bring it here, and support their motion rather than actually bringing on board people who do not support the motion?  In my view, this will be one of the ways of killing the motion. 

So, I think that the people who supported the motion should be given the opportunity to draft their motion and bring it here. Those who do not support it will have the option to kill it, and at the end of the day the House will pronounce itself on this matter. But I regard this matter as very crucial and this House must state its position. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have said enough about this matter, let hon. Amongi and her team go and sit down and prepare their motion. They should also seek legal guidance from the Attorney General. When they are ready, they can come back and we debate it formally.

REV. KABUSHENGA: Madam Speaker, the substance of hon. Amongi’s motion is clear. What we are talking about or debating is not about the clarity of the motion. What we are debating is the expediency of the motion.  

I do not find much value in getting them to re-draft something that we understand so well. I would say that procedurally we should pronounce ourselves on the motion and then get technical people to draft it.  If we approve the motion, then we can get people to draft a communication that does not go beyond the authority of this House. If we do not approve of the motion, then it is not worth the time. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members; we have two sides to this issue, and I think they should be given every opportunity to exhaust all their arguments. So, we are saying that the motion as it came was extremely wordy and needs to be refined. So, we give the chance to hon. Amongi and her colleagues to refine it, not necessarily today, but we shall give her time to come back and we address it again.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Much obliged, Madam Speaker. With reference to our Rules of Procedure, namely rule 40, I beg to move the following motion without notice:  

“WHEREAS the Land Act, 1998 has provisions meant to protect lawful and bonafide occupants of land against, among others, arbitrary and forceful eviction and other forms of land deprivation; - 

AND WHEREAS despite the said legal protection there are many reported cases of forceful and arbitrary eviction of bonafide occupants countrywide, most especially in urban areas like Kampala and specifically Lubaga South; 

AND WHEREAS the recent occurrence in Kitaka Zone, Busega where a 102 year old Maria Magdalene Nansubuga was violently evicted from her kibanja where she has lived for the last 48 years - and I repeat, 48 years- highlights the plight of such vulnerable elderly and poor bonafide occupants of land;  

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this Parliament that Government, through the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment urgently: 

(a) ensures the implementation of the Land Act, 1998 so as to among others protect the vulnerable bonafide occupants of land;

(b) sensitises the public in respect of their land ownership/possession rights and also the procedure to be followed to effect attainment or loss of land rights and ownership.”  

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is just a straightforward matter of asking the Government to do their work. I think it does not even require debate.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Let me justify it briefly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, honourable member, you are asking the Government to fulfil its obligations under the Land Act.  That is all you are saying.  There is nothing controversial about that. The Minister of Lands can say something, because to me it is so straightforward that I do not think it requires debate.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am a bit worried about the way we are proceeding because we have in the past in this House, moved and passed motions urging Government to perform its functions.   

In the past, we passed a motion here urging Government to pay teachers salaries and allowances. I think what we were addressing was the magnitude of the problem. 

The magnitude of the motion being moved is that the law, which was passed in 1998, up to now has not been implemented and it has had some very serious consequences. The land tribunals, which were supposed to be constituted under that Act, have just been constituted, and maybe for some of the districts they have not.  

There is a law but I do not know when it will be debated because of the financial implications. For instance, under that law there were supposed to be land committees at every parish, but the finances cannot allow.  There is a law to be debated putting those committees at sub-counties or divisions in the city. The motion being moved is to urge the Government to implement that law, and we should support it because the people who are actually administering this particular law, together with the other organs, are facing tremendous problems 

You are a lawyer, Madam Speaker. You know that in some of these cases you cannot move anywhere other than going to the High Court. So, I think the motion is justified. Thank you –(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Eh, hon. Lukyamuzi, you moved your motion; you have been backed adequately by the Member for Nakawa, really! Your colleague has backed you and seconded you very effectively. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I have read the motion but it remains to be justified by the mover.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. Your colleague from Nakawa has already justified it very effectively.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke):  Madam Speaker, I take it that the Member for Nakawa has seconded the motion very articulately. I am left with very little to say, because this motion is really saying what I have already stated before this House under my budget statement for this year that, “Parliament give me the tools, I shall do the job.”  

But let me put it on record that this Land Act, 1998 is one of the most popularised pieces of legislation in this country. Let me also state that in the 15-Point Programme of the Movement Government, among other things, point number eight states that of all fundamental laws made, the Land Act is the most fundamental. It is a pro-poor law, it is securing the livelihoods of the weak and it requires the support of all of us to be implemented. Why we have not moved at the speed anticipated is because of the resource envelope. 

In spite of the small resource envelope, the district land boards have been established in all districts, old and new. Parish land committees are also in place. Land offices are being established in all districts, and district service commissions are recruiting professionals in the land discipline to man these offices. 

The Chief Justice commissioned the district land boards in November last year, and they cover every district. As we speaker today, every district has got a tribunal with an office and a vehicle to help them carry out dispute resolution. Every district has been facilitated to do that.

This law has also been translated into the major vernaculars: Lugbara, Luo, Kupsabiny, Ateso, Luganda, and the four Rs. No other law has received so much publicity like the Land Act. We have even gone as far as the parishes to teach the content of the law to the local leaders after finishing with higher levels. We do this in conjunction with non-governmental organisations and professionals who have formed consultancies in the dissemination of pro-people information. 

We have also established land information centres. There is a centre in Kagadi, one in Kampala, another in Kapchorwa and tomorrow I will be commissioning the one for Mbale. 

The Land Act has been amended once, when there was a public outcry about the nature of what hon. Ken Lukyamuzi is mentioning in his constituency. That first amendment of the Land Act has restored the determination of land disputes back to the LC courts, and that is why now there are no more violent cases of eviction like we used to have three years or so ago. 

The land regulations for effective implementation of the provisions of the Act were also gazetted two years ago and they are being used by the Land Management Institution to implement this law. 

Last year when there was a very serious case, again in Kampala at Kabalagala, where an innocent lady was killed in circumstances similar to the Lubaga South circumstances, the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Justice and myself sat together to establish why there were such violent evictions. 

We found out that the courts do not make some of these so-called court orders. They are orders written by fraudulent individuals under mango trees. We took administrative steps to ensure that the Police and the Local Defence Units always check on the authenticity of these orders before executing them. We have not investigated the Lubaga South case; I suspect this is such a case. All I am saying is that, give the tools to my ministry and we shall do (a) and (b) as requested in the resolution. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think there is no question about the minister’s commitment to proceeding with this matter, so let us move on to some other things.

MR LUKYAMUZI: With due respect, Madam Speaker, I did accept your ruling that I do not justify, because the resolution was popular enough. But then, after doing that, I would have expected the House to pronounce itself on the motion I have moved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no disagreement. Nobody has objected at all to your motion. It is very clear.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Would you not put the question? - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Suppose they say “No”, what would happen? You have such overwhelming support from the colleagues, from the Minister and everybody agrees with Ken. It is a very popular motion. Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Sessional Committee on Social Services on the Ministerial Policy Statement for the financial year 2002/03. 

Honourable members, you may have seen that the report is fairly large. It is a 62-page report, and given that volume, I beg your indulgence that I do not read each and everything, but that I highlight certain major areas for your attention.

The Committee on Social Services proceeded under Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and examined the recurrent and development Budget estimates of the following ministries:

Gender, Labour and Social Development.
Health.
Education and Sports.

This report covers Vote 30 – Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

Under the Ministry of Health it covers the following:

Vote 014 - that is headquarters 
Vote 019 – Butabika Hospital 
Vote 023 – Mulago Hospital 
Vote 032 – Health Service Commission 
Vote 050 -Regional Referral Hospitals, General Hospitals, NGO Health Units and  Primary Health Care units.

Thirdly, under the Ministry of Education and Sports it covers the following:

Vote 013 – Ministry of Education and Sports headquarters 

Vote 024 – Makerere University 

Vote 044 – Institute of Teacher Education, Kyambogo (ITEK) 

Vote 46 – Makerere University Business School. 

In addition it also covers: 

Vote 40 – Education Service Commission 

Vote 36 – Uganda Management Institute 

Vote 24 – Mbarara University of Science and 

Technology and then Vote 50 covers district primary education, district secondary education, district tertiary institutions and district health training institutions.

On behalf of the members of the Committee on Social Services, I wish to take this opportunity to thank all those with whom we interfaced, especially the officials of these mentioned ministries, for their co-operation and support.

I will begin with the submission of the committee on the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, on page four. You have seen the preamble and the mission, so let us consider point 3.0 – Budget Performance.

Madam Speaker, honourable members, during the financial year 2001/2002, Parliament approved a total of Shs 11,515,931,000 for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for both recurrent and development expenditure. Out of that, Shs 10,677,330,000 was released. This was 93.4 percent of the budget.

Compared to the budget of the previous years, the committee realized that this is a great improvement and we should appreciate and encourage it. Previously, after we had approved the budget of the ministry, less than 50 percent would be released, therefore, this is commendable. It is a big achievement. 

You will note some major achievements, which are noted under sub-sectors, and I will read them later.

Although major achievements have been registered, much more could have been achieved if the ministry was not greatly undermined by perpetual under-funding and under-facilitation. It is worth noting, however, that in this financial year 2002/2003, the budget of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development was estimated at Shs 51 billion but it has been allocated only Shs 18 billion. That is a shortfall of Shs 32.8 billion.

Following the Budget Act, which enabled Parliament to make an input, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development received an addition of Shs 0.455 billion from the Ministry of Finance. When you look at Appendix II item 18, you will see the communication from the Minister of Finance to the Budget Committee. 

Following the Budget Act, I must say that we are grateful that at long last, Parliament can have an input and the Ministry of Finance listened, and we appreciate that.

Whereas the committee appreciates this increase, the total budgetary provision for this financial year falls far short of the budgetary requirement of Shs 51 billion. As you will realize, many of the development budget projects run by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development are supported by donors.

The Department of Children and Youth: 

You can see the mandate of the ministry and the projects under that department, so I beg that we move on to page six.

Many of these development budget projects as enumerated are donor supported and operate in a few sampled sub-counties and districts. 

The major achievements of the ministry in general and this sub-sector in particular, during last financial year, which we should acknowledge are:

The ministry removed 422 children from Kampala streets. The children were resettled with their parents, and others are undergoing rehabilitation at the National Rehabilitation Centre, Kampiringisa.
We also appreciate that the ministry received and returned 335 formerly abducted children to their districts of origin. We appreciate that.

The committee was concerned about and observed the following:

There are many street children and youth in most of the urban authorities.

Orphans are on the increase because of civil war and the scourge of HIV/AIDS. Many children, over 5,000 of them, are still under captivity because of armed conflicts; and child labour is not yet eliminated.

Many institutional buildings in remand homes for children are still roofed with asbestos. And note that asbestos has been proved internationally to cause cancer.

There is misinterpretation and misuse of the Children’s Statute, 1996, which is likely to be one of the possible causes of strikes and riots in schools.

There is gross under-funding of the National Council for Children, the National Council for Youth, and the Department of Youth and Children.
The committee was concerned about the many youth who were trained for the Youth Entrepreneur Scheme (YES) but have not yet received the loans. Note that each youth who was trained contributed a fee of Shs 50,000 for training. 

You can imagine, honourable members, these are handicapped youth who were made to contribute a fee for training but at the end of the day, many of them have not received the loan. That was a big concern.

Our recommendations are: 

Government should re-roof the buildings in the six remand homes with safe materials.
Government should identify the youth who were trained in the YES Programme countrywide and provide them with loans.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should formulate policies on street children, orphans and child labour, and this should come as soon as possible.

Government should remove street children from the streets in all urban authorities and resettle them. 

Government should continue with efforts to rescue the children under captivity. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should sensitise the communities about proper interpretation and application of the Children’s Statute.  

Honourable members, point 5.0 is about the department of Gender, Labour and Community development, and elaborated below are their mandate and programmes. I beg that we go to the third paragraph. 

The committee supported the following initiatives taken by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. These are new policies, which I am drawing your attention to:

 Transfer of funds of Functional Adult Literacy (FAL) as conditional grants to districts with effect from this financial year. 

 Transfer of funds of district and sub-county women councils as conditional grants to districts.

 The Ministry is also to provide financial support to districts to enable them recruit District Community Workers (DCW) and Community Development Workers (CDW) at sub-county level, and train the existing ones. The committee supported these initiatives.  

We congratulate the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the bill, which was brought before Parliament, leading to the enactment of the National Women Council (Amendment) Law. We appreciate that. 

We move on to page nine. The committee is concerned about the delay of the Social Development Sector Strategic Investment Plan. This has affected the funding of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We are also concerned about the delay of the elections of National Women Councils; we are concerned about the insufficient provisions for the Wage Bill of public libraries; we are concerned about the gross under-funding of public libraries, National Women Councils and the Department of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  

We recommend that all the above are attended to, but I wish to emphasise that the elections of National Women Councils should be held as soon as possible, not withstanding the state of affairs in the Electoral Commission.

The Wage Bill for Government workers is an obligation and, therefore, the omission of a Wage Bill for public libraries or the little money provided by Government is an act of gross negligence. Government should provide a supplementary for to the public libraries.

I move on to the Department of Disability and the Elderly. On page ten is the department’s mandate. I wish to emphasise the observations we made on page ten: 

The committee was concerned about the delay in establishing the Equal Opportunities Commission. I am happy, Madam Speaker, that you have announced a Standing Committee on Equal Opportunities, and I wish to recommend that they pick up on this one. 
We are also concerned about the delay of a bill to establish substantive councils on disability. 

Next is the department of Labour, Employment, Industrial Relations and Occupational Safety and Health. Shown on page ten is their mandate, but I wish to emphasise their major achievements on page 11:

Following the Workers’ Compensation Act, 2000, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has earmarked Shs 400,000,000 under item 7014, Programme 07, to compensate the dependants of the Ebola victims The ministry has already compiled the list of the beneficiaries for compensation this financial year. We note with concern the shortfall of Shs 410,000,000 to complete the compensation programme of the Ebola victims  

Honourable members, the committee was concerned about the gross under-funding and the under-facilitation of the industrial court. It was noted that the Trade Disputes, Arbitration and Settlements Act provides that the entire expenditure of industrial courts is statutory and, therefore, is charged directly from the Consolidated Fund. The court has no official accommodation.  

The unemployment level in this country is estimated at 7.4 percent, according to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics. The committee however commends Government’s efforts to create employment opportunities, like AGOA. All the same, more is required. 

We were concerned about the delay of the policy on a minimum wage in this country.

Also, Government should consider financing Industrial Courts as one of its priorities. 

The National Social Security Fund’s (NSSF) achievements are on page 12. According to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, after re-organisation in the management and the Board of Directors of the NSSF, the fund has increased its collections from Shs 3 billion to Shs 6 billion per month. We congratulate them.

The committee was concerned about the recent re-organisation of NSSF by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The committee was however informed by the ministry that such re-organisation was done because of gross mismanagement of the Fund and, therefore, they suspended the top managers and the board. 

The ministry has appointed new management, it has re-constituted the Board of Directors, and it has contracted a consultancy firm to carry out an audit of the entire organisation.

We also had other issues of concern about NSSF. Among them is the delay of payments of benefits, the delay of NSSF to open up more branches countrywide, the interest rate of 4 percent for beneficiaries is still low, and investments by NSSF are not spread across the country. 

We were further concerned about whether Government was pursuing the privatisation of NSSF. The committee was informed that Government is to liberalise the pension sector and not to privatise the NSSF.

The committee recommends that NSSF should further reduce the period of paying beneficiaries. We also recommended that as the income increases, NSSF should open up more branches for claimants to access. Interest rates should be increased and NSSF should consider credit facilitates to the contributors of the fund.  

Honourable members, I beg to move to the Ministry of Health on page 14. We can see the mandate of Ministry of Health, but I will beg that we begin on the second paragraph, the one with the guiding documents for health sector development. 

Their guiding documents are: 

Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) 

National Health Policy (1999) 

Health Sector Strategic Plan, and 

President Museveni’s Election Manifesto  

Budget Performance: 

Honourable members - (Interruption)- as I appreciate the services of hon. Kibaale, the total resource envelope approved for the health sector for the financial year 2001/2002 was Shs313.85 billion. Of that, Shs 169.77 billion was from the Government of Uganda budget support, and Shs144.08 billion was direct donor support. 

On page 15, we went on to analyse how the resources were utilised as given. When you look at that table, we just wanted to illustrate what is allocated as compared to what is approved and released, and we gave the percentages of all of them. We mainly concentrated on capital development, which was a major concern because we realised that the performance was not to our expectations. 

For example, when you look at table two, that is development, Vote 114 - Ministry of Health, we approved an average of Shs 18.4 billion. What was released was an average of Shs 11.3 billion. That one was a performance of 61.6 percent.  

When you look at Butabika - Vote 119, we approved an average of Shs 4.1 billion and what was released was Shs 1.4 billion; a performance of 34.1 percent. 

That issue was our concern, and according to the Ministry of Health, the development budget was affected thus because most of it is non-PAF. Therefore, shortfalls in cash flow affected the levels of releases from the Ministry of Finance.

As far as Butabika Hospital is concerned, the performance was poor mainly due to the fact that the support to the Health Sector Strategic Plan Project started late. Therefore, counter-funding could not be increased within the financial year since activities had not yet been in place.  

Our observation is that although figures indicated are for the end of May, the performance on capital development was poor, particularly for Butabika Hospital.

On the same page are the budget proposals for this financial year. Within the Medium Term Expenditure Framework, the health sector has been allocated a total of Shs246.78 billion as compared to Shs313.5 billion for last financial year. 

Although the Government of Uganda budget support to health has gone up by 15 percent from Shs169.77 billion to Shs195.8 billion, the total resource envelope has decreased by 21 percent. That is from Shs313.85 billion to Shs246.94 billion. 

This decline is due to the 65 percent decline in donor support, which declined from Shs144.08 billion to Shs51.14 billion, and has not been compensated for.  The decline was caused by a shift from projects to budget support and some projects are closing down. For example, the project on Sexually Transmitted Diseases, Essential Drugs, etc are closing without new ones coming up. The diminishing resource envelope means that there is a growing list of un-funded and under-funded priorities, including some items under district primary health care and the recurrent development for referral hospitals.  

The committee was informed that due to the limited size of the resource envelope, it has become necessary to scale down on some of the three-year targets in the Health Sector Strategic Plan. One such affected target is the construction of the planned 250 Health Centre IIs, which will not be undertaken. 

Honourable members, this is where our interest is because when we talk of Health Centre IIs; those are the ones that are constructed at Parish level. So, you can see that right from the word go, that issue is badly affected this financial year.  

The total resource envelope for the health sector is further constrained by the fact that it includes the funds for the AIDS Commission, which is under the President’s Office. Honourable members will recall that the Uganda AIDS Commission was transferred to the President’s Office but the money has always come under the Ministry of Health. 

And when you look at our procedure of analysing this issue, it is lacking. The Committee of Social Services does not monitor, nor can it invite the Uganda AIDS Commission for interrogation. It is therefore unfair for this vote to continue appearing under Ministry of Health. And when the Ministry of Finance is making its budget cuts, it does not consider it. When the Ministry of Finance is calculating the average per capita income of each household, it considers this vote too, which gives a wrong impression.

The committee recommends that in order to implement HSSP, the President’s Manifesto and PEAP, supplementary funds should be sought for the health sector. Specifically, the funding gap of about Shs36 billion previously agreed upon in the December 2001 BFP when the health sector had been allocated Shs231 billion instead of the now Shs195.8 billion, be filled as a matter of Government priority.  

Government should find the right home for the Uganda AIDS Commission. Their funds should not be reflected in the health sector budget. 

The priorities of the health sector include:

Provision of drugs 

Human resource development

Reproductive health.

Under provision of drugs, the budget allocation of health sub-district service delivery has been increased by 60 percent over the funding for this financial year, to Shs 17.17 billion. Out of this, 50 percent will be used for drugs and other medical supplies, especially at Health Centre IVs and other lower units.  

The non-wage recurrent budget for district, regional referral and national referral hospitals will increase by 15 percent. Out of this, 30 percent of non-wage funding at this level will be used for drugs. The committee had no objection to this since the drug stock-outs are a big problem at all levels of health units throughout the country, especially with reported increase in attendance since the abolition of user fees.

The second priority is on human resource development. On this, the ministry is to emphasise recruitment and in-service training of badly needed health workers. The ministry is focusing on clearing the payroll in which they anticipate to identify personnel gaps, which will be filled out of savings accruing from this exercise.
 
Their third priority is reproductive health. Activities under this item will put emphasis on recruitment of midwives and provision of contraceptives. The ministry has identified Health Centre IVs as points of reference for maternity services. A bulk of funds for district primary health care development will be utilised at this level.  

Honourable members, I wish to draw your attention to the fact that Shs 3.9 billion has been provided for the consolidation of Health Centre IVs done in the previous year. A provision has been made for theatre equipment of Shs6 billion, and a provision of Shs2.03 billion for transport. We expect about 86 vehicles for Health Centre IVs. 

Funds totalling to Shs1.55 billion have been allocated for upgrading Health Centre IIs to Health Centre IIIs to provide badly needed maternity services in only 31 sub-counties in the country. This has left under-funded priorities in the infrastructure development such as new Health Centre IIs, upgrading of more Health Centre IIs to Health Centre IIIs as well as staff accommodation.  

Honourable members, you can imagine the budget could only accommodate upgrading of Health Centre IIs to Health Centre IIIs for only 31 sub-counties, and you are aware that in this country we now have an average of 1000 sub-counties.  

Recommendations on the priorities:

The committee strongly recommended that within the available resource envelope, re-allocation be made to address the following- honourable members, following the Budget Act we made these recommendations:  

1. Construction of new Health Centre IIIs:
The Health Sector Strategic Plan puts emphasis on increased proportion of the population within a distance of 5 kilometres to a health center. Increased access is indeed a key PEAP indicator. 

Another PEAP indicator is increased DPT 3 coverage - those are vaccines - which measures the level of immunization coverage, which may be increased with more strategic health centres near the population. It is also clear that the infant mortality rate is still high in Uganda and having health centre IIIs near the people will promote early and appropriate treatment of the sick children. 

Furthermore, the President promised one health centre per parish and the population is looking forward to this being implemented.  

When implementation of HSSP began, a total of 2878 Health Centre IIs were planned, and in the health policy statement 2001/02, the minister pointed out that they had constructed 200 in that financial year.  In the past one year, the target was 868 over the next four years. During 2001/02, 100 were due for construction leaving 768 still planned for the next three years. 

It was thus unaccepted by the committee to budget for only one Health Centre II for this financial year. When we received the budget, the Ministry of Health had only budgeted for one Health Centre II. And when we analysed, we thought that following all this, especially the promise by the President of one Health Centre II per parish, we thought that was unfair. 

The Committee recommended to the Budget Committee that Shs1.57 billion be cut from the Shs2 billion budgeted for the in-service training of nursing assistants and be added on to the budgeted Shs0.03 billion to make Shs1.6 billion for construction of at least 50 Health Centre IIs out of the previously planned 100 by December 2001. The reasons for re-allocation from the budget of training were:

First, in the policy statement 2001/2002, the minister indicated that 4000 nursing assistants had been trained by the end of the financial year 2000/2001 and that 2000 were expected to be trained in 2001/2002 in addition to 100 anaesthetic assistants and 30 theatre assistants. This means a large number of staff - an average of 107 per district - had already been trained and thus the remaining Shs0.43 billion would better be used to train more anaesthetic assistants and theatre attendants to work in the completed theatres at Health Centre IVs.

Secondly, we had been informed by the minister that the Health Centre IIs were planned to be manned by at least enrolled nurses/mid-wives initially, but subsequently they will be manned by enrolled comprehensive nurses as they become available. 

Health training institutions were transferred to Ministry of Education and the ministry is to receive support from the European Union to enable them train more health workers including enrolled comprehensive nurses. There are even more who are trained but not yet employed. The payroll cleaning by Ministry of Health and recruitment of new staff should go a long way to mitigate the blow of not training more nursing assistants this financial year.  

Realizing the importance of Health Centre IIs in health service delivery, the Budget Committee recommended re-allocation of Shs 1 billion from the training of nursing assistants to the construction of Health Centre IIs. The Ministry of Finance proposed the negotiation with Ministry of Health.  I am glad to inform this august House that the Ministry of Health has accepted the re-allocation and thus a total of 33 units are to be constructed in the country instead of only one previously planned for. We congratulate them - (Applause) 

So far we count that as the second achievement of the Budget Act. We have already seen an addition of Shs0.455 billion to the Ministry of Gender, but you have also seen that the committee could negotiate with stakeholders, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Finance and they accepted this within PEAP. We congratulate and thank you! - (Applause)

Regional Referral Hospitals:

In this country we have 10 regional hospitals and 56 district Government-aided hospitals. The 10 regional hospitals are now self-accounting directly to the Treasury. These referral hospitals include: Masaka, Jinja, Mbale, Soroti, Gulu, Arua, Hoima, Kabale, Lira and Fort Portal. I wish to mention here that among the achievements of the Ministry of Health is the upgrading of Lira District Hospital into a regional referral hospital from this financial year. 

The committee had discussions with directors of national referral hospitals and medical superintendents of regional hospitals to assess their performance against the budget allocation. These are observations out of these discussions: 

The committee observed inadequate funding. Funds to Government hospitals can enable them to purchase drugs and sundries, which last only for two weeks in a quarter, the period that is intended to be covered. For the remaining period, patients are made to buy their own drugs.  

There is over congestion of patients, especially after the abolition of cost sharing. 

We also observed, on a sad note, that after abolition of cost sharing in Government hospitals, the funding gap has not been fully addressed, especially to enable hospitals sustain the wage bill for support of some staff like cleaners, night watchmen et cetera. 

The committee also observed that lack of accommodation for staff to be near hospital to address the emergencies is a big problem. 

Inadequate staffing in hospitals is yet another problem. 

No major repairs or renovations in most the hospitals. Most hospitals have blocked sewerage systems 

There is lack of major equipment in laboratories like X-ray scans; the few existing ones are not provided with adequate maintenance funds. 

The committee was also concerned about the high costs of utilities like water and electricity.

The committee was informed by the Minister of Health that: 

A proposal of rehabilitation and equipping of 11 district hospitals has been given to JICA and we hope for funding. JICA is a Japanese company; the minister will elaborate better.
The draft proposal for rehabilitation of Fort Portal Hospital was ready. 

The draft proposal for rehabilitation of regional hospitals is being prepared, but funding is not yet identified. 

These hospitals countrywide are in a sorry state and this august House must take interest in this matter to support more funding to the health sector.  

Observations on NGO hospitals:

Some NGO hospitals and health centres receive grants-in-aid and this financial year, honourable members, I wish to inform you that 46 NGOs and health units will receive a total of Shs16.61 billion. 
 
The committee was informed by the Ministry that: 

Government supports NGO health units so that they can reduce the charges on services delivered to patients. 

NGO budget line is a PAF line, whereas hospital rehabilitation is non-PAF. Therefore, when the committee proposed re-allocation of One billion shillings from NGO to general Government hospitals, it was not supported. 

While the committee supports Government aiding NGO hospitals and other lower units, this support should not exceed the Government hospitals where the Government has direct responsibility. 

We also observed that NGO hospitals still charge high fees, especially to the poor.  

Given that Government channels public funds to NGO hospitals, we noted that there is no community involvement in the management of affairs of these institutions.

Recommendations:

The committee recommended that Ministry of Health should review this policy in order to address the above raised concerns.
 
In the absence of any increase by Government to the health sector resource envelope, part of the increase in funding to NGO hospitals should be given to regional or district hospitals. 
 
The committee also recommended that comparative figures need to be given to indicate what the charges would now be if there was no budget support to these NGO hospitals. 

This came out of the cry that even if Government is still supplementing, we still find that the real needy patients cannot afford. So, we want to see what the figures would be if Government was not adding.  

NATIONAL DISEASE CONTROL

Malaria Control:

Honourable members, the committee noted that malaria is on the increase in the country, both in terms of spatial distribution and intensity. 

The committee was happy to note that the Ministry of Health has launched a home-based management of malaria-using pre-packaged drugs. This involves training of mothers in villages to manage the distribution.  

The committee recommends that all malaria-prone districts should be considered as a priority. We were told that this new programme has already been launched in 18 districts, and we recommend to the ministry that they consider those malaria-prone districts as a priority. We also recommend that health-trained personnel should be involved in the distribution.

Sexually Transmitted Diseases, HIV/AIDS:

The committee hailed the Ministry of Health and other stakeholders for the continued decline of HIV/AIDS prevalence and incidences. It also noted the improved programmes for prevention of mother-to-child transmission and STD/HIV surveillance.  

It was also noted that the cost of Anti-retroviral Drugs (ARVs) has considerably reduced and an expert committee to develop a plan and oversee further expansion of access to this drug has been appointed. Technical assistance was also procured from UNAIDS. 

The committee however expressed dismay at the speed at which issues of access to these drugs are handled. It noted with concern that very little money is put in the provision of these drugs.  For example, only US$9,000,000 out of the expected US$52,000,000 from the Global Fund for AIDS, TB and Malaria is to go on ARVs, and that access to these drugs will be by sub-county allocation. I think this was unacceptable; it is as if we are allocating bursaries! 

The committee recommends that the Committee on HIV/AIDS take on this issue as a matter of urgency with the relevant bodies to ensure that more Ugandans can access ARV treatment.  

Immunisation

Honourable members, the committee noted that despite the reported improvement in coverage, the PEAP indicator is still below 50 per cent. This cannot bring about herd immunity necessary for proper control of these immunisable diseases. 

The committee noted and appreciated the new vaccines, which have been introduced, but more needs to be done.
  
Health Infrastructure:

Honourable members, this should be of interest to us because many of these structures are within our constituencies. You can read the mission, but I wish to emphasize the specific objectives of health infrastructure as far as Ministry of Health is concerned: 

1. To rehabilitate and improve the performance of existing health facilities. 

2. To increase access to health services to within a radius of five kilometres. 

3. To provide appropriate medical equipment for health care. 

4. To establish a functional referral system by establishing different health care levels; providing communication equipment for consultants, referral and strengthening management, and also to provide ambulances to facilitate referrals.  

Looking at those objectives, honourable members, the table on Page 27 is to emphasize the new policy. At every level, what kind of structure do we expect?

At parish level, a health centre constructed there is known as Health Centre II, and at Health Centre II we expect at least an outpatient department with a community shed, a staff house and a pit latrine. That is the Government policy.

At sub-county level, we expect construction of a Health Centre III, and this one should have facilities like an outpatient department, maternity or general ward, a staff house and a pit latrine.

At county level, which is now a constituency, in each of your constituencies, expect a Health Centre IV. This one should have an outpatient department, a maternity or general ward, an operating theatre, a drug store, doctor’s house, staff house and pit latrine.

Honourable members, if you recall from my previous submission, out of all these enlisted, the Ministry of Health this financial year is going to concentrate on construction, completion and consolidation of Health Centre IIIs. 

This financial year, they have earmarked Shs3.9 billion to do this, and in your constituency you may have realised it. But also, when you look at the objectives, where a facility that possibly has a theatre exists, they have just consolidated that.  Where an NGO exists, they have consolidated that.  

Our observations about this health infrastructure:

Honourable members, the committee was concerned that conditional grants channelled to districts for construction of health facilities or infrastructure has some shortfalls. Now, after we have passed the budget, the monies are passed to local governments; to your districts, and I wish to inform you, before I read the shortcomings, that on average, a theatre is allocated Shs63 million and above for construction. These monies have been going to local governments.

We observed the following shortcomings:

great variability in tender prices;

poor workmanship; 

delayed completion of works;

abandonment of sites by contractors after full payment of contract sums;

inadequate supervision by district engineers and Ministry of Health officials. 

Honourable members, we have visited some of these health centres but a lot is left to be desired. For example, we visited Kabwohe Health Centre in Sheema, but the contractor was putting shutters of substandard quality. He painted them and called those mahogany shutters; just vanishing! 

I had the opportunity of visiting Koboko in Yumbe and if you looked at the glass for the windowpanes in the health centre in Koboko, a lot is desired. You cannot believe the size of some of them. They just reduce the sizes of the rooms The district engineers are doing us a disservice because if they go on giving certificates of completion even on shoddy work, on incomplete work that is a lot of injustice to this country.

The committee was further concerned about the number of Health Centre IVs which are completed so far and those not yet completed. Here we have given you Appendix I at the back of your report for purposes of you following. I know this is where your interest lies, and some of the questions you would ask are already here. You find that some theatre constructions as per April this year, which are completed and are operational or require only equipment to operate, are only five in the whole country. The list on which district they are in is there.

Those theatres that are practically complete but require minor improvement, especially plumbing and fittings - you will see the column where they are - are 68 in the country.

Those theatres that require plastering, fixing of doors and windows, plumbing and electrical installations or painting are 44 in the whole country. 

Those theatres that are up to roofing level, comprising any stage of construction from foundation, walling and roofing, are 12. 

The theatre that is at tendering stage - preparation of tender documents, floating of tenders through to contract awards, but prior to starting work in the whole country - is only one.  

Those with no action at all in the whole country are 21. 

You will see the details. Study that chart properly so that you can avoid asking questions you would have asked. 

The committee recommends that the relevant authorities ensure that society realizes value for money sent out to local governments for this policy of health infrastructure. For instance, we wish to appeal to the Ministry of Local Government, the Local Government Committee of Parliament, the health management committees, and we also wish to appeal to the Ministry of Health to ensure that the society realizes value out of this money.

Mulago Referral Hospital:

Mulago is the largest national referral hospital with a bed capacity of 1,500, but apparently it also serves as a district hospital for Kampala. The biggest problem facing this hospital is over-congestion by patients from all over the country.  It has been worsened by the abolition of cost sharing with no corresponding increased budget allocation.  

The committee noted a reduction in the allocation from Shs23.66 billion last financial year to Shs23.65 this financial year including donor funds.

Mulago Hospital is considered by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as non-PAF and, therefore, often suffers budget cuts. The committee noted that Mulago Hospital is affected by the depreciation factor, which has been constantly ignored by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The priority areas of Mulago are:
 
Drugs and Sundries: 

The problem of drugs in Mulago Hospital has been compounded by the abolition of cost sharing with the resultant increase of the number of patients. Mulago Hospital needs a minimum of Shs6 billion for this item alone, but only Shs4 billion has been provided for. The appreciation of the dollar affects the purchasing of drugs as the budgeting is done in Uganda shillings without adjusting for changes in the foreign exchange rates. The releases for drugs have been decreasing and untimely. 

Maintenance of Medical Equipment:

Last year, Mulago Hospital acquired equipment worth 12 million dollars, which need constant servicing and maintenance estimated to cost Shs1.08 billion. I wish to inform you that Finance has only allocated Mulago Shs58 million for this item. So, when you go there and the scans and the X-rays are not operating, this is the problem.  

Food  for Patients:

On average, meals for 1,500 patients have to be provided daily. Currently, Mulago can provide one meal a day.  Mulago needs Shs1 billion for this item, but I wish to inform you that Finance has provided only Shs300 million for this item. Out of this Shs300 million, Shs90 million goes to intern doctors alone.  

The management of Mulago Hospital submitted that Appropriation-in-Aid in the private wing is currently collected and passed on to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This affects service delivery in the wing, as funds are never provided by Finance on time. 

Honourable members, you remember under the Finance Act that there are certain institutions where we recommended that they should spend at source for example, Makerere, but in the case of Mulago it is not among those institutions. So, when Appropriation-in-Aid is collected and taken to the central source, the consolidated fund, the release in most cases is not timely.

Recommendations:

Mulago Hospital should be given special exemption by allowing it to spend its Appropriation-in-Aid at source, especially in the private wing.  

The allocation to Mulago Hospital, especially on the item of drugs and sundries needs to be stepped up, and Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development should ensure timely release.

Butabika Hospital:

Butabika Hospital is currently the only national referral mental health institution in this country. It is also a teaching hospital for all cadres specialising in mental health, ranging from nursing cadres to post-graduate students.

The allocation to Butabika Hospital has reduced from Shs 19.9 billion last financial year to Shs18.38 billion this financial year. The hospital is apparently benefiting from a loan from ADB. However, the allocation to drugs is still low since the drugs are very expensive.  There is also limited research at the hospital, yet mental problems appear to be on the increase.

National Medical Stores (NMS): 

The mandate of National Medical Stores is to procure, in bulk, drugs and medical supplies and market them to the public and private sector throughout the country. However, almost at the same time when National Medical Stores was established and vested with this mandate, bestowing to it a public monopoly status, other macro-economic policies and statutes were enunciated. These included the liberalisation policy, privatisation, decentralisation policy and SWIPCO arrangement. The net effect on National Medical stores is unavoidable competition, regulation and inefficient bureaucracy. This makes fulfilment of National Medical Stores’ mandate an impossible task.  

There is an arrangement of privatisation of National Medical Stores, honourable members, and according to the Privatisation Unit, National Medical Stores has been placed under category two, whereby Government will retain 51 percent and 49 percent will be privatised. 

When we analysed all these factors, the committee objected to the privatisation of such a key sector and raised the following observations: 

We objected to the President’s election manifesto 2001 pledge to give free medical care to the poor. How will Ministry of Health fulfil this if this facility is sold?

Health centres have been receiving drugs from National Medical Stores on credit, and the committee doubts whether this arrangement can work with a privatised company.  

With privatisation of NMS, the committee was concerned whether it would be possible for private business dealers to import all essential drugs that may not be profitable and yet very essential to our patients. We considered drugs like mental health drugs as very expensive with little or no profit, and we doubted whether private companies would consider importing such drugs, which National Medical Stores has been doing.

Recommendations:

Government should delete National Medical Stores from the list of category 2 of the PERD Statute 1993.  

Government should re-consider the sale of National Medical Stores, but instead harmonise and rationalise the conflicting laws and policies through appropriate amendments, liberalisation policy, privatisation policy, SWIPCO arrangement and the like.

HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION

The mission is there, as you can read honourable members, and you remember we passed the Health Service Commission Act.  

The committee was informed that the entitlements to commissioners in the Health Service Commission have never been fulfilled according to the Specified Officers Act. We made these commissioners full time, but Ministry of Finance never provided the funds, and these commissioners are already in arrears.  

The committee was also happy to learn that the Health Service Commission has embarked on a recruitment exercise, and already most of the posts in the health service upcountry have been filled. The Commission, however, faced a challenge of inadequate staffing in the health units across the whole country.

Legal and Regulatory Framework:

Ministry of Health recognises and supports professional councils within the budget framework. The professional councils include: Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council, Uganda Allied Professionals Councils, Pharmacy Councils and Midwives Councils.  

These professional councils are important for regulating the practices of the various professions within the health Sector.

The committee was concerned about the many new cadres of nurses being trained. For instance, we have a new cadre where nurses are getting a degree in nursing.  We also have a new cadre of comprehensive nurses where these nurses qualify with a diploma. We have another one of nursing assistants, which has been in-service certificate training by Ministry of Health. 

All these mentioned above are not recognised by way of positioning, deployment or salary by Ministry of Public Service and the Health Service Commission. Given the fact that health training institutions were transferred from Ministry of Health to Ministry of Education and Sports, will the responsibility of conducting examinations remain under the Nursing Council, which is still under Ministry of Health?  This one was a dilemma.  

After restructuring, these institutions were transferred to Ministry of Education and Sports, but the body examining, especially the nurses, is the Nursing Council, which is being regulated by Ministry of Health. So, we request Government to harmonise this one, given that we have new cadres with diplomas and degrees on board. We need some clarification.

Protection of the Public from the many illegal clinics operating countrywide: 
The committee was informed that the concerned professional councils take action, among which is closure of illegal clinics.

Recommendations:

The Ministry of Public Service and the Health Service Commission should recognise the new health cadres and take - (Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I have noted that the chairperson of the committee is referring to Ministry of Finance inadequacies, but the whole Ministry of Finance, which has five Ministers, is not represented. I do not know who is representing the Leader of Government Business to note our concerns. 

So, procedurally, is it correct for us to deliberate this entire important social services sector without these ministers and the Leader of Government Business? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I understand there is a Leader of Government Business here in the person of hon. Christine Aporu, and I am sure the Minister of Finance is consulting his officials in the lobby.  

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, without wanting to disturb the chairperson, is the Minister of Finance taking us seriously by staying in the corridor, when in fact the chairperson of the committee is presenting a report, which impinges on the activities of his ministry and we just allow him to stay in the corridors? Honestly, is he taking this House seriously? And they are five in total; can you imagine! And none of them is here!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The Minister of Finance is requested to withdraw from the lobby and come back to the Chamber.

MRS HYUHA:  Thank you very much Madam Speaker for that wise ruling, because most of these issues are really affecting many ministries, and Ministry of Finance will have a role to clarify to this house when we have finished debating.  

Honourable members, I beg you to go to page 35. 

MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS  

Those are the guiding principles of the Ministry of Education you can see, but I wish to emphasise the budget performance, point 16.0. 

Education continues to rank as a priority sector within Government’s expenditure.  This financial year Government’s discretionary recurrent expenditure on education will be 32 per cent compared to 31 per cent last year, 2001/2002.  

Within the education sector, the top priority will be primary education, which consumes 65 percent of the total resource allocations.  

Overall, the budget for education has increased by eight percent from shs509.6 billion last financial year to Shs550.79 billion this financial year, 2002/2003. This increase in the education sector has been mainly due to increases in the wage bill. For instance: the primary school teachers’ wage bill increased by 29 billion shillings, and we hope this will take care of our salary arrears accrued last financial year, 2001/2002. This will also cater for allowances of teachers in hard-to-reach areas.  

In the case of secondary school teachers, the wage bill increased by 15 billion shillings.  This is mainly to take care of new teachers accessing the payroll following grant aiding of 96 secondary schools and nine primary teacher colleges, which were turned into comprehensive secondary schools in the financial year 2000/01.  This increase will also include a new bursary scheme for the needy but bright students.  

Business, technical, vocational education and training wage bill increased by three billion shillings.  

Primary Education:

I wish to draw your attention to a new policy on this sub-sector, honourable members. Government has extended the provision of free education from four children from each family to all children attending Government-aided primary schools with effect from this financial year.  

I also wish to point out here that Government has voted 41.5 billion shillings for capitation grants at UPE rates formula of annual tuition of Shs8,100. Honourable members, each child attending primary five to primary seven is given a provision of Shs8,100 a year. One attending lower primary, from primary one to primary three, is given Shs5,000 a year.  

Urban schools have been authorised to charge Shs10,400 per pupil because of costs of utilities.  Urban schools like Shimoni, Kitante and others, because they have utilities like water and electricity.  

Using the projection of pupil/classroom ratio of 74 to 1 by the year 2004/05, Government has voted 53.9 billion shillings for construction of classrooms under the School Facility Grant, popularly known as SFG. 

On Page 37, we can see those achievements, but I wish to congratulate the Ministry of Education for the major achievement of UPE enrolment, which has increased from 6,519,543 to 7,210,102 children with a tremendous increase in enrolment of the girl-child of 49 per cent of the total enrolment.  They have constructed 26,568 classrooms since the inception of UPE, in addition to those that existed.  We congratulate them!

Observations:

The committee was concerned about lack of support by Government to extend capitation grants to school going children in community or private schools. 

Honourable members, this is where we got concerned about the work method of Government. You have seen that in health, Government is providing money to NGO hospitals, and you have even seen that it is even giving more than what it would even give to Government-aided hospitals.  When it comes to education, they say, “no, we shall only provide to children who go to Government-aided schools, but not those who go to community schools.” Isn’t that a contradiction, honourable members? Which child is private in a community school when we have free education for all?  

I think this time the honourable Minister of Finance should hear this because it is Ministry of Finance to answer this. The committee was concerned about the high taxation of private providers (both in secondary and primary) and non-secondment of teachers by Government to private schools.  

Honourable members, in secondary schools, if I am not mistaken, more than 50 per cent are private providers. In primary school, about 30 per cent are private providers. This is a social service where these private providers should be encouraged.

Honourable members, the lack of a proper supervision and monitoring mechanism on utilisation of UPE funds to Central Local Government was of concern.  

The lack of a mechanism to recover funds from contractors who construct shoddy buildings under SFG was also a big concern.  

Many classrooms constructed under SFG do not cater for physical structures and inadequate instructional material for children with disability.  This is where we want Ministry of Gender to bring the policy on disability very fast, because many of these facilities are not being provided for - (Applause).  

Honourable members, for purposes of emphasis, I want the hon. Minister of Finance to hear this point; I want to emphasise this purposely for him. It is on page 37. Among the serious observations the committee made is the high taxation on private providers for both secondary and private. We wish to request you to assist us here, honourable Minister.  

Honourable members, can we go back to page 38; we were also concerned about the high dropout rate, especially of the girl-child, in upper primary; we were concerned about lack of a policy for pre-primary, it is for whom it may concern. This policy has been promised but it has not come. We were concerned because Government had said there would be free education to all school-going children in private school. Do we have laws in place to make it compulsory?  We were also concerned about lack of mid-day meals for UPE children.  

We recommend, therefore, that: 

The Ministry of Education and Sports extend capitation grants to all children attending Government and community schools.  

We also recommend that Government should waive off taxes on private providers of education since they complement Government efforts to provide this social service.

Government should come up with a clear mechanism of punishing contractors who construct sub-standard buildings.

Government should put in place a policy/law to make UPE compulsory now that it is free for every school-going child in Government-aided schools.

Government should send teachers to private schools.   

Ministry of Education should arrange to provide mid-day meals to UPE children.

Secondary Education:

The policy of Government is emphasizing equitable access to education at all levels. The Ministry of Education has planned these interventions, which I wish to emphasize here:  

Development of a cost strategic plan for expansion of post-primary education and training.  

It is to provide a seed secondary school in sub-counties without any secondary school, and expand day secondary schools in urban areas with the highest enrolment levels.

It is to grant-aid 270 community or private secondary schools in the medium term budget framework.  

It is to introduce a bursary scheme at sub-county level for the bright but needy students.

It is to provide special secondary schools for severely disabled children, one per region.  

It is to implement the teacher load as follows:

An A’ Level teacher should have 18 periods a week; and this is important because it determines the number of the teachers they should employ, and the wage bill Public Service should provide. 

A teacher taking both O’ and A’ Level should have 20 periods per week. 

A teacher taking O’Level only should have 24 periods.

Major Achievements:

The ministry is completing construction of the first set of nine seed schools distributed in nine different districts, which started in the financial year 200/2001. 

What is a seed school?  Note that a seed school includes four fully furnished classrooms, one science laboratory, one office block, two six-stance blocks of pit-latrines; all at the approximate cost of shs147m per seed school.  You will see the list of these nine schools in the policy statement on page 21.

Honourable members, we congratulate the ministry because it has deployed teachers in 94 newly grant-aided secondary schools. These schools were grant-aided in the financial year 2000/2001.  

Observations:

The Committee was concerned about: 

Government’s failure to fulfil the commitment of grant-aiding 270 community or private schools within the medium term as planned.  Government has only grant-aided 96 community or private schools and nine former PTCs in the financial year, 2000/2001. This year, Government has not provided any wage bill in the budget to enable Ministry of Education and Sports grant-aid any private or community secondary schools.

Honourable members, I wish to emphasize here that do not go to Ministry of Education and ask for grant-aiding this financial year. This was in the plan; we hoped that this would address the policy of one secondary school per sub-county, given that we have about 1,000 sub-counties in the country and only about 700 Government-aided secondary schools. 

We had hoped that every financial year, if Government grant-aided 90 and it started in 2000, by now Government would have grant-aided 270. But it only fulfilled this commitment in the last financial year.

These consequent financial years, Government has not provided for this facility. Therefore, honourable members, having debated this, you are not expected to go to the Ministry of Education and say, “I have my small school, it started under the church, I want assistance”. Grant aiding means that they would post their teachers, books and science equipment to those schools. So, this financial year, I will emphasize, Government never provided a wage bill.

The committee noted with disappointment that Ministry of Finance did not fulfil its commitment of one billion shillings for grant-aiding secondary schools as communicated by the Budget Committee.  You can see Appendix (ii).  

Honourable members, after hon. Sendaula communicating to us that he was going to consult, when we went back to the committee, no consultation was made and no provision was made.

The policy of a bursary scheme at sub-county level for the bright but needy is yet to be discussed by the committee and the Ministry of Education and Sports. A report will be provided when ready.

We were also concerned about the rampant strikes and riots in secondary schools where a lot of property is lost. 

We were concerned about the high fees charged by many secondary schools without a ceiling. 

We were concerned about the ban on recruitment of new teachers in secondary schools. However, the ministry informed the committee that Government has lifted the ban for only Science and English language teachers. So, it is a partial lift; I wonder whether when a school requires a history or CRE teacher, they will post a physics teacher to take on that!  

Recommendations:

The committee recommends that Government should:

Grant-aid community schools in order to accommodate the bulk of UPE graduates. Next financial year, honourable members, we expect one million children to leave P.7, where are we going to accommodate them?

Put in place clear policies to address the rampant strikes and riots in schools.  

We want them to streamline the fees structure in secondary schools by setting a ceiling. 

We also recommend that they should lift the ban on the recruitment of all teachers in preparation for UPE graduates - (Applause).

Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training:

Honourable members, you remember last financial year, Government said it was to set up polytechnics at sub-county level. These are multi-skills training institutions, but I wish to inform you that within the budgetary provision in the MTBF, Government has earmarked 16.3 billion shillings for the construction of only 54 community polytechnics within a period of five years.

Observations: 

We observed that the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) loan of shs2.9 billion passed by Parliament in support of construction of 14 community polytechnics has not been provided for within the MTBF. 

I have been receiving communications from colleagues saying, “my polytechnic was to be considered; it is not on the list.” But note that the resolution that we passed here to borrow money has not been provided for within the budget framework. Therefore, the construction of the 14 new sites as we passed will not take off unless this money is provided.  

Many business, technical, vocational education and training (BTVET) teachers, tutors and instructors have not yet accessed the payroll. 

The inadequate development funding of BTVET institutions is a problem. For instance, the Government has earmarked Shs900 million for development for 47 transferred institutions - this is where we have health training schools. They do practical papers; they need gloves and syringes. Therefore, when you give a training institution an average of Shs20 million, how much does each student receive? 

Recommendations:

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide Islamic Development Bank funds as passed by Parliament.  

We also recommend that Public Service should access BTVET teachers, tutors and instructors on the payroll. In other words, lift the ban on recruitment since the Government abolished cost sharing in higher tertiary institutions, which was an alternative source to pay some of these public officers.

TEACHER EDUCATION

On teacher education, the policy will be to continue recruiting and training teachers. The policy will be to finalise the Teacher Development Management Plan that will guide and promote professional development for primary schools. This emphasises funding of core PTCs and co-ordinating centres.

Lastly, the Government is to resolve the imbalance in the allocation of core primary teachers’ colleges and TDMS co-ordination centres among religions. This financial year they have earmarked Shs2 billion for establishing five additional core PTCs. 

Under the Roman Catholics, Lodonga TTC in Yumbe will be put under TDMS, St. Aloysius, Ngora in Kumi, Musubisi in Mubende and Ibanda in Mbarara. Among the Muslim faith, Kibuli will be considered. You can see page 20 of the policy statement for details.  

Government will also emphasise training of more teachers for special needs, secondary and vocational schools through universities, national teachers’ colleges and tertiary institutions.

Observations:

The committee was concerned about the ongoing strikes by primary school teachers about salary increment countrywide. According to the survey done by the Minister of Education and Sports, these were the causes of the strike: 

the low pay for teachers; 

large differentials between salaries of head teachers and classroom teachers, 

the delay of salaries, 

high taxation by Revenue Authority, especially on PTA allowances - Hon. Musumba, you hear that?

comparatively high graduated tax, 

high Pay As You Earn (PAYE), 

the very small salary increment.  

The committee was disappointed to note that the very issues raised by the teachers now have always come up in the reports of the committee to Parliament, but the Government has never addressed them! It appears we just sing a song or lullaby but no action is taken. If you analysed the policy statement, the Committee of Social Services has revised these issues affecting the teachers every year but no action has been taken.

The shortfall in the wage bill of teachers in the last financial year caused delays in salary payments across all levels of teachers. I wish to emphasise here that you would find that in one month, primary teachers are affected in Busia, their salary has not gone, the following month it is tutors in colleges in Moroto, the following month it is secondary school teachers in Jinja. This is a big concern. Wages and salaries should be among the priorities.  

Failure by the Ministry of Education and Sports to implement the incentive scheme for teachers in hard-to-reach areas like Kalangala, Kotido, Moroto and Buvuma islands was another concern. We had passed the money but whatever happened? We are concerned, honourable Members.  

Lack of promotional ladders on job in the teaching service is yet another concern.  

Recommendations:

The concerned stakeholders should immediately address the plight of striking teachers. The ministries of Public Service, Local Government, Education and Sports, Finance and the Education Service Commission should reconcile this matter as urgently as possible.

Salary is a right; therefore, the Ministry of Education and Sports should consider the wage bill as top priority in planning.  

Government should immediately provide allowances to teachers in hard-to-reach areas.

EDUCATION SERVICE COMMISSION

Article 168 of the Constitution prescribes the functions of the commission, and among the key functions are: 

The power to appoint persons to hold or act in any office in the education service including the power to confirm such appointments, exercise disciplinary control over persons and remove them from office.
  
Review the terms and conditions of service of public officers in education service.  

Achievements: 

We wish to congratulate the Ministry of Education and Sports for the enactment of the Education Service law, which was passed by the Seventh Parliament.  

We also congratulate the Education Service Commission for recruiting personnel for the newly grant-aided secondary schools, and for the validation of appointments.

Observations:

The committee was extremely concerned about the increasing cases reported in the mass media where teachers commit errors and unacceptable behaviour such as defiling or raping school children, embezzling school fees and inciting school children to riot or strike.  

Recommendations:

The Education Service Commission should take disciplinary measures on teachers, based on immoral characters as legal measures take place.  

Higher Education:

Honourable members, on page 47 (22.0) there is a new policy, which I wish to draw to your attention to. The Ministry of Education and Sports has developed guidelines on the policy of quota system for admission into public universities.  The policy is expected to come into effect in the financial year 2003/2004. However, the committee is yet to meet the Minister of Education and Sports and other stakeholders to discuss this new policy. A report will be submitted when ready.

Achievements:
 
Under this sub sector, on page 48, the National Council for Higher Education has been appointed following the enactment of the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act. This will improve management of public and private universities and other tertiary institutions. 

We observed that this council should be having an executive director, but who has not been appointed.  

We also observed that the governing councils in higher tertiary institutions like NTCs and the transferred institutions are not yet appointed according to this new law.

According to this new law, public universities like Makerere are supposed to have a chancellor, and this chancellor should not be the President. The President should be a visitor. We expect this National Council for Higher Education to take up this issue of appointment. 

The Ministry of Education should also appoint governing councils following this law.

There are four public universities in Uganda namely: Makerere University and Kyambogo in Central Uganda, Mbarara University of Science and Technology in Western Uganda, and Gulu University in Northern Uganda.  It was noted that there is a marked imbalance in the distribution of public universities. None is located in the eastern region - (Laughter and Applause). The committee was concerned whether the Ministry of Education has a policy on establishment or distribution of public universities.

The committee was concerned about the delay of the legal instruments to establish new public universities like Gulu and Kyambogo. This has greatly undermined their funding and bargaining powers for increments of funds. 

According to the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, we expect Government to bring a resolution here for us to legalise the establishment of Gulu and Kyambogo universities but we have voted money. They have been told to start, but there is no instrument.

The committee was also not satisfied about the regulatory mechanism of appropriation-in-aid in public universities and higher tertiary institutions, especially on the amount charged to private students and priorities to be spent on.

Honourable members, maybe I will need guidance from the Minister of Finance on appropriation-in-aid and whether Parliament or Ministry of Education has no say about regulating or scrutinising the priorities of some of this money internally generated. We also noted that there is no standard unit cost for all these public universities on how much they should charge the students.

Recommendations:

The committee recommends that the Government should establish a unit cost of education at tertiary institution level to minimise universities and other higher tertiary institutions overcharging private students.

The committee also recommends that the Government should establish a public university in eastern Uganda as a matter of priority to address the marked imbalance.

GULU UNIVERSITY  

Gulu District Farm Institute is temporarily housing the new Gulu University to kick-start this academic year.  Government has budgeted Shs2 billion to start, but there is a shortfall of Shs0.7 billion for recurrent expenditure.   

Programmes for Gulu University are Science Education and Human Resource, and Gulu University has admitted 140 students for government sponsorship and expects to admit 200 on private scheme.

Observations:

Lack of a legal instrument undermines Gulu University on the following:  

It cannot have a code. Its money is voted under the Ministry of Education headquarters.

There is no clear name for the university. Some books refer to it as Gulu University, others as the University in the North, and others the University of Agriculture and Environmental Science in Gulu. We hope the legal instrument will streamline this. 

We were also concerned about the insecurity in the region when the university begins. 

UGANDA NATIONAL EXAMINATIONS BOARD (UNEB)
  
UNEB conducts examinations for primary, secondary, business and technical schools in Uganda.  

Observations:

The policy of UNEB on cheating in examinations: 
The committee noted with concern that cheating in examinations could be caused internally by staff of UNEB or externally at centres where examinations are done.  

The committee was informed that UNEB has established a policy on cheating in all examinations it conducts. I wish to beg for your attention so that you listen to these policies clearly:

Any school or individual candidates caught cheating will have their results cancelled.
Any school found involved cheating twice will have its examination centre number withdrawn for at least two years -(Applause).

The Board will recommend to the Ministry of Education and the Education Service Commission to consider disciplining and de-registering teachers found involved in cheating of examinations.

The committee supported these policies on cheating and commended UNEB for the firm stand against cheating schools and individuals. We wish to encourage UNEB on that.

Forgery of Certificates of UNEB:  

The committee was concerned about cases of forgery of certificates. It should be noted that these are criminal cases. Culprits should be brought to book.

Children with Disability:

The committee was informed that the Board would set up a desk for special needs examinations during the financial year 2003/2004. The Board will recruit professional personnel to take charge of this desk.

The committee was concerned about the Acting Secretary for UNEB, who has been acting for a long time without confirmation.  

The committee was also dismayed to learn that there is doctoring of results, where a student who offered sciences receives a pass-slip with results of arts; and where a student got an “A” but can receive a slip where his/her result reads “B”. We condemn this practice seriously.  

Recommendations:

UNEB and the Ministry of Education should deploy scouts who are professionally trained teachers to all examination centres of PLE with effect from this financial year. These scouts should be posted to districts where they do not teach. 

The Government should fund UNEB adequately.  

Checks and balances should be strengthened to minimise internal cheating of examinations.  

Moral integrity should be considered as a strong point for deployment of staff in sensitive areas like the printer, packaging and computer.

MBARARA UNIVERSITY

Page 53 reflects the programmes run at the university. Three of them are already in place but the university has introduced a new programme this academic year of Nursing and Bachelor of Science with Education (evening class) intended to benefit registered nurses, midwives and Grade V teachers respectively.

Achievements:

Construction of a four-storey faculty building where the first phase of two storeys is completed. We congratulate them.

Observations:

Enrolment of female students in this university is still lower than males. For instance, last academic year Mbarara University of Science and Technology admitted 289 male students compared to 82 females. 

Inadequate funding has greatly limited the expansion of this university.  

Scraping of cost sharing and delegated funds have greatly affected health care services – (Interruption)- I thank you, hon. Minister. 

Recommendations:

The committee recommends that the Government should provide adequate funding to Mbarara University.

Mbarara University should begin construction on the new proposed site.

MAKERERE UNIVERSITY 

The university reviewed and started implementation of a strategic plan for five years. 

The major achievement was a breakthrough on the mobilisation of resources for priority areas. One of the priority areas it has developed is Information and Communication Technology (ICT). This one will minimise the delays of giving transcripts. It will also ensure that the academic records information system will be modernised.

Gender mainstreaming:

The university has upheld the policy of 1.5 being awarded to female students at admission until gender equality is achieved. This has increased the intake of female students. From last academic year, out of 4000 students admitted, 39 per cent were female compared to 25 per cent in 1990.  

The female scholarship programme has been launched with that funding, as you can see on page 55. 

Through the Department of Women Studies, Makerere University hosted the Women’s International Inter-disciplinary Congress on women in July 2002, the first of its kind in Africa. We congratulate them - (Applause).  

Unit Cost Per Student: 

I want to emphasise this. Makerere commissioned NORAD Consultants to carry out a study on unit cost per student per faculty. The study revealed that the average cost for a science-based programme at Makerere is Shs5.75 million per student per year, while that of humanities is Shs2.65 million, making an average of Shs3.681 million. 

Currently, Government contributes Shs2.9 million per student per year. The longstanding concern of the committee is, who fills in the financial gap of these government-sponsored students?  

I also wish to draw your attention to the new policy of transformation of the Faculty of Medicine into a College of Health Sciences. The Government has earmarked Shs17 billion, out of which Shs10 billion is from development partners, to transform this faculty into a college of health sciences.  

The College of Health Sciences is geared towards a community-orientated curriculum that involves taking students to community centres and orientating in them community health issues so that they can appreciate the rural environment and settle there whenever they are required. This, therefore, means increase of staff to student ratio, purchase of extra books and restructuring delivery mechanisms 

The transformation of the faculty will bring paramedics on board so that they can have an opportunity to become affiliated institutions and obtain recognisable Makerere certificates.  

The policy will also bring several other hospitals on board as teaching hospitals to expand the opportunities of clinical practice.  

The committee is in agreement with this policy, as it is intended to expand the method and scope of training and equally cater for more supervision and training of other cadres in public health. This approach will guarantee better and wider training of cadres for our rural health institutions like Health Centres II - IV.

Wage Bill:

Shortfalls in the wage bill remain a hindrance to the recruitment of adequate staff. You can see that out of the Shs21.4 billion for this item, the Ministry of Finance only provided Shs15 billion.  

Lumumba Hall:

Lumumba Hall of residence is indeed in a sorry state. We have always reported this but the Ministry of Finance has never fulfilled the presidential pledge of Shs2.3 billion to overhaul the hall. 

In light of financial constraints, it was decided that one block of Lumumba Hall, which is worst affected, be vacated this financial year while students continue to occupy other blocks. This will of course affect accommodation of 350 students. The university has therefore voted Shs300 million from internally generated funds for the start of renovations of Lumumba Hall.

About UMI, honourable members, -(Interjections)- Sexual harassment?  

The committee was also concerned about allegations of sexual harassment of female students at the university. We request the administration of Makerere University to investigate such immoral behaviour and take disciplinary action -(Laughter).  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order! Please proceed chairperson.

MRS HYUHA: Honourable members, about Uganda Management Institute, the committee was concerned about the closure of the School of Journalism at the institute. The committee was informed that the School of Journalism was found to be financially non-viable and unsustainable. The school needs specialised audio-visual studios and broadcasting equipment in order to teach broadcasting students. The committee objected to the closure of the School of Journalism.  

Recommendation:
 
The journalism school should remain open and Government should provide money to run this programme.

KYAMBOGO UNIVERSITY

In 1998, the Government of Uganda took a policy decision to merge the Institute of Teacher Education, Kyambogo (ITEK), Uganda Polytechnic, Kyambogo (UPK) and the Uganda National Institute of Special Education (UNISE). Since then, some decisions and recommendations have been overtaken by the enactment of the new University and other Tertiary Institutions Act. For instance, the ITEK Statute was repealed while UNISE was saved. Consequently, UNISE is not part of the proposed merger as originally desired. 

It is also important to note that ITEK over time developed degree programmes with the assistance of Makerere University while the former UPK did not have degree programmes. After the merger of ITEK and UPK, a funding gap in the wage bill of Shs1.3 billion has been created.  

Recommendations:

The Government should urgently bring the resolution that established Kyambogo University to Parliament.  

There is need to amend the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act in order incorporates UNISE into the new Kyambogo University.  

The Government should upgrade salaries of the staff of the former UPK to the levels of the former ITEK staff.  

Sports:
  
The committee is disappointed about the way sports are not prioritised in this country. The committee has always submitted to Parliament the following issues but Government takes no action: 

There is lack of a sports policy in this country.  
There is lack of a department of sports in the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

There exists only the Minister of State in charge of Sports, hon. Oryem, and one official at the desk –(Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!  

MRS HYUHA: Honourable members, if I can clarify on this point, there is no structure below the Minister in charge of Sports. The Ministry has six commissioners: Commissioner for Pre-primary/Primary, Commissioner for Teacher Education, Commissioner for Secondary Education, Commissioner for BTVET, Commissioner for Higher Education, Commissioner for Planning, but no commissioner for sports! And all these have other officers.  

The committee was equally concerned about the outdated laws for sports in this country. No amendments have been made.  

The committee was further concerned about the Federation of Uganda Football Association (FUFA), which is never brought to book for accountability of funds. To whom is FUFA responsible, is the concern of the committee. Funds are sent from FIFA to FUFA, but because of outdated laws in sports there is no clear Government mechanism to monitor and supervise their utilisation. 

No report whatsoever about appropriation-in-aid from sports is ever brought to Parliament. Are funds collected from Nakivubo, Nambole, Lugogo, etc ever taken to the Consolidated Fund? These are public facilities built from taxpayers’ money and, therefore, the public should be informed.  

Schools and universities teach physical education, how are they funded without a national policy? There is no structure to monitor and supervise utilisation of the funds!  

The committee was concerned about the gross under funding of sports. The committee therefore recommends that Parliament should not consider approval of the budget of the Ministry of Education next financial year unless the Government has addressed these anomalies, especially the submission of the National Sports Policy, structures in the Ministry and funding of sports - (Interjections). Honourable members, we wish to give them one more chance to address these issues. 

In conclusion, the committee wishes to recommend to the House for approval the recurrent and development estimates of the Ministries of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Health and Education and Sports for this financial year 2002/2003 as follows - We circulated an up-dated document, which I hope every member has received. It is what we are going to read but before I pronounce these figures, I hope the Minister of Finance took into consideration the arrears. It was drawn to my attention as I was coming here. 

For Vote 30 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, I wish to recommend the approval of recurrent and development expenditure of Shs5,771,056,000 and Shs10,438,628,000 respectively.  

Vote 014 - Health Headquarters  

I wish to recommend that this House approve a recurrent budget of Shs34,738,737,000 and a development vote of Shs130,513,915,000. 

Vote 019 - Butabika Hospital
  
I wish to recommend for your approval Shs2.5 billion for recurrent expenditure and a development budget of Shs29,200,781,000.

Vote 23 - Mulago Hospital Complex
 
I wish to recommend to this House for approval Shs18,072,000,000 for recurrent expenditure and a development vote of Shs2,196,915,000.

Code 32 - Health Service Commission
 
I wish to recommend that this House approve a recurrent budget of Shs1,288,000,000 and Shs40 million for development. That is the state of affairs we have, honourable members.

Code 050 - Referral Hospitals 

I wish to recommend to this august House the approval of a recurrent budget of Shs16.2 billion and nothing for development.  

I also wish to recommend under Vote 50, approval of Shs8.72 billion for recurrent expenditure of general hospitals.

I also wish to recommend approval of a recurrent budget of Shs16.61 billion for NGO health units under Vote 50.

Primary Health Care

I wish to recommend to this august House approval of a recurrent budget of Shs63.53 billion and development budget of Shs7.58 billion.

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports 

I wish to recommend to this august House approval of a recurrent budget of Shs53,748,489,000 and a development fund of Shs89,353,691,000.  

Vote 024 - Makerere University 

I wish to recommend to this august House approval of a recurrent budget of Shs28,819,000,000 and a development fund of Shs7,861,362,000.  

Vote 036 - Uganda Management Institute  

I wish to recommend for approval a recurrent budget of Shs400 million and no development fund.  

Vote 040 - Education Service Commission 

I wish to recommend for approval a recurrent budget of Shs1,610,997,000 and a development budget of Shs149,790,000.  

Code 042 - Mbarara University 

I wish to recommend to this august House the approval of recurrent budget of Shs5,799,002,000, and Shs517,100,000 for development expenditure.

Code 044 - ITEK 

I wish to recommend to this august House approval of Shs3,166,000,000 and Shs197,000,000 for recurrent and development expenditure respectively.

Code 046 - Makerere University Business School  

I recommend to this august House approval of a recurrent budget of Shs2,907,000,000 and nothing for development.

Code 050 - District Primary Education  

I recommend to this august House for approval a recurrent budget of Shs226.6 billion and a development fund of Shs53.88 billion.  

District Secondary Education 

I wish to recommend to this House the approval of recurrent budget of Shs 65.98 billion and nothing for development.

District Tertiary Institutions 

I wish to recommend to this august House the approval of Shs13.42 billion and nothing for development.

District Health Training Schools

I wish to recommend to this august House the approval for a recurrent budget of Shs1.89 billion.

Honourable members, I beg to move. I thank you - (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me thank the chairperson and the Committee of Social Services –(Applause)- for that very comprehensive and elaborate report on the key sectors of the economy. Thank you very much.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I concur with you that the chairperson on behalf of the committee has indeed presented a first class report - (Applause). For this House to do justice to this report, there is no way we can discuss it in one evening. I therefore propose that perhaps today we should address Gender and Health and then we find time to discuss Education another day.

The number of issues, which need to be raised –(Interjection)- I am raising a matter of procedure, which has not been ruled on, so there is no need for you to seek clarification. Therefore, Madam Speaker, that is my proposal. Thank you.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, this sector of social services is very wide, and as you can see from this report, it is also very elaborate. Parliament’s sessions this financial year continue to address sectoral issues as presented by the respective committees. 

The general understanding here is that there is no sector or ministry whose budget was granted as was presented. They all had to live within a ceiling. So, we are considering amounts of money, which are largely below what was expected in this session. Since we are working within a tight budget, will it not be procedurally correct to go ahead and grant these monies and then return to our committees to continue to discuss sectoral issues? That way, we would exhaustively handle matters of these sectors in preparation for the next budget of 2003/2004. I beg to be guided on this matter of procedure, Madam Speaker.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thanks a lot, Madam Speaker. I am supplementing what my colleagues have said about the importance of these social sectors. I however want to differ from the first proposer who looked at the watch and said that due to the importance of this report, we should consider only one sector today. 

I am of a view that instead of debating only one issue of this important document, which is catering for a lot of ministries, we would rather start on all issues at once. When a member stands to talk you will find that he has something to say about health, education and sports all at the same time. Let us proceed that way, but instead of debating the report for only one evening, we could even sit tomorrow so that we can exhaustively contribute to this important document. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules say that we are required to sit between 2.00 p.m. and 7.00 p.m. In view of that, you concentrate, take five minutes each and do not repeat yourselves. Do not tackle new areas either. That way we can finish the debate and pass these monies today. 

So, I appeal to members, do not go back to the areas you raised in the general debate, the State of the Nation Address, the Budget Speech or in the committees. And do not repeat what others say. I give everyone five minutes and I start from this side –(Interruption)- is it too long?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is three minutes each then.

MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Now that you have given us only three minutes, I will try to be as brief as possible. I would like to add my voice to those of my colleagues who have already commended the good report of the chairperson. 

Madam Speaker, I start with sports, and since I am the chairman of the Parliamentary sports team, I think it is high time that this country invested in sports, like other countries. We have made a lot of comments, since NRC, but nothing has taken place. 

I remember when we were watching the World Cup earlier this year; we were so interested in cheering the African countries playing. It is as if they were coming from Uganda. I hope those feelings were reflecting the true colours of the nation. 

I want to give an example of how sports can contribute to the economy of this country. Recently I was discussing with colleagues and we noted that most of the players of Nigeria play for European teams They have done a lot of investment in their country, boosting the economy of their country. So, the only encouragement and requisite I am giving to the members is that let us not only lament but also make sure that we support the sports sector. And the Government should now come out openly and invest in sports.  

Let me now move on to the sector of NSSF, in which I am so interested. Madam Speaker, first of all I would like to congratulate the minister. According to this statement, the collection has now increased from Shs 3 billion to Shs 6 billion per month. This is wonderful. One wonders - we know very well that the rate of employment has not increased, it should be the same number of people who have been contributing to this fund that was maintained, so what has caused this increase? 

I would like to say to the minister that something must be done to find out what has caused this increase. If the loss before was involving some swindling of money, something must be done about it. This should not only stop at praising the ministry for the increase and waiting for the report of the consultant. Something should be done now to find out what was causing the loss of Shs 3 billion per month. Of course I hope the minister will take steps to find that out.  

I want to make another comment concerning the Ministry of Labour. We are made to understand, by the Committee on Social Services, that the ministry has removed 422 children from Kampala streets. They say these children are now undergoing rehabilitation at the National Rehabilitation Center, Kampiringisa. 

My concern is, were these figures backed by certain evidence in order for the committee to be convinced of this as the truth? If they are undergoing rehabilitation, what sort of rehabilitation are you referring to? Is it vocational education? We should know whether the ministry has done something very important, and also be assured that these kids were not taken on a trailer and the following day they are going to come back. 

On page seven the committee recommends that Government should re-roof the buildings in six remand homes with safe materials. That is already an indicator of poor standards in these homes. And if the remand homes that are within Kampala cannot be re-roofed, what do we expect to be done to those children who are taken to Kampiringisa? Does that mean that there is nothing being done for them? At the end of the day, what we are going to experience is the same inflow of street children on a different street in the country. I think that something important must be done about this.

Lastly, let me comment on the recommendations of the committee regarding the recurrent and development expenditure. Madam Speaker, with due respect to members of the committee, I do not know if these were your recommendations or you adopted those of the Ministry of Finance. 

If these were your recommendations, I want to be convinced why Vote 050 – Referral Hospitals - should only have recurrent figures and not development. Do you mean that we do not need development in these hospitals? 

Why should Uganda Management Institute have only recurrent and not development expenditure? What I am trying to indicate here is that it seems this was not a recommendation of my colleagues of the Sessional Committee on Social Services. It appears the committee just adopted wholesale, a recommendation from the Ministry of Finance. And that ministry has continued to undermine certain sectors, and to convince you to accept the little they are willing to give. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I start with the Ministry of Health. There was no development fund given to the referral hospitals, or was it given under the ministry? If it is not anywhere, who will do this rehabilitation and who will supervise it? 

We have been talking about Kyambogo University, and there is supposed to be an instrument to establish its autonomy. Kyambogo University has been suffocated by Makerere University because the funding is from there. I ask the minister, when are you bringing this instrument here? 

And you have put a ban on recruitment of science teachers for secondary schools, when are you lifting it? Even with that ban, have you in your own way established the distribution of these teachers in secondary schools? Because in one school you might find there are 18 teachers and in another government-aided school there are only four. How are you going to address that anomaly?

Honourable minister, there is no sports policy in the country. Last financial year I said that the only component of sports in the ministry was the minister, and you told me that the sports policy was before Cabinet. Where is it now, and when are you bringing it here? You are thinking of competing in the World Cup in 2006 without a sports policy! What a contradiction.

I ask the Minister of Education, is the in-service course for Grade III teachers still a necessity? The Grade III teachers who upgraded through the in-service course five years ago are still getting a Grade III teachers’ salary. This is one of the things contributing to strikes in primary schools. And I told you that during the general debate. What are you doing about it?

I have heard of the construction of sub-county senior secondary schools. When is this programme starting? In the last budget you told us that it is in the President’s Manifesto. Who is delaying the President’s Manifesto: is it the Minister of Education or the Minister of Finance? Who is sabotaging our President? You know the President started with four children per family for Universal Primary Education, now they say that it is for all children. 

In the previous years they have been giving UPE funds to private schools. These private schools were decongesting our government-aided schools because we do not have enough classrooms there. Up to today we do not have enough classrooms, and you have removed the UPE funds from those that were assisting us decongest these schools. Who is sabotaging the President’s Manifesto? Should these children be sent away, where will they go?

I ask the Leader of Government Business, who is sabotaging your work? These children do not have anywhere to go; we do not have enough schools! I can give an example of Kamwenge. I have even got children who have come from Tanzania to study here, and in some schools enrolment has increased by 300 -(Interruption)

MR YIGA: There is one, Ngoma Ngime, who is in charge of implementing the manifesto of the President. He could advise us on that.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I thought the Leader of Government Business was the chief implementer, but I have heard of Ngoma Ngime also. In summary, I think that we have to put a lot into this social sector. 

In the health sector, we do not have enough drugs, and the Minister of Finance knows that he does not give out enough money to buy enough drugs for all the health centres. Who is sabotaging the President’s Manifesto? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS RUTH KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for this report. I raise an issue, which needs some more emphasis, and this is the hardship allowance for students. Some of these districts that have been mentioned, including Kalangala, are already geographically disadvantaged. When teachers are not encouraged with the incentive, which they are supposed to be getting, then it is even more difficult to get children into school. That means that Kalangala and Kotido and all these other districts will lag behind even further in education. And we need to remember that these fish-eaters are very clever people. Give them a chance and they will rule this country.

Another point - and this worries me - is wastage of human resources and wastage of money. The failure of the Ministry of Education and Sports to come out with a policy on re-admission of girls who drop out of school due to pregnancy is wastage. Either teachers or fellow students make these girls pregnant. The teacher continues teaching, and the girl is deprived of education!

Remember this child has been invested in from primary one, under UPE, up to primary five. If she drops out because she is pregnant, how much money is that to this country? I will give an example of Kalangala. So far this year we already have 30 girls who have dropped out, and the district has a maximum of 200 students. If 30 girls are sent away, what percentage of students is that? And where are we going as a nation?

Uganda boasts of the fact that we have a very big budget for education and we are on the fast track in the area, according to international ratings. And this is what is happening? We have signed an agreement that we should have education for all; are we going to meet these goals without a policy that considers this wastage? And I will repeat, this is wastage of resources and money. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with the committee that women are harassed, but men are also harassed, and this was a big error of omission by the committee. They should have said, “harassment mostly of male students and male teachers.” That is not my major issue for today, however.

My major issue is that I agree with the committee on the recommendation that Makerere University should come up with a cost per unit per student. That way they will clearly work out how much private students should pay. 

As the Bible says, however, “he who has more, more will be added to him.” The students who go to Makerere are those who come from good primary schools and good secondary schools. These are children of the well-to-do people; the Ministers, Members of Parliament, good businessmen and what have you. The children of the peasants who survive hardship, whose parents even sell themselves to keep the children in school, are the ones who go to poor schools. And when it comes to joining university, they are the ones who end up as private students –(Interruption)

MR GABOI WAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I get clarification from my brother, hon. Nandala Mafabi, Member for Budadiri West because I would like to follow him clearly? What does he mean by “parents selling themselves”? How do they sell themselves?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I will help you. You can sell yourself in the form of offering your labour: You can go somewhere and work from morning till night. That way you are selling yourself for your children to go to school - (Laughter). 

The children of the peasants are the ones who go to Makerere on private sponsorship, while Government is paying for those of the rich who can afford the university fees. Why? Anyway, I agree with the Bible when it says that, “he who has more, more will be added to him”, but our Government should change that, and we should amend the Bible.

What I am trying to say here is that if Government is going to contribute money for 4,000 students, let us get the total value of that money and spread it over all students who go to the university. Whoever qualifies to go to the university meets their minimum requirements anyway. They are all Ugandans and they are all beneficiaries of the taxpayer, so all should benefit.

When that is done, you will find that the cost per private student will go down. If it is Shs 2 million being paid now, it will reduce to Shs 1 million. Let everybody make a contribution no matter who you are. 

This has a lot of benefits. The dropout rate will go down, the rate of parents selling themselves will go down, and the number of people who will qualify will go up. 

These private students have many problems because they come from poor homes. When they finish school, after their parents have sold all the property, he does not even get a job, adding insult to injury. I request the committee to accept the recommendation I am going to put forward.

From now on, universities should allow all students to pay the difference of Government’s contribution. Let me elaborate, Madam Speaker. Give me a few minutes –(an honourable member rose_).
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is winding up.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I am winding up. Of course I will ask honourable members to support me in that noble cause. 

Let me talk about UNEB. UNEB is the centre of forgery. We should take it to court. If it says that it is not the one forging, let it prosecute those with forged certificates. Thank you very much.

MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will go straight away to clarification and inquiry. Oh, and I thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. 

The report of the committee, on page five, talks about the YES programme. When this programme was introduced, youth contributed money to join this team in a hope that they were going to get money. Eventually, they were told that they wanted to use people who are well educated, and these are not very many in the rural areas. I seek clarification from the minister, what changes have been made to this programme to cater for the majority of the uneducated youth in the rural areas?

Page 36 contains comments on UPE. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable Minister of Education about the target. What is the new target for attaining UPE this time? When do we expect to get UPE, because we are trying to get UPE? The target to attain Universal Primary Education was for the year 2003 but we have not attained Universal Primary Education. What is the target for obtaining it? I am sure the minister has understood the question. The question is to the minister. 

Then there is a difference between putting on shoes first and socks later and putting on socks first and shoes later. There are efforts to remove the disparities at tertiary levels - even at primary levels - but we have not addressed the pre-primary education level. 

People in towns get pre-primary education for three years, primary education for seven years, plus coaching, which totals to about 14 years. People in the rural areas are getting about three and a half years only of the primary education cycle. If we do not have a clear policy on pre-primary education to address the rural problem as well, we shall find problems in attaining UPE.

From the enrolments for UPE, it shows that about a third of the Uganda population is in primary schools. Has the Ministry of Education carried out a study to see the impact of AIDS on UPE in relation to the teachers and the pupils? Recently I buried a teacher who died of AIDS. There was no representation even from the previous school where she had been teaching. That shows that there was no care about these teachers who are suffering from HIV/AIDS. 

I would like to request the ministry to get some money from the School Facility Grant (SFG) to renovate some of the old schools. They have old buildings, but they get no money from the ministry. 

What was the reason for removing UPE grants from private schools, were they at fault? Child psychology suggests that you do not give a child the punishment of denying her or him food. So please do not starve these schools in case they have a problem. Education is an expensive thing. Even the oldest institutions like Oxford University, Cambridge University are still fundraising!  

There is nothing mentioned about the Education Standard Agency (ESA), yet the quality of education is very vital. The ministry gave us a handout dated 20 February 2002, but there is no reference about the funding and the status.  Without quality education, poor education is worse than no education.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My first concern is on the issue of entandikwa. I have listened carefully and followed through the report but I have not seen or heard any mention of entandikwa.  What has happened to entandikwa?  What do I go and tell my people? There has not been any Government position or mention about this entandikwa. If entandikwa cannot appear in the ministerial statement, do we still need a Minister of State for Entandikwa? 

I know there have been other interventions like rural micro-finance projects, et cetera. If that has replaced entandikwa, should we not move this Minister of State for Entandikwa from Ministry of Gender to either the Prime Minister’s Office or Finance?

Secondly, about the major achievements, I appreciate, but I think it is high time that the Minister of Education concentrated on the academic standards of our UPE pupils. I feel saddened when I go to my constituency and a child in P.7 can hardly construct a sentence in English. Somebody in P.5 cannot even write his or her name. Having achieved the classrooms, the textbooks, enrolment, now the next step should be for the ministry to move on to the quality of education. I do not know if there is any policy on that.

About the secondment of teachers to private secondary schools, there is no policy about it. I think there is a contradiction, given that in the health sector, Government assists private hospitals. The main argument is, they are lowering costs and they are giving a service, which Government should be giving. Why can’t Government extend a similar intervention to the education sector by seconding teachers to private schools, and maybe the cost of education in private schools could come down.

Lastly, last month I held a seminar in my constituency on the academic standards in my primary schools. Bujenje County used to be the best in the whole of Masindi District as far as education is concerned. As I talk now, Bujenje County is the worst in Masindi District as far as education is concerned. 

One of the main issues raised was the difference in the salaries between head teachers and other teachers. Once the head teacher is not at the school, it is time for both the students and the teachers to relax and not to teach or learn.  I do not know what Government should do to reduce the big difference between the salaries of head teachers and the salaries of the ordinary primary teachers. I know it will contribute towards the improvement of the standards of education. 

There are other issues, which came up, and which I will bring to the attention of the minister, and some really concern the Ministry of Education. Thank you very much.

MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro North, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to so many voices that have thanked the committee for a good job done. And I want to comment on Ministry of Gender. 

I want to comment on children who are being demobilized from the streets. I noted that this is a very good achievement because the children on streets have reduced, but such children need to be backed by a very serious sports programme, because sports somehow divert attention from mischief. And I have seen that the ministry lacks adequate programmes on sports to back these street children.

I want to comment on Gender and add on to what my colleague, hon. Kabakumba, said about the entandikwa scheme.  I have tried without success to help the youth in my constituency to do something to boost economic activities and improve on their incomes. So, we need to be told that this is no longer viable and we can inform them to forget about it.

About health, I am somehow impressed about the disease control programme of the Ministry of Health, particularly the immunization programme.  I want to say that they have done a very good job and we have also done a lot to support their programme, however, there is a lot to be done on disease control. 

Malaria, as highlighted by the committee, is on the increase. In my constituency particularly, the entire Isingiro, we had to look for drugs to assist the people because in the stores of all the centres, we had run short of malaria drugs because of the increase of malaria in our area.  Also, T.B is on the increase.

However, much as we have seen so much improvement in the health sector, I would like to urge the ministry to invest more in disease control. If we invest more in disease control, we shall reduce on the expenditure on the drugs and the cost of running these centres. This could be manifested in paying attention to the child nutrition programme, but I also think the adults need an adult nutrition programme. Most of our people do not know what to eat at the right time. They are drinking and eating food most of the time, which is not nutritious. So, there is also need to extend nutritional programmes to the adults.

Madam Speaker, I have a grievance with the Ministry of Health in failure to intervene in development of health centres. When the ministry releases money for developing a health centre in place “X”, it means they have identified the need for the existence of that centre.  But more often than not, the district councils divert this money from those health centres and develop others. There is need really, to intervene in this area so that when money is released for health centre “Y”, it develops health centre “Y”; it is not diverted to “Z”, which was not originally on the programme.

I would also like to say that we have a problem in Nyamuyanja Health Centre, which is for the entire Isingiro County. There is construction of a theatre without a ward; there is no facility for an ambulance. So, really, if you have somebody operated in the theatre and there is no ward, how do you run the centre? We have informed you, honourable Minister, but up to now we have not had remedial action – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: I am winding up, Madam Speaker.  I have very few comments on the Ministry of Education. 

First of all, I would like to inform the Minister of Education that we could save more money on UPE, because most of the head teachers are inflating the number of children they have. This money could go to other programmes. 

Secondly, I am not satisfied with the amount of money allocated to Makerere University Business School. Makerere University Business School has very good programmes, and you know one of the problems we have had in Uganda is lack of managers. Since it is a new institution, how do you facilitate a recurrent budget and you do not allocate them a development budget programme? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI (Kiboga West, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have some few comments to make on this. The first one is on UNEB. I have seen in the report that UNEB intends to punish those children caught cheating and the schools will lose their centre numbers. I want to say that this is not enough. 

The law of 1983, which establishes UNEB, puts the whole responsibility of examinations and administration on UNEB. Therefore, if exams leak, they leak from UNEB. UNEB must be the primary unit to be punished! All these other interventions are subsidiary; they are just looking at the output. We must punish the input signal. 

If we continue to say there are examination leakages or schools failed to get their results, the UNEB guys will continue getting their money and they are not bothered. In fact, they do it double, because they sell exams and when they sell, they earn. When there is a problem, nobody touches them and they get their salaries. So really, honourable Minister, UNEB must be punished. If every time examinations leak the management is dismissed, I can assure you, the following year they will not leak.

Another issue is on this primary school classroom construction. There is a note here in the report that Government should punish those people who construct classrooms wrongly. But the problem is with the policy. 

What is this School Classroom Grant (SFG) going to do in the district, construct classrooms or make the natives wealthy? You must be clear on that, because when you say it is PAF, that way it almost goes there to fight poverty in the villages.  

If you want a classroom, what you should do is get a standard specification of a classroom, get a good contractor, get a good engineer to supervise and you will get a classroom. As to whether the people of that village become wealthy is secondary. What you want is a classroom. Once you do not get your objectives right, it becomes a problem.

Lastly, on sexual harassment at the university, I am sure some of you have gone to the nearest university, Makerere University. The way the female students dress in the university is incredible.  Before we say they are sexually harassed, we should sit here and ask the minister to prescribe a dress code for the female students at the university so that we know whoever does not obey that dress code – (Interjections) – Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

REV. KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru South, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I want to first of all thank the chairperson of the committee and also to comment on the Ministry of Gender, particularly on the issue of street children. 

There is a crisis when it comes to the youth and the children using drugs. I do not know what happens in the rehabilitation centres. I do not know whether they are only dealing with physically removing the children off the streets and taking them to school without dealing with the drug problem. This is a widespread problem in all urban centres and also in schools.  

I have read in the papers that in high schools there is a high use of drugs, including cocaine. I do not know what policy the Ministry of Education or the Ministry of Gender will come up with about the use of drugs in schools. We need to really put emphasis when it comes to the youth, even in small areas.  

The taking of these children to Kampiringisa was a very good thing, but maybe it is sweeping the problem under the carpet. Just recently, I was at Kalwere and there are children there who know me because I have been with them. They were saying, “We cannot go to the market because we may be arrested.” They are still in the communities and they are not going to school. I think we need good co-operation between the law enforcement officers and the secretaries for the children in these areas.

The use of drugs is encouraging even the parents to behead their children. There was a report from Fort Portal that the parents who beheaded their children were under the influence of drugs, yet people are growing marijuana, mairungi and so forth, and these people are not brought to book.

What Government has done to children in the north who were being kidnapped is good, but what do you do with traumatised children? You may now have in the north a generation, which has not been healed as far as the trauma is concerned. What do you do with children below the age of six who have gone through this trauma until they are eight years old? You may give them food, but psychologically nothing has happened. 

There are reports that some of the people who are beheading children have themselves gone through some trauma, which has never been healed. I think we need to look at this issue.  

As for UPE, there are children in my constituency who are sitting at home. They are not going to school because they were chased away because they are not able to pay money for lunch, and they cannot provide scholastic materials like exercise books, which cost almost nothing but some of the parents are so poor they cannot afford. I do not know how far the ministry is going to deal with such situations.

As I wind up, I have heard about these tenders and the poor workmanship in the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education and Local Government. What is Government policy on giving these tenders? If this money is being misused and the culprits are not apprehended, the issue will just continue. I wonder what policy is in place to really bring these people who render poor services to book?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbale County, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, I want to begin on page 38 of this report where the committee observes that there is lack of midday meals for UPE children. I would like to think that this is a gross fundamental abuse of human rights. If these children were empowered, they would have taken this Government and their parents to court. You are quite aware that in the Constitution, it is the right of the children to go to school and the parents and the Government have a duty to provide for this. Now, if children can go to school without lunch, I think this is a serious matter. 

Some time in 2000, I was the chairman for education in Mukono District.  I tried to make an ordinance enforcing parents to make sure children have lunch. I was told, “you will become a saboteur”.  There is no national policy on this matter. 

I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Education to have a national guideline as to how these children should be treated at school. I think these premature marriages and pregnancies are partially a result of children going without lunch. It is more serious if there is no money at all. There is no need to increase the number of children from four to everybody when the quality is still poor. We would rather remain on four and provide lunch for the few who are in classes.

I want to go to secondary schools. I would like to appeal to the ministries of Education, Finance and to my colleagues in Parliament that it would not be counter for us to pass a budget where we cannot have grant aiding of secondary schools. This is quite contradicting! 

If you read the President’s address on the state of the nation, he did state clearly that by 2003, they are targeting to ensure that all sub-counties get government-aided secondary schools. It is quite appalling and disheartening that practically, on the ground we are saying we cannot provide grant-aid to secondary schools. 

I represent a constituency that has one Government secondary school with four sub-counties. Whenever I go back home, that is the question. I even fear to go back to say, “I was among those who passed a budget without grant-aiding secondary schools.” Therefore, can I appeal to fellow Members of Parliament to ensure that this matter is properly addressed?

I would like to call upon the Minister of Education to define the issue of decentralising secondary schools. This has been there for several years and it is not clear.  And we still say secondary education is decentralised, but the authority is not very clear. So, the minister should be able to mention something about that. 

I would like to wind up by emphasising the issue of grant-aiding secondary schools. Thank you very much.

DR ARAPKISSA YEKKO (Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to make three comments on health and on education.

On page 20 and 33, the legal status of health staff undergoing training is mentioned. In particular here I want to talk about anaesthetic assistants. The guideline for training anaesthetic assistants is that you ought to be a clinical officer or just a registered midwife or a registered nurse. 

I have a case in Kapchorwa where someone trained as an anaesthetic assistant in Lacor Hospital. The trainer was, I think, Dr Bukirwa or something like that. But this man who trained was an enrolled nurse. When he finished the course and wanted to be recruited as an anaesthetic assistant, he was rejected. And currently, I am aware that there are now anaesthetic assistants who are enrolled nurses or midwives undergoing training in some parts of Uganda. 

The committee even notes that Public Service and the Health Service Commission do not recognise the various cadres, including enrolled people, going for training as anaesthetic assistants.  So, I think there is a contradiction here and a big problem might arise. Probably, we are wasting time and resources training these current enrolled people as anaesthetic assistants while we have different regulations that they must be either clinical officers or at registered level.  So, that should be cleared before the training continues further.

Secondly, about the National Medical Stores, the committee recommends that Government should reconsider its position about privatising National Medical Stores.  The experience I have had with National Medical Stores, which still continues up to now, is that when you order for drugs and sundries from them, you may find that about 50 per cent are out of stock. So, giving monopoly to National Medical Stores may bring more problems, unless it can improve on its efficiency and effectiveness as of now. But left alone as it is, it is not efficient and not effective.
  
The third point is about aiding a secondary school per sub-county. Well, I just want to emphasise what other members have said by saying that in my constituency, Kween County, there is only one sub-county with one secondary school and yet there are five sub-counties. So, I think the Minister of Finance should come out very clearly with what it wants to do, having even rejected a proposal by the committee of the one billion shillings, which was to assist about 90 schools. In view of the fact that we are getting UPE graduates next year, something must be done; otherwise there will be frustration on that project of UPE.  Thank you very much.

MR ROGERS MAATE (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will try to be as brief as possible. My first point is about Makerere University. 

My major concern here is whether the chairperson of the committee and the members did find out why Makerere University is continuing to enrol more students when it cannot accommodate them in the lecture theatres available. 

When you go to Makerere University, it is no longer the university we knew in our days. A lecture theatre accommodates over 1,000 students, and I wonder how these people are getting value for the money that Makerere is charging! Is there a possibility of providing these services through correspondence so that there can be a better way of getting value out of this university?  

The second issue is about health. We are very concerned about the cost of drugs in this country. Though our priority is primary health care and prevention, there is still need to put attention on medical care as well. But my problem is that there are certain drugs, which should have been categorised under pharmaceuticals so that they are also considered for not paying taxes because the majority of the patients use them. This is the class of antibiotics.  

When you look at the category of drugs where taxes are paid, especially import tax, you find that antibiotics are charged seven per cent and there is an addition of four per cent tax related with COMESA. Is it not possible that these antibiotics can be moved to another category of pharmaceuticals so that this import tax is dropped? This would be a better area for improving our budget management than reducing tax on beer. We should have reduced tax on these antibiotics rather than reduce on beer. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ALASO ASIANUT (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee, but I have three clarifications to seek. One is from Ministry of Gender, and that has to do with a programme for enhancing adolescent reproductive life. 

The second phase of this programme was piloted in Soroti District, where I come from, and we were assured that the programme was going to last for some five years, and immediately we were given an expansion to cover six more sub-counties. The programme, I think, was phased out - maybe not in the whole country, but specifically in Soroti and in two or three other districts. 

Now, I am wondering what the point is in doing such intense mobilization before you even give the people what you promised them. You get out of the district without notice, without any explanation. And what is the sustainability of this programme if you are just going to come into the district, start off this one morning and hardly three months or one year down, you are out of the district?  What is the future? How do the district leaders explain to the masses that you asked them to mobilize?

Secondly, I would like to ask the Minister for Education to offer very specific guidance to the districts that suffered during the period from 1986 to 1990, which were turned into barracks. For instance, in Soroti District the furniture was destroyed, the classrooms were destroyed and the compound was dug up with trenches. 

The other category of schools is very old - from the junior type of programme or junior kind of education those old days - and now the walls are really cracked. You can not seem to know whether the children will stay in for the next three days without walls falling on them. 

I am asking the Minister for Education to offer specific guidance, because it looks like there is no room for manoeuvre in the guidelines for completing grant-aided schools that are given to the districts. These schools are already considered to be complete and, therefore, not demanding specific attention. It would be good if some guidance were offered.  

Lastly, Soroti District is one of those that was attacked by tsetse flies and many people suffered from sleeping sickness, particularly in the counties of Kasilo and Serere.  The trouble we have had is that, in the course of trying to mobilize the masses against the spread of the tsetse flies, we do not seem to have specific guidance.  

When you go to Ministry of Health, you are sent somewhere to some building around Wandegeya Vector Control, and from there they will also tell you to maybe go to Ministry of Agriculture. From Ministry of Agriculture, they will also tell you there is a project somewhere in Tororo. 

I am wondering whether such a big issue should be left floating somewhere! Where do you go to get specific guidance? I would rather request that the management of sleeping sickness be streamlined so that the masses are guided and mobilized accordingly.  Thank you very much.

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just have a few clarifications that I want to seek from the minister and the committee.  

On page 41, where we have the policy of a bursary scheme at the sub-county, we are made to understand that the committee and the Ministry of Education and Sports are yet to meet and discuss this very serious intervention. 

In my view, this intervention is so serious and badly needed to the extent that we may need to know the timeframe. When you talk of when the report is ready, it reminds me of statements like “plans are underway”. You find that 10 years down the road, nothing has been done. So, can we benefit from a timeframe on this one?  

Secondly, on the same page, this partial lift of the ban is mentioned. May I know why it was partial? Does that mean that there are more students who may need more teachers in science and English or otherwise? This is a serious issue. So many teachers are coming out of colleges and they have no jobs. So I think we need a better explanation.  

Thirdly, you find that we have schools that are benefiting from UPE, some of them are boarding schools and others are day schools. May I know from the minister how they harmonized the contributions of some of these schools, because some of them are first class schools? 

You find a school like Kabojja with very rich parents who can afford to pay, and then you find a rural school with parents who cannot pay. So, how do they harmonize the contribution of UPE funds in order to assist the entire population? We may need some affirmative action for some of the schools, which are in need.

Fourthly, the Islamic Development Bank loan mentioned on page 42 was brought to Parliament here and we did express support for it. So, may I know what happened, because we actually knew that we were going to get the 14 polytechnics, which are supposed to answer the question of the UPE graduates, since this is a better outlet for some of them? So, what happens since it is not provided for in this year.  

On the School of Journalism, we have liberalized the media, is it not only logical that we get training institutions in order to create capacity for people who work in the media?  You find people with no qualifications or training dominating the media. They end up really embarrassing some people on some programmes, and I think it is in our interest to have these schools. Some of them may not make it to Makerere for Mass Communication, and this serves as a fallback position. So why are we closing the school when the demand for that service is even increasing? I would like to be helped with that contradiction.

The Ministry of Education and Sports, like the chairperson rightly put it, has got commissioners for everything else, how about sports? This is a serious contradiction. May I know why? If you are going to develop sports right from lower school in our education system, it suffices to have a commissioner to follow the sports programmes across the board. So why don’t we have a commissioner in charge of sports?

Lastly, when we talk about sexual harassment in the university, I think let us just talk about immorality in the education system. It is not any better for a primary teacher to defile a pupil, and it is not even good for a lecturer to do likewise.  So, when addressing this problem, let us handle it as a vice that needs to be cleared out of the education system. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

PROF. BANZANA KABWEGYERE (Igara West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the recommendations that have been made. Some of them are recommendations for improvement, but there are recommendations that I have problems with, for example, a recommendation that those primary school children should get a meal.  Can that be achieved within this budget? It is recommended here! 

If you take seven million children, you give them a meal a day and calculate for the whole year, I am most sure that the budget that we are about to approve will fall short. Let me make a calculation; it will be a trillion, which is much more than the money we are approving for the whole ministry! The question is, are we really telling the country that we are giving them free education and food for the children? Are we really serious, can we do that? 

These are some of the recommendations we throw to the population and excite their aspirations and then we fail.  That is a disaster for the society! Why should a parent who has produced a child not feed that child when the child has now been allowed to go to school?  Why should it be a burden now that Government should take it on and feed the children in school?  

The second point I wanted to raise here is the question of leakage of exams  Surely, it is true UNEB should be really hit hard, but let us also tell our people.  There are parents who walk around with monies looking for exam papers. There are teachers who want to appear to be doing too well in their schools. So, the issue is much more complicated. UNEB would not be selling these exams if they were not getting a market of parents. So, there is a big disaster and it is not only for UPE; it is also in universities.  We are aware that some people hire people to write dissertations for them. This is happening in Makerere. So, the problem is much larger, and it must be addressed radically.  

The next point I wanted to raise is on a recommendation to the Ministry of Health. Why don’t we start thinking about health insurance? Really, if you are going to address the health of our people, they must have access to health insurance. And this can be realized through a programme, even when the individual taxpayer contributes. Let us think about it. 

I wrote a paper on it and I gave it to the Minister of Finance at some point, when Mr Rukikaire was still the Minister of Planning. There is a possibility of helping our people through a health insurance scheme, but we do not seem to do that.  

Another point is on the universities; how are we going to address the health problems when Mbarara University can only produce 60 doctors and Makerere University can only produce 100? Surely, we must think in terms of mass production of doctors. The unit cost must be addressed. Let us go and study how Cuba did it. Cuba has thousands and thousands of doctors, are they any richer than ourselves or is it because we are lacking vision?

The last point is the quota for university entrants. It is still coming, but let me warn them seriously, you do not address inequality by focusing on entrants to the university. For heaven’s sake, this is imaginative! Start with primary; let everybody have a chance of equal opportunity. That is why this Committee on Equal Opportunities is important.  Equal opportunity must start from day one when the children come on earth. But if you wait for them to first pass exams and then you select a few of them to go to university, you are addressing smoke; you do not know where the fire is.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope the fire does not burn the Minister of Education - (Laughter).

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative for Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to commend the Ministry of Gender for taking away the street children and rehabilitating them. And I want to find out from the minister when she will remove street children from other urban areas.

With regard to the YES programme, among the people who were supposed to benefit from the YES programme were the disabled youth. And as it is reported, they never got the money, thereby, adding more insult to their desperation. When will Government provide money for these people who have been trained?  

On the question of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, I have always wondered why they get so little money. The answer is found on page 9 - because they have not produced a sector strategic investment plan. What a shame! When will they actually produce this plan so that they can get more money?  

I see on page 10 that disability is again marginalized. It has got a few sentences, and what the committee missed out here is that we disabled people need a policy on disability. Please, please give us a policy on disability. 

I can see that the minister has set up a consulting firm to investigate and carry out an audit on NSSF.  The question is; how much is this audit going to cost in terms of fees? Who is doing it and what are the benefits expected from this famous audit?  

I see on page 16 that Government is not getting money from donors, I was wondering whether the effects we are getting out of this money are not arising from the utterances that were made once upon a time by one of the ministers. What measures is Government taking to repair our relationships so that we can continue to get these donor funds?  

With regard to drugs, we have said here before that Government needs to reconsider the policy of abolition of cost sharing. When you look at this report, it is hitting Mulago Hospital and it is hitting other institutions. For heaven’s sake, review this policy of abolition of cost sharing so that at least some medicines can be found in some health centres and these institutions should be motivated to provide efficient service.  You cannot promise something you do not have. You do not have the capacity to provide medicines free of charge and pay people properly. For heaven’s sake, reconsider the abolition of the cost-sharing scheme!  

On the question of privatising National Medical Stores, we want to be assured that when this is done, it will not increase the cost of medicines.  

Madam Speaker, I get intrigued by the pride with which the ministry reports the increase of enrolment of UPE children. What they are talking about is input and not output. The Ministry of Education should also consider the outcome, because really, what remains is to look at the impact.  People are complaining about the quality of UPE.  When will the Minister of Education tell this House what the impact is as far as UPE is concerned?  

Finally, the department of sports; if Government is serious about sports, they should create a viable sports department rather than create a department of sports which will never ever develop sports in this country. I think hon. Oryem Okello has been given byoya byanswa in as far as the Department of Sports is concerned. For heaven’s sake, when will Government do anything tangible about sports?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR IBRAHIM KADDUNABBI (Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson and everybody who did a good job. 

About NSSF, I would like to know from the minister why it has taken the Government all this time to liberalise the pension sector. I think everybody now is aware of the difference between liberalising the pension sector, which Government is doing, and privatising NSSF. That is very good for the insurance and other fund operators who can come up and compete with NSSF, and you would get the best results. 

The committee recommended that Government facilitate or put in more money in NSSF, but I do not agree with that. What I think Government should do is to speed up the liberalisation in order to solve the problem. I want the Government to hand over NSSF to its rightful owners, and these are the employers and the workers. They can constitute a board and they will do a better job, 

About UPE, I want to know what the minister has done to include religious education teachers on the payroll of Government. We have been told that we have 7.2 million pupils, and these pupils will become a menace if they come out without any grain of religion.

I would like to know from the Minister of Education how far Government has gone with the universal secondary education, which was proposed. 

Lastly, I would like the minister to tell us what his ministry is doing about some Government schools, which have policies that are against the faith of some of the students. We have so many cases in point, but it will be enough to mention Gayaza High School serving pork that is against the faith of Moslems I thank you, Madam speaker.

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA (Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to contribute on some of the points, which have been brought out in this report. I am very privileged to have been one of the Members of Parliament who went and visited the teachers when they were on strike. I think that is why I am so grateful that you have recognised me, and this will help the ministers concerned to take note.  

First of all, when the strike began, I read it in the papers. I personally moved to my constituency, of seven sub-counties, and I found out that there were a lot of problems Incidentally, some say it was about a pay rise for the head teachers, but it was not a pay rise of the head teachers alone. There are many points that have been enumerated and many are already here in the report. 

There is marginalisation; they think they do not belong to this society. They talked of lunch, they talked of burial facilities; that when they die they have to contribute within themselves. In the Army, Police and other forces, even in Parliament, there is a service that caters for burial for the lost comrades and workers; teachers do not have that one. 

When they upgrade, they are not promoted, they stay at the same level. Somebody who has been a Grade III teacher goes up to the university but he is not considered for promotion and he stays at the same level. They have been telling me that most of them, mainly Grade III’s, are at U7 for now 20 to 30 years: you teach people, they go and come back and find you at the same level! 

I would like to talk about what the committee reported. The committee was disappointed to note that the very issues raised by teachers have never come up to be considered by Government. This means every time the committee reports, no action is taken. When it comes back to the field, there is arrogance by education officers and some Government officials. 

For example, in the neighbouring district, how can an RDC threaten to arrest teachers on strike and beat them up? In a certain sub-county neighbouring mine from a different district, teachers were bundled up and beaten and taken to the Police!  So, these things annoyed the teachers. In short, Government should come in very seriously and address this situation.  

About this strike, they told me it is a mock for the Minister of Education. I do not support the strike, but they assured me and they sent me to say that in third term - according to your circular dated 15th, you promised to handle the issue as soon as possible. They were asking, “as soon as possible is when?” How soon will it be? Therefore, hon. Minister of Education, I want you to give us - (Interruption)

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you Captain for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague here that I did the same in Fort Portal Municipality. I met all the teachers working in primary schools. Most of them did not go on strike, but they were disgruntled and they were saying that during the third term, if serious action is not taken, they are likely to go on strike. Thank you, my colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up.

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA: Let me summarize. Hon. Basaliza Araali, you have taken some of my time.  Now, honourable Minister, I thought I should tell you what is happening because I am not prepared to go back to convince these teachers. So, you should see to it that by third term something has been done.  

The disparity between the teachers and headmasters should be addressed. Education officers and local government officials plus other leaders should try to recognise teachers. They were so annoyed and they gave an analogy of a wife leaving her husbands home and going to stay with her parents. You do not go to look for her after a week! They said maybe Government does not recognise them. But they are so happy with me and they said –(Laughter)- yes, for sure they were, and they said by the time I go back, I should be able to report what has happened. Incidentally, Mr Minister, I have a report for you and the committee, and all those details will be involved. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AMON-REEVES KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am adding my voice vehemently, to those who have thanked the chairperson and the committee for a very good and comprehensive report. I believe there was good co-operation with the ministers and their technical staff however I have one question for the minister. 

I am aware of the moral decadence among our teachers who have been defiling children and eloping with others, but now I do not know which law some of these communities in the district are using to make mass weddings. There are mass weddings of teachers that have been arranged in some areas, and unless a teacher is married, he cannot teach in certain schools. I do not know whether the minister has an answer to that, because you are obliging young men and women to get married. 

The second question still goes to the Minister of Education. We have had reports about shoddy work being done. It is because much of the supervision and monitoring has been left at the district and sometimes at the sub-county. I pray that the ministry can have a very strong team that penetrates even beyond the district and goes to these projects. They should be monitored when they are halfway, instead of leaving the whole building to be completed and it collapses after one month. What do you think about having a monitoring team visiting a district to see the work before the conclusion of these pieces of work? 

There is a very big problem. Sometimes you may be very successful while you are doing something and thereafter relax. In other words, you can fail to manage success. This is what is about to happen in UPE. Those who started with P.1 could be in P.4 now, but those who were in P.4 have already graduated. Now, if somebody can fail to pay school fees for primary school, what do you expect in secondary school? 

As one member said, the President’s Manifesto states that there will be universal secondary school education, but it seems the report is quiet about it. There seems to be no hope of it, and yet it is in the President’s Manifesto! I think some of these ideas in the President’s Manifesto, which was confirmed and approved by Ugandans who gave him the votes, should be put in these programmes. To ignore it -(Interruption)  
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you asked me for permission because you wanted to ask the Prime Minister a question. So far you have not done so.

MR KABAREEBE: I am very sorry; it is because I knew I would not be given another opportunity. I wanted to know, although it falls on gender, but since the Prime Minister is here and we are friendly to Nigeria, what is Uganda’s position on this lady who is going to be stoned, because she has got a child? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you arrived late. 

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I was ambivalent when this matter was being discussed, because I am terribly against policies of stoning people and disparity of treatment between different sexes. It is a violation of Article 33 of our Constitution, which accords parity of treatment between men and women. These are now global matters. They are no longer local issues. That is one side of the coin.  

The other side of the coin was the issue of how this would affect our relationship with Nigeria, which is a sovereign country and where Sharia law operates. I have talked to the honourable member who moved the motion and I think she should go to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, raise the matter there and find out whether they have protested. 

They may have, in fact, already taken action, because there are many issues, which we raise with our sister-countries without causing undue embarrassment. I think that is the best approach. I think she appeared to agree to find information by liasing with Foreign Affairs, and of course by interacting with other groups, which are concerned.

Another diplomatic approach is that there are many NGOs, which are also concerned. They can also express their concern without making it directly a state affair. But I think it is a very major matter, which the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should take up without necessarily passing a resolution here. At the end of the day, even when you pass a resolution, it will be the Executive to take up the matter.  

It may well be that you are raising a matter, which has been taken up. It is a pity that there is no person from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to give us any clue as to what is happening, and yet every ministry must be represented in this Chamber -(Applause). 

So, I am disappointed on that score. But naturally, I take charge as you know. I am the first Premier who is here by 2.00 p.m. and leaves here at 7.00 p.m., except when there are other pressing matters. 

I would advise that this advice be taken up and that she sees the Minister of Foreign Affairs. He is normally in the departure lounge. If he is not there, there must be another minister to take charge. That is my approach. But I am also very concerned about stoning to death. It is very, very brutal.  

Finally, I do not want Parliament to be divided between Christians and Moslems I have been also talking to people who are Moslems and they are a bit annoyed. We must avoid that divide, because I am always an integrator; I am an embracer. So, you can see, the matter is very complicated. I have talked to a number of Moslems, including some who are lawyers. They are bitter; they are saying, “You Christians, you have to impose your own laws and approaches.” 

The issue is extremely intricate. I would advise that we handle it diplomatically through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and I am willing to intervene if necessary. But I normally want ministries to run their affairs until there is a problem, and then it is referred to me. Otherwise, I will be unduly taxed. I thank you.

MR MOSES KIZIGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have three clarifications that I am seeking from the Minister of Education and Sports. First of all, I read from the report with keen interest on page 43, the last bullet under tertiary education, that there is a decision to have additional core PTCs and TDMS co-ordinating centres. 

My concern is that on several occasions I have raised the issue of the largest TDMS co-ordinating centre in the country, Balawoli co-ordinating centre with 73 schools, and yet it was programmed to cover only 20 schools. I wonder whether another co-ordinating centre is going to be opened up to accommodate some of the 73 schools such that the CCT in that co-ordinating centre can at least have some breathing space, and the children have quality education as designed by the ministry.

Secondly, FUFA and its relationship with FIFA and the ministry: Last year in December, I was disappointed when, together with the Minister responsible for Sports, we witnessed the manipulation of the FUFA elections. To the disappointment of Ugandans, elections were manipulated, an executive was returned and the minister was present! I remember talking to him and he said, “let us play it down; it will work out itself.”  

Some delegates have even petitioned one of the courts, but now FUFA executives are going to the old tricks of banning members, which has happened in this country before. I do not know whether the minister has found time to look into the records to see the sort of struggle his colleague, hon. Mushega had with FUFA until some sanity was returned to football management in this country. 

Of recent, we have even read in the press about encounters between the executive and the technocrats concerning the management of affairs in the National Council of Sports. I am really concerned about this as a sportsman and a former FUFA treasurer. A lot has been done in this country, and in the mid ‘90s, Ugandans thought some sanity had been returned. But where are we going to end up? 

Lastly, on a very serious note, the great Lumumba Hall; what is going to happen to this great institution, which at one time had the highest concentration of intellectual manpower in Africa, South of the Sahara? - (Laughter) Are we going to look at the great Lumumba Hall collapse as if the Ministry of Finance is not seeing? Is it a conspiracy by Mitchellites to destroy Lumumba once and for all? I appeal to the Government that something should be done to save this great historical hall of residence, which has seen so many Ugandans pass through it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I think we all agree that the committee has given us a very firm foundation to continue to dialogue with the officials concerned with all these sectors. So, I would like to propose that the contributions end here, the ministers respond and we proceed.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Capt. Mike Mukula): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Ministry of Health, I thank the chairperson and the members of the committee for doing a very good job. The interface we have had with the committee has given us the fruits, in that the recommendations that have been drawn and submitted to the plenary have been quite elaborate. I think they will go a long way in addressing the issues in the health sector.

The Ministry of Health believes that through the Health Sector Strategic Plan, a healthy mind and a healthy body will give us a healthy nation. It is against this, and the team in the Ministry of Health, which believes in effective delivery of services to the nation and teamwork, that I would like to respond very briefly to the seven or eight Members of Parliament who raised issues relating to health.  

I will start with my colleague, hon. Rwamirama from Isingiro, who raised the issue of disease control and malaria, and more so in Muyanja. I would like to first thank the honourable member for the reception he accorded us when we visited the clinic. He raised the issues on disease control, malaria and drugs, particularly on TB.  

The Ministry of Health, as has already been elaborated in the document, has a well thought out strategy called “Roll Back Malaria”. It is the first of this kind in the entire African continent and possibly at the global level.  

The Roll Back Malaria strategy, which was launched by his Excellency the President on 17 June this year at the International Conference Centre, and I am very sure Members of Parliament attended, is a horizontal programme. For example, in Kumi where we went last week to roll this strategy, we discovered that at the grassroots level, no family has suffered loss of life from malaria in the entire district where this strategy has been launched. They were able to recover in the first 24 hours and the others recovered within the first 48 hours. 

We also noted that there were few referral cases to either the Health Centre II or III. This is a major achievement for us, because infant mortality and mobility at the national level is going to be tackled using this strategy. Of the total index of people who suffer from various ailments, malaria contributes between 40 to 60 per cent. We are starting with 10 districts, but the intention of Government is to cover all the 56 districts in the country. 

On the tuberculosis drugs, we have what we call the Directly Observed Treatment Short Course (DOTS) programme. And with the Global Fund on HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis, the committee has got the support at that global level. In this financial year, US$52 million has been incorporated in our budget. As soon as we get it from the Global Fund, where one of our colleagues, Dr Kiyonga sits, we believe that this will be able to help us in the management of HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis.  So, enough drugs will be made available in this direction.

On child nutrition, we have an on-going programme funded by World Bank. The Government of Uganda took a loan of US$48 million, and this component is now being applied initially in a number of districts. The first programmes are already being operationalised and we believe that this is helping our country on the ground.  

But taking into account the areas that you raised, particularly on the outpatients’ ward, the problem emerged last year. Mbarara District, which had been allocated resources, I think received the funds towards the end of the financial year. When the resources were allocated, it was found that in keeping with the budgetary and accounting provisions, these funds were returned to the centre. But I am happy to say that Shs181 million has been taken back to the district of Mbarara, and we believe that this will help us in addressing the issues you raised.

Rev. Dr Sempangi raised the issue of construction and what policy we have on the ground. The Ministry of Health, together with the education sector, is addressing the quality and standards of the buildings we are constructing. The health sector’s strategic plan is making sure that within the radius of about 5km, there is a Health Centre II so that we are able to treat our people. 

The policy is being drawn, and it is focused on a forensic approach to ensure that quality of buildings meets the standards and the vision and mission of the Health Sector Strategic Plan.  So, I would like to say very clearly that this is being addressed. But of course, the health sector strategic plan is being implemented with the decentralised programme, but we at the ministry continue to oversee the programme.

Dr Yeko raised the issue of the National Medical Stores and talked about the cost of drugs. Quality, efficiency and effectiveness were of serious concern to him, particularly as a medical officer. We have the Joint Clinical Stores, which are being managed by a number of other organisations, so that if you do not get drugs in the National Medical Stores, you can be able to fall back to the Joint Clinical Stores and still get the same type of drugs. The bottom line is that the Ministry of Health has developed efficiency within the sector, and recruitment has taken place within the National Medical Stores. We now have an effective team on the ground.

Hon. Matte talked about drugs. I would like to say very briefly that there are zero tariffs on the import of drugs. Therefore, the seven or four per cent on antibiotics is a matter that we can be able to continue to discuss with the Ministry of Health. 

Hon. Alaso Asianut, Member of Parliament for Soroti District, raised the issue of the tsetse flies. The Ministry of Health has a multi-sectoral approach, and this encompasses the Ministry of Agriculture but the responsibility we have in the Ministry of Health is focused on the clinical aspect; the vector is left to Agriculture. But the area you talked about is being addressed with the support from the European Union. We have 4.7 million Euros and this financial year, a bit of money has been allocated to this sector. Dr Maiso is now responsible for this sector. We will now be able to have an integrated approach. And we will be inviting Members of Parliament who have got this endemic problem in their districts, on a very integrated and well-designed approach on controlling the tsetse flies.

Prof. Kabwegyere raised the issue of health insurance. Yes, under the Ministry of Health we carried out a very intensive study using both Makerere University Medical School and also Harvard University and Oxford. But the brief we have is that, we are developing this programme and it will mainly cover those who are in the formal sector. When a questionnaire was passed here in Parliament sometime back, most members rejected this health insurance, but in the ministry we are bringing it on board.

He talked about gaining the critical mass, training a number of doctors. This has got to be backed by resources. We do not just recruit; we must make sure that we allocate enough resources to train doctors and ensure that the output from the secondary schools fit in the institutions you have talked about, so that we can bring out more and more doctors.

Another issue was raised by hon. Mwandha on the forensic audit, which I have already answered. We have talked about abolition of cost sharing, and I would like to remind the House that a study was carried out by Prof. Turyamuhika. The study showed that out of the entire population, only 13 percent could afford this fee. The other 87 percent were left to fend for themselves and cater for their own well-being. No wonder, when the President made this pronouncement last year, the surge in the demand for health services was overwhelming. This shows you that a number of our people were being left to die at home, and this is something that we need to concentrate on. 

We will continue to improve the services, but I would also like to remind the House that most hospitals at the referral and district level can now charge a fee and share the cost with the patients. It does not mean that the whole cost sharing scheme has been totally removed. There is still some sort of accommodation for it in the health service delivery system.  

I would like to inform the House that the Ministry of Health has been able to put up a comprehensive strategy in addressing the problem in Gulu, Pader and Kitgum. This is because of the current emergency problems we have had in the area. What we have done now is that in the last two to three weeks, the ministry has been able to mobilise US $1.1 million to serve our people in these three disturbed districts. 

We have enough drugs now, and the Medical District Director of Health Services in Gulu has been able to report that he now has enough drugs to contain the situation. We also have enough tents, portable toilets and so many other things needed in treating the people.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I thank you and the chairperson for the position that has been placed before the House. I seek your support in the budget allocation that has been given to us. I thank you once again.

THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me, on behalf of my ministry, to thank the chairperson of the Social Services Committee, the entire committee and the House for the support they have given to my ministry. Through the effort of the Members of Parliament, the Ministry of Finance was able to increase our budget by nearly Shs 500 million. I think that was very commendable, and in two months’ time our Social Development Sector Strategic Investment Plan is going to be out. I hope that when the plan comes out, we will still get a lot of support from Parliament because we believe they are our first allies.

Hon. Bakkabulindi’s interest was on the street children. He wanted to know what programmes we have in place for the street children we removed from Kampala streets. Our report shows that we removed over 400 street children to Kampiringisa. Allow me to give you the categories of the children we had on the streets. 

We had five categories of children on the streets: The first category of children was that of the real destitute children who were possibly orphaned and were on the streets because they had nowhere else to go. 

The second group of street children were there because they were being funded by other people and kept on the streets not for the interest of the children but for the people who wanted to keep them there. Some of these people were supporting them by night and pouring them out onto the streets during the day. Others were brought by their parents and then returned home at the end of the day. Others were organised groups, who were like warlords. They took these children to the streets and reaped out of what they begged during the day. 

Then the last group were people who came from disturbed areas. These are children who would come with their parents and they all stayed on the streets. 

So, you did not just have street children, you also had street adults and elders. These ones would beg for a month or two and after that, they would return to the areas where they came from, which were mostly the disturbed areas. They beg as a source of income, and then they go and do business back home, and another lot of families would come back to the streets.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is finalising a street children’s policy, which is already at draft level. We believe that it has very comprehensive interventions. We are going to have counselling and to see how to re-settle these children through community projects.

About Kampiringisa, one of the questions asked was, “what are you doing for these children apart from keeping them in Kampiringisa?” The children are also playing football, among other programmes, and we believe that when they go home and back to school, they can continue doing that. 

We have counselling services for these children. They will also be followed by our probation officers - who are counsellors themselves - when they are resettled with their families. We have skills development for these children, so that when they get out of Kampiringisa they can be self-reliant. That is just to mention but a few. 

Hon. Bakkabulindi also asked about re-roofing the remand homes. Give us the tools honourable Members of Parliament. All we need is the money and we will re-roof all those institutions.  

Hon. Mafabi talked about sexual harassment. I think that was for the Ministry of Education, but let me make a small comment, because the victims are mainly the girl-children. When I was facilitating a workshop for the youth in Mukono, the girl-children told me that they could not get jobs unless they gave “carpet certificates.” I did not understand what a “carpet certificate” was until they elaborated on it. 

The other thing is that it is true the girl-children are being harassed, not only at the university level but also at the primary level. I remember in my own district, five head teachers made five little girls pregnant. And one of them, from Cilio Primary school, died because she was too young to deliver that baby. 

I want to thank my colleague, the Minister of Education, because he took appropriate steps when the report was brought to him. The head teachers have received their due punishment. I thank him for that.

Hon. Mugambe was asking about the Youth Entrepreneur Scheme and the youth who paid Shs 50,000 for the training. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to make it clear and put it on record that this money was not taken by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and we did not carry out that training. Rather, it was done by the private sector; and when things are private, you have to pay for them. 

You were wondering whether Government could also have an input, like it is giving money to the NGO hospitals. This training was done by private organisations, organisations that believed they had given these children skills so that they could borrow money from any organisation, not necessarily the Youth Entrepreneur Scheme. 

They could borrow money from the Rural Micro-Finance Scheme under the Prime Minister’s Office. They could borrow money from FINCA; they could borrow money from Pride Africa or any other bank. What these people received were really entrepreneurial skills. That is the explanation I have received, and it is the explanation I can give to the House, Madam Speaker. Our ministry provides training under the National Youth Council and that training is free. We do not charge anything for it.  

Hon. Kabakumba asked, “What has happened to Entandikwa?”  Entandikwa, as the majority of you know, is not my language, but I believe it means, “to start off”. Entandikwa was money given to start off people who would borrow this money, and after they had expended it and gained some profit, they would pass it on to somebody else. Unfortunately, our own leaders mismanaged entandikwa and took it to be a political gift, which was not true.  

In very many countries, excluding Uganda, micro finance is respected. In Uganda we do not know that micro finance is a business and an industry. It is an industry and business, which must make money and transform the lives of the people. For us we have taken it as a political gift and a joke. And in the same way, people have mismanaged the restocking programme. So, there is no more funding for entandikwa. The funding for entandikwa is already there. What the Members of Parliament can do, including myself, is go to our constituencies to help recover the available entandikwa money that is already there. That money can be recycled within our communities. In making this appeal, I include myself because even in my own constituency the money was mismanaged. So, we have to get out there, talk to the people and recover the money so that we can be able to recycle it. 

All I know is that there is going to be a micro- finance industry, which will soon be developed in this country. It will handle the Shs 10 million, which was promised by the President to each parish. It will be implemented through your own constituencies. Honourable –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: In view of the comments made by the minister, what now is the fate of the Department of Entandikwa and the minister manning that department?

MRS BAKOKO: Thank you very much, hon. Mwandha. I had not finished, you are very impatient but I think I can now finish - (Laughter). Be patient, otherwise you will crash. We have to do it slowly. 

Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister of Entandikwa, Economic and Civic Rights will still be there. She has a role to play, because we have to come out with a national policy on the micro finance industry. That means it is even going to be bigger than just entandikwa, which was a very small portion. I hope my colleague is satisfied now.

Hon. Bright Rwamirama asked me about the demobilisation of street children. I believe he is so used to demobilisation because he is a soldier. We took the children to Kampiringisa and as I said, they are playing football and we are introducing them to sports. We shall pass them on to my colleague as they pass out. 

When we talk about sports, we are not only looking at schools; we are also looking at children out of school. So, we need your support a lot so that we can mobilise our communities for that.  

To hon. Kefa Ssempangi’s question about the street children, I say that the issue is still about the draft policy on the street children.

I will now mention the children in the north. I paid a visit to the north with my colleague, hon. Betty Akech. Honourable Members of Parliament, the psychosocial policy and programme, which we are developing and which we have in the Ministry of Gender, is going to address that problem. 

One three-year-old child fell sick with malaria and when the nurse went to inject him, he actually said, “do not play with me, I will cut off your head, I will put it on a stone and get another stone and break your neck. I will also get a panga or an axe and cut off your throat.” So, you can see the level of trauma these children have undergone!

These are children who have seen peoples’ heads being chopped off. We have to have a comprehensive psychosocial programme, not only for the northern region, but also for the entire country.  

Finally, hon. Alaso asked about PEARL. I think we still have PEARL in the districts where the project was started and in those to which it has been expanded. We are aware of the shortage of funding from UNFPA because of the Bush administration’s attitude towards reproductive health programmes. But I would like to invite her to come to my office and give me the details of what happened to the programme in Soroti, with your permission, Madam Speaker.

I move on to NSSF. The question is, “where is the Shs 3 billion coming from?” I do not know, but I believe there was a haemorrhage. That haemorrhage has been stopped and we will even go further. We have already put in place early warning signs to detect any haemorrhages and a forensic audit is being undertaken. When the results are out, they will be brought in front of the Social Services Committee and the august House. We already have enough information to reflect the level of haemorrhage we were having at the NSSF.

That said, I thank you for thanking me for increasing collections by 100 percent. I thank you again, Members of Parliament. We have developed 12 other projects and soon we will have project documents. When our Social Development Project Investment Plan is launched next month, it will also include the 12 projects where the donor funds will be reflected, and then you will know how much money the Ministry of Gender gets. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much, Members of Parliament.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the minister has not answered my question on disability. I do not know whether this was deliberate or another way -(Interruption)
 
MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: I am very sorry. I think it is because time is running out. I have already told my colleague, hon. Mwandha, before and he knows that the disability policy should have been developed before the disability council.

When consultants worked on the disability policy, they advised the ministry that the disability council should be developed first. So, the disability council will be formulated first. And the Minister in charge of the Elderly and Disability, with support from NUDIPU, is also looking at the policy. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, thank you very much.

THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr  Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I would like to ask you a favour; hon. Oryem Okello, who is in charge of Sports, is here. He requests that he answers some of the issues raised about sports, with your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you want to start with sports? Hon. Oryem.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SPORTS (Mr Oryem Okello): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. I take this opportunity to tackle some of the very important matters concerning sports. First, I extend my appreciation to the chairperson and the Committee on Social Services for a very moving report, especially on the area of sports. 

Secondly, I would like to commend my colleagues for their support and interest in this very interesting department. When I took up this portfolio of Minister of Sports, I thought it was going to be an easy job, but it turned out to be complicated. 

What I would like to tell you, members, is that the issue of sports is not only the need for the involvement of Parliament, it is not only a need for money, but we need components and strategies as well for sports. We need professional managers, professional administrators and keen people to manage sports if Uganda is to also be on the map like other countries. 

You will realise that no matter how much money we pour into the administration of sports, when we have corrupt individuals there, nothing will change. With individuals who have personal interests and have no heart for sports but rather for kitu kidogo for their pockets, the money just goes down the drain. We need the right people in these institutions, and we need the right administrators in these institutions. Only then will the money we put in these institutions be justified. I think you will agree with me that the taxpayers’ money cannot continue slipping through the palms of these administrators. So, the administration needs to be changed.  

Hon. Kizige raised the matter of FUFA, or rather the controversial issue of FUFA. Government does not any more give money to FUFA. For many years however, people have been alleging that the administration of FUFA has been corrupt. For Government to put money into FUFA with such a corrupt administration, it will be causing a lot of hullabaloo. You will say that the Ministry of Sports is putting money into an association that is not delivering.

I would like to inform you that despite the difficulties that we have in sports in Uganda, we are making progress. Recently, I led a team of young athletes to Manchester and in spite of the noise made that Uganda should not have gone to Manchester, we won some medals. There were 72 countries in Manchester and after the results were tallied, Uganda was 30th - (Applause).

We were not number 71 and we were not even number 36, which is half the number of countries that went to Manchester. At least we came back with two medals. That was our best result since October 1990. And apart from the two medals, we managed to break two national records and four personal records for our athletes. So, by any standards, this is an achievement. 

The best thing we can do for our athletes is to encourage them. I think you also agree that since I took over sports, there has been a very good structure. Things have changed - (Laughter). I think the interest in sports has taken a new direction and I am sure we will do better things. 

On a serious note, part of the 30 per cent of the UPE money that goes to culture, drama and others is used in sports in this country under UPE funding. But also, I am encouraging the private sector to come into sports as part of the President’s manifesto. 

You will have noted that in the one year that I have been in the ministry, I have managed to attract a lot of money into motor sports in this country, contrary to what it was before I came; I have managed to attract money back into tennis, which was not there; I have managed to attract hundreds of millions of shillings into cricket; I have managed to bring back private firms into sponsoring basketball, and I have managed to bring back Coca-Cola to sponsor post-primary school football, which took place in Lira recently.  

What I am trying to tell you, honourable members, is that we need to all talk the same language. We need accountability in sports, we need transparent managers and we need good governance. More so, I think the administration of sports should be told that they should not expect handouts and feed-outs from Government. They should go out to the private sector and get more money out of the private sector once they have cleaned their house. 

This is done even in the developed countries. In the developed countries, Governments have cut down on sponsoring sports. In fact, they have created national lotteries, and money comes from national lotteries and Government does not pour money into sports. Even in the United Kingdom where I lived for 16 years, Government has cut down on sports.  

The FUFA elections that took place in December, for all intents and purposes, I could not influence them and none of us could influence them. This was a democratic process that took place by FUFA standards and I could only accept the results.  There was no way I could influence them. I had to accept the individuals that came into office.  

But it is unfortunate that at that time when FUFA elections were taking place, as much as I advised other individuals who are in politics not to enter into the elections of FUFA, some chose to bring party politics into the elections of FUFA, hence the results. Just as the controversy that resulted from the presidential elections, it did not surprise me that there was controversy in these small elections.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, sports has a bright future in this country. I am glad to note that every one of you is concern about there being a department of sports in the Ministry of Education and Sports. My Minister, hon. Khiddu, has already presented documents, the draft of the policy is before the Vice President and I am sure it will soon be brought before Cabinet. This is an interesting development, and I am sure before the end of this financial year, the policy will be in place. Hence there will be no need to stop or refuse the budget for the Ministry of Education and Sports next year by the Committee on Social Services. 

I would like to take this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to thank you for giving me this opportunity and my colleagues for listening very keenly to my intervention. Thank you!

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr  Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much once again, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee itself for a job well done. I thank my colleagues, the Members of Parliament, for their contributions. 

Frankly, I regard what has been said here as advice to the Ministry of Education and Sports. We will study this advice and see if within the constraints of resources, personnel and so on, we are in position to implement these recommendations. If I am to stop there, I am sure many will be disappointed.  Therefore, let me highlight a few of these matters.  

There was a lot of concern about the instrument on Kyambogo University, but we have moved a great deal because at this moment, we have a law in place, which outlines what we are supposed to do. The National Council for Higher Education is in place and it has approved the establishment of a public university at Kyambogo. 

I have authority, and I have issued instructions to the First Parliamentary Counsel to draft the resolution, which must come here. After you have endorsed this resolution, I will be in position to issue a statutory instrument. This is the law that we passed in the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act. So, we have moved a great deal already on the instrument.  

On this question of a secondary school per sub-county and who is sabotaging the President’s manifesto and things like this, Madam Speaker and honourable members, allow me to read the manifesto itself. It says on page 51 - this is under secondary and vocational schools: 

“The Government will therefore aim at providing a first-class day secondary school per sub-county by the year 2003. The children will be able to cycle to and from school. 

In the medium-term, Government intends to provide universal secondary education. This programme will be encapsulated in the slogan, ‘A big modern-day secondary school per sub-county by the year 2003.’ Therefore, by providing at least one big day Secondary school per sub-county, we shall be doing two things at the same time; making schools more accessible and making them cheaper. 

We must, however, first of all ensure more revenue collection. UPE now takes up Shs304 billion. We are collecting Shs1,100,000,000 much more than the Shs44 billion we were collecting in 1998. Once revenue collection rises, for instance, to 2000 billion shillings per annum, we shall be able to fund universal secondary education.”  

Really, it is not universal secondary education in the air; it is in the context of collecting Shs2000 billion per annum.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am a member of the Social Services Committee and I would like to get clarification from Finance. On page 40, the one billion shillings that was indicated in Annex II to the chairman Budget Committee, that is supposed to be used to grant-aid Secondary schools in this financial year, is it in place or not? The Ministry of Education says you have told them there is no money. So, I am seeking clarification on the one billion shillings that you approved, and annex II clearly has in all those details.  I thank you.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the minister. He says additional revenue should be collected. Have Members of Parliament refused to pay their taxes so that they have not realized additional revenue and that is the reason you are not going to build secondary schools in every sub-county? 

CAPT BYARUHANGA: The minister has clearly said that we ensure that enough revenue is collected. Who is to ensure? Is it the one sabotaging the manifesto?

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, this manifesto has been cited as the authority for one secondary school per sub-county. I am reading the context in which it was said. When these benchmarks are reached, I have no doubt that universal secondary education will become a reality. 

The question of incentives to teachers in hard-to- reach areas is a priority area for us. We are doing everything possible to ensure that this is put in place without any further delay.  

The re-entry of girls who become pregnant when they are at school is a controversial matter in which we are consulting all the stakeholders, because these schools are not all Government schools. In fact, fewer schools are really the property of Government, the rest are owned by foundation bodies and they have to consult the foundation bodies to see that they are on board when we begin on this policy of re-admitting the girl-child after she has delivered. 

How are you going to do it - in the same school, in neighbouring schools, or what? You know we do not run this show alone; we run it in partnership with the foundation bodies and they have to come on board, otherwise, we will have a lot of difficulties.

I have to accept one thing from hon. Nandala Mafabi on the importance of the unit cost. We have been urging for a quick resolution of this issue because without a unit cost, I think the charges are being fixed on the basis of course work. 

I am happy to report that this is a matter we have been studying. I think now there are two studies. What remains is to reconcile them and we come up with a unit cost that will be the basis for moderating all the charges being paid at university. It is a very important point; the unit cost must be established. 

This same issue is also following us at secondary level. People complain about the high level of secondary school fees, and this is why I imposed a moratorium on the increase. I said, “do not increase, we are studying this matter and once we have established the unit cost of educating a Ugandan child in secondary school then we can actually begin to fix.” But in the meantime, I imposed a moratorium and I will be happy to receive information on people who are not obeying this moratorium, because I have dealt with some and I have the power to deal with the others. 

Hon. Mugambe, it is also true that addressing the imbalances at the tertiary level is too late. We should begin by addressing the imbalances at the pre-primary level. This is correct, but you know, in the policy statement on page 19, we are actually addressing this issue of policy on pre-primary. It is not as if we are not thinking about it, we are actually examining it critically. 

As I said, some of this is really advise. I agree, other things being equal, we shall allocate more funds to MUBS because of the crucial nature of management science in a modern economy. 

UNEB is a matter that I am examining very seriously myself, because at one time the leakages used to come from UNEB. But we had plugged that one, and they are now happening after the exams have left UNEB. But you are reporting and I take your reporting seriously. You are reporting that these leakages may have come back at headquarters. This is a matter that I will examine particularly in the coming examinations. 

Classroom construction and whether we need to use it as a means of fighting poverty –(Interruption)

MR KIBALE WAMBI: I am a member of that committee and one serious issue that came up during that time was that a secretary of UNEB has been acting for the last five to six years. As a committee, we thought sometimes some of these uncertainties might come from the boss who is not acting fully. We had wanted to know when this man would be confirmed. If he is not fit, then dismiss him and appoint a person whom you think is fit and we move on. I would like that clarification made.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, yesterday I appeared before the Committee on Government Assurances and I answered a few questions on undertakings. Let me make another undertaking for which the ministry may be taken to task. I would like to assure you, Madam Speaker, chairperson, honourable Members of Parliament that this issue will not appear in this form next year - (Applause).

There are very many issues and I accept them as advice, but finally, the question of the midday meal. We are receiving advice that there is no way we are going to run UPE when there is no midday meal. But, Madam Speaker, allow me to read Article 34 (2) of the Constitution: 

“A child is entitled to basic education which shall be the responsibility of the State and the parents of the child.” 

I think that when you have paid Shs5000 and for lower primary or Shs 8100 for upper primary, and when you have paid the teacher, when you have put up the building, when you have bought the books, all this is part of the responsibility and the state is doing this. I really think that the responsibility of the parent should also be taken into account to provide the lunch, the notebook and the pencil. Otherwise, Article 34(2) will be meaningless.  

This is a very good report from the committee. I thank the committee very much for understanding the issues at stake. I appeal to you, honourable members, to support this budget.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that we have had quite a long day, and at least we have heard the report, we have debated it and got the responses from the ministers. So, I think that this is an appropriate time to adjourn.  

We will reconvene tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock to complete the work on the Social Services Committee. Thereafter, we shall take on the report of the Committee on Trade and Industry, which is very brief, and I know I will not keep you very long tomorrow. So, let us adjourn until 10.00 O’clock tomorrow morning.

Let me also alert you that in organising your weekend, you will have to come back here on Monday to consider the report on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. So, Monday afternoon is cut out of your long weekend.  Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 8.03 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 23 August 2002 at 10.00 a.m.)


