Tuesday 22nd August, 2000

Parliament met at 10:35 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

ASCERTAINMENT OF QUORUM.

57 Members were ascertained as being present.

The House could not proceed due to lack of Quorum

Parliament later met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

ASCERTAINMENT OF QUORUM

103 Members were ascertained as being present.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the chair)

The House was called to order
                                          
MR. CHEBET MAIKUT: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking your guidance with respect to the meeting of this House concurrently with the Committees of this House. This morning some of us came here and moved to another Committee of this House. I was attending the Select Committee on Defence and our attention was drawn to the fact that, when the House was in the process of taking a decision, there was a head count and some of us were pronounced to have signed and run away from the House.  So, I am seeking your guidance as to how we should function when we have committees of this House working concurrently with the main Plenary session of the House.  Thank you, Sir.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With due respect to you, the people I represent in Lubaga South requested me to stress a point before today’s session starts, in reference to a circular, which was issued by the Clerk of Parliament, dated 21st of August 2000. Much as the Constitutional Court recently ruled the way they did, it does not automatically amend our Rules of Procedure. The ruling only states the legal and constitutional requirements which must be followed. If the court rules on a matter of a constitutional nature, is it the Clerk who directs Parliament on what should be done?  Have we amended the appropriate rule in our Rules of Procedure so that we can appropriately proceed? Isn’t someone hijacking our constitutional powers in doing so?  I need your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Let me start with the point raised by hon. Chebet Maikut. Ordinarily, and in accordance with the circular issued by the Clerk earlier on, when the Plenary sits, particularly when discussing the budget, no other business should take place. The reason for this is that earlier on, the Plenary was adjourned to give Committees time to do their work, although it is possible that the Committees have not finished their work. That was a decision taken by the Business and Welfare Committee and we may have to revisit this issue with regards to the Select Committee. Given the reason for the circular, my view would be that the Select Committee also waits until we have disposed of the process of looking at the budget.  

Hon. Lukyamuzi, you were wondering whether the Clerk was right in issuing that circular, and whether it should not have been the House to amend its Rules of Procedure. The Clerk issued the circular based on the law as pronounced by the Constitutional Court. So, even if you were to amend your rules, they would have to conform to the ruling of the Constitutional Court.

MS BABIHUGA: Thank you, Sir. You explained how this House should proceed during this time that we are debating the budget. The Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government has not disposed of its business, primarily because of lack of co-operation from the Ministries. How then is this Committee and such other Committees, which have not finished their work, going to dispose of their business?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe I will ask the chairpersons of the various Committees to indicate how much time they want, and basing on that, we should be able to synchronise Committee work with the Plenary.  

MS BABIHUGA: Sir, we hit a snag on resolving the issue of pensions and payments related to the former East African Community workers. It is only today that we have received communication from the Minister of Finance, on his willingness to come and resolve issues with the Committee. Therefore, we would need an additional four days, because we intend to call the forum responsible for the affairs of the East African Community workers, in order to strike an amicable position that we can report on before this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Any other chairperson who would like to report on his Committee’s business?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr. Karuhanga Elly): Mr. Speaker, we need about two weeks. We are not even sure whether that will be enough. Although we have met officials from the Prime Minister’s office, the President’s Office and Foreign Affairs, we have not yet met the intelligence people, that is ISO and ESO. We are also yet to meet the Vice President.  She has been busy in Karamoja. We have put in a request to meet the President. We do not know whether he is going to give us an appointment this week, but we are waiting to get that done.  

I also have a problem with being here to be counted in these plenary sessions. In the morning we were busy writing the report on what we have so far done, but then we had to be here. Well, we propose maybe, by 27th or 28th we might be ready. 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Lt. Col. Mudoola): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think we need about a week or two. The problem is that the policy statements for both Ministries came in a bit late. So, we have just finished with the Ministry of Defence and we even intend to visit one or two barracks before we write our report. So, it is between one week and ten days. 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr. Mutesasira Timothy): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We need just an extra two days to have our report ready. 

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, it seems that most of the chairmen of the Sessional Committees have something to report. In that connection, would it not be reasonable that you and the Business Committee meet before order papers are prepared?

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: The chairman for the Committee on Works has just arrived, he has been with the vice-chairman trying to wrap up the report. I think we need some extra days. He can pick up from here. 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. Katweiremu Yorokamu): Mr. Speaker, considering that we got our policy statement a little bit late, we need up to next week to be ready with the report. Maybe by Wednesday next week we will be ready.  

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We need one week.

THE VICECHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (Mr. Abura Kene): Mr. Speaker, I think we shall need about one week to complete our work. 

MR. KANYIKE: Mr. Speaker, the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is ready and I can move now. 

MR. BUTELE: Mr. Speaker, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry should be through by the end of this week. We need one week. 

THE SPEAKER: I take it that on average, the time required by the Committees, which have not yet presented their reports, is one week. We shall make the necessary arrangements to give you time to complete the work within the week you have asked.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LAND AMENDMENT BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr. Baguma Isoke): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I beg to move that the Land Amendment Bill, 2000 be read for the First Time.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs. M. Matembe): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg to move that the Inspectorate of Government Bill, 2000 be read the First Time 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2000/2001

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr. A.W. Kanyike): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a report from the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the recurrent and development Budget proposals, and NARO development and budgetary proposals for the 2000/2001 Financial Year –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am sorry to interrupt, but may I request you to, as much as possible, summarise your report. 

MR. KANYIKE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was coming to that point. This report would appear to be a fairly thick one, but I am not going to be read the whole of it, I will summarise as much as possible. I also want to inform the House that most of the attachments we have on this report are going to be laid on the Table and will not necessarily be read.  These attachments include a list of District Farm Institutes handed over to NARO, that is attachment number one. The second attachment shows the location of the agricultural research development centres.  

The third attachment shows the location of Agricultural Development Centres, formally District Farm Institutes. Attachment number four is a summary of how the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries handled the parliamentary recommendations for the year 1999/2000. Attachment number five shows the technologies that have been released by NARO. 

It is important for Members to know these attachments so that they know where to go when looking for agricultural information to take to their constituencies.  

As mandated under Rule 143 (a) of our Rules of Procedure, the Sessional Committee on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, also referred to as the Committee on MAAIF in this report, received, examined and discussed the policy and budget estimates for the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) and NARO. We hereby report on our findings, observations and make appropriate recommendations.  

Apart from speaking to the Ministers of State, the Permanent Secretary and the Director General of NARO, the Committee also visited Namulonge Research Institute to gain first hand information on the technologies available at NARO. The Committee also went to Mukono Agricultural Research Development Centre, the first of the twelve ARDCs. The Committee got first hand information on the National Agricultural Advisory Delivery Service (NAADS), which is replacing the Agricultural Extension Services.  

The Committee noted, with satisfaction, the following achievements on MAAIF:  

    a. The elimination of the water hyacinth using biological control on our water bodies. This potential menace is now under control, thanks to the efforts of scientists at NARO.

    b. The efforts MAAIF took in having the fish ban by the European Union lifted.

    c. The food security provided by the development of cassava varieties that are resistant to the mosaic virus.

The Committee also noted that the Ministry made positive responses to the Committees’ past recommendations. Some of these are attached as appendices to this report, but the Members observed that there are still other challenges to be addressed by the Ministry.  These are discussed in paragraphs 2.1 to 2.7.

Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA): 
The formulation of this plan has been the pre-occupation of the Committee and the Ministry from the beginning of the Sixth Parliament. The plan is eagerly awaited for by the population we represent in this Parliament. The Committee wishes to see the effective implementation of this plan by MAAIF without any further delay, with the involvement of all Members of Parliament in general and members of the Committee on MAAIF in particular. PMA is the most important ‘commodity’ that the Movement and the Sixth Parliament must deliver to the people of Uganda.  

The National Agriculture Extension Policy: 
The following critical issues require to be explicitly clarified to all stakeholders, for the avoidance of doubt:
    (a) It is believed that a lot of improved enterprises in planting and stocking materials have been generated and are available at the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO). The Committee would wish to see in place a clear policy on how these technologies are going to be disseminated and transferred to the farmers. For instance, how our farmers are expected to access improved coffee planting materials.

    (b) The Committee wishes to see in place, before the end of this fifth year, a clear National Agricultural Extension Policy to enable the training and education of the farmers. The most critical areas here, in addition to the availability of improved planting and stocking materials, include technical capacity building at the district and sub-county levels, as well as facilitation, ensuring that decentralised services are carried out and reach the farmer so that the modernisation of agriculture is felt at the village level.  At the moment, the majority of our farmers do not access any agricultural extension services at all, and there is no way you can talk about modernisation of agriculture without training and education.

Provision of Water for Humans and Agriculture: 
During the past four years, the Committee and the Ministry have been pre-occupied with activities surrounding the availability of water for domestic use and for agriculture, particularly for animals. As we enter the fifth year, in spite of Government claims that the issue is being addressed, very little activity, if any, is seen on the ground. The Committee took up this matter with the Prime Minister, and the Minister as well as other officials from the Ministry and from the Department of Water development on 8th May 2000. The Prime Minister assured the Committee and gave the undertaking that the provision of water for agriculture and other purposes would be addressed in the 2000/2001 budget.  The Committee wishes to see this undertaking realised during this year’s budget. 

The Committee further wishes to see the question of investment in technical provisions for irrigation addressed during the coming year. The need for the water policy is more urgent, given the unpredictable weather patterns being experienced in Uganda and other neighbouring countries.

Control of Animal Diseases and Crop Pests and Diseases: The modernisation of agriculture cannot become a reality until the question of control of pests and diseases is given the full attention it deserves. The Committee wishes to see the Ministry put in place a clear policy in this respect. The cost of herbicides and pesticides is beyond what an ordinary peasant farmer can be expected to afford.

Marketing: 
Essentially, modernising agriculture focuses on the aspects of marketing the agricultural produce and animal products so that the farmer can realise benefits. In turn, commercialisation of agriculture has an element of quantity and qualitative production. The Committee wishes the Ministry to develop a clear policy and to guide the stakeholders, including producers and the private sector, to establish a mechanism for large scale agricultural production as well as adding value to the products in order to attract both internal and international markets.  It is important that issues regarding prevention of post harvest losses, processing, transportation and storage are taken care of.

Rural Credit: 
In order to empower rural communities to access improved technologies and modern farming methods to facilitate the commercialisation of agriculture, it is important that Government promotes the availability of affordable rural credit for farmers who show capacity to utilise such facilities.  

Rural Development: 
The majority of agriculture producers live in rural areas. The Committee recommends that aspects of rural development be integrated in the plan for modernisation of agriculture. In this respect, the Committee recommends a village level participatory approach in the Agricultural Extension Policy so that agricultural activities can be used to stimulate the development of infrastructure and other activities in the rural areas. This will lead to better and improved living conditions of our people.  

The Ministry mandate has not changed, it is to support, promote and guide the production of crops, livestock and fisheries so as to ensure improved quality and quantity of agricultural produce and products for domestic production, food security and export. The Ministry structure, both at political level and technical level, has remained the same. However, there have been several challenges in fulfilment of the above mandate and the Committee has noted the following:
    • Looming famine spread countrywide, in spite of the Ministry’s effort to encourage enough food production.  
    • Poverty still remains a challenge, partly because people are not mobilised for production.  
    • Unemployment due to lack of a deliberate policy to encourage agro-processsing industries.  
These are still major challenges.

Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture:
The Committee on MAAIF has been involved in the development of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture and the Committee is proud of this. We welcome the intended objectives of the PMA.

Our Committee wishes to re-emphasise that PMA must be a holistic strategic framework for eradication of poverty through multi-sectoral interventions, enabling the majority of subsistence farmers to improve their natural resources in a sustainable manner in terms of both economic growth and environment.

It is in this respect that our Committee believes that under the PMA, the National Agricultural policy must address and include issues that will facilitate extensive rural development and transformation.

The Committee on MAAIF is generally happy with the broad strategies for PMA implementation. We appreciate the key public interventions, which are identified as follows:
    1. Research and technology development.
    2. Agricultural advisory services
    3. Rural finance
    4. Agro-processing and marketing
    5. Agricultural education
    6. Sustainable natural resources management
    7. Supportive physical infrastructure, which should include electricity, feeder roads, schools, health centres, water and communication.

There is a lot of debate on the placement of the PMA. In view of the mandate of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Committee wishes to submit that the most suitable home for the PMA and the implementation process should be the Agricultural Secretariat created under MAAIF. The Secretariat should also take over the functions of the Planning Unit in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

The Committee is of the view that fragmentation of the agricultural policy generation should not be encouraged under PMA. We are further of the view that ‘remote control’ in the implementation of agricultural policy has done enough damage and must be discouraged.

The National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS)
PMA calls for the creation of a National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) to spearhead the delivery of advice to the farmers (extension).  This is in line with Government policies of decentralisation, liberalisation, empowerment of the people in decision making for development and increasing public sector co-ordination, efficiency and accountability.  

The Committee has seen the draft report on NAADS. We commend the Ministry on this development, since in the past the Ministry had argued that extension was not its responsibility. It is now confirmed and clear that the agricultural advisory services are the responsibility of the Ministry. And NAADS efforts should be finalised quickly.

Farm Inputs:
The Committee on MAAIF is of the view that if an expanded agricultural production is to take place as provided for under PMA, Government should empower the private sector to enable it avail agricultural inputs to the farmers at affordable prices.

Government should further re-examine taxation on farm inputs and implements to make them affordable to the stakeholders.

The Committee was disappointed with Government policy on distributing seeds through the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. This resulted in seeds being misdirected to areas where they were not traditionally grown, and led to seed stock piling and hence becoming stale.

Parastatals under MAAIF:
The following parastatals exist in the Ministry:
    (a) Dairy Development Authority(DDA)
    (b) Cotton Development Authority(CDO)
    (c) Uganda Coffee Development Authority(UCDA)
    (d) The Uganda Tea Authority; and 
    (e) Uganda National Seed Industry Authority (to be established).

Dairy Development Authority:
The Committee is hopeful that, with the official launching of this body, the Dairy Industry will be developed. The Committee urges the Minister to expedite the divestiture of the Dairy Corporation Limited to ensure that cooling plants scatted in rural areas are sold to local farmers’ associations to enable them to benefit.

The Dairy Development Authority should be encouraged to speed up the process of ensuring the establishment of a powdered milk plant to stabilise milk prices and to improve distribution and reduce wastage.

Cotton Development Organisation (CDO)
The Committee on MAAIF recognises the importance of the cotton sub-sector and the agricultural sector. The Committee urges Government to ensure that the cotton farmer is sufficiently empowered and facilitated to enable him or her realise a meaningful benefit out of her sweat.

The above calls for the reviewing of the Cotton Development Organisation Statute to bring it in line with the 1995 Constitution, particularly the recognition of decentralisation of services and divesting of agricultural extension services to the districts.

The CDO mandate should not include getting involved in activities that comprise the interest of the cotton farmers. The Committee further recommends that Government improve the performance of the cotton industry through adding value, so that the country could enter into the export market for textiles and cotton yarn instead of exporting raw cotton. With regard to seed quality, the Committee recommends that high quality seeds be maintained at all costs. The Committee further commends Government for availing Uganda Shillings 2.5 billion for supporting cotton in this financial year.

Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA)
The Committee is still concerned with the presence of the coffee wilt disease, which, if not addressed, will affect the coffee industry in this country. The Minister himself admitted before the Committee that the coffee sector is becoming a challenging one because of the coffee wilt disease. The Ministry, however, in its policy statement, points to the fact that medium and long term research and development programmes are being employed as strategies to minimise the effects of the disease. The Committee urges NARO to undertake this as a serious challenge. Government should increase funding to NARO so that research on this matter is hastened. 

The Committee commends Government for making available 1.5 billion shillings in this year’s budget for the support of developing nurseries for coffee seedlings.  UCDA is urged to ensure that the price at which it sells the seedlings to the farmers is affordable. While at Mukono District Agriculture Research Development Centre, the Committee was informed that the cost of production of a seedling is 150/=.  The Committee then wondered why UCDA inflates the price of the coffee seedling up to 500/=.

Uganda Tea Sub-Sector:
This sub-sector is still challenging too, and the Minister alluded to this fact.  Much as tea is now the 3rd foreign exchange earner to our economy, Government’s attempts to support it have been minimal.

The Committee continues to urge Government to immediately bring to Parliament the Tea Bill to provide for a Tea Act, which will regulate the growing, processing and marketing of tea. This will ease the establishment of the Uganda Tea Authority and support its performance.  

Development of other crops:  
The Committee still believes that there is need to encourage the growing of other cash crops to diversify from the traditional ones namely, coffee, cotton, tea etc.

The Committee also urges the Ministry to set aside funds to support areas in this country where new crops are being introduced and improved upon, for example matooke in Northern Uganda as well as coffee. Government is also urged to put in place incentives for large-scale farmers in the above sub-sectors.

Fisheries Sector:
The Committee has noted with great concern that, whereas fisheries is bringing in a lot of money, Government is not investing in the sector. The Committee urges Government to encourage investment in the improvement of landing sites on Ugandan lakes and to facilitate water harvesting for fish farming.

The Committee was happy to learn about the lifting of the ban on Ugandan fish by the European Union. The Committee urges Government to ensure that conditions that are demanded for the promotion of Uganda’s fish to list number one are fulfilled without any further delay so that this country may continue to earn the much desired one million United States dollars weekly from the fish export.

The Committee urges Government to immediately come up with a fisheries master plan to address the production and development of the sector. There is need to intensify the marketing of fish. There should be regulation of the fish industry to enable the establishment of an Authority.

Programs and Projects under the Ministry:
My Committee had, at the beginning of this Session, agreed to make on-the-spot physical assessment of programs and projects in the Ministry in the course of discussing the policy statement. This was however, not possible due to the time allocated to passing the budgets. The Committee did not have enough information to analyse this part of the Ministry's policy proposals. However, the Committee intends to visit these projects, and at a later date, after this budget period, a report will be made to Parliament on the programs and projects under the Ministry.

The National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO):
NARO has the statutory mandate to undertake, promote and co-ordinate research in all aspects of crops, fisheries, agro-forestry and livestock. The mandate of NARO is operationalised through on-station and on-farm research to generate new technologies needed for the challenges of the day. It is also operationalised through outreach to farmers and extension agents to transfer new and improved technologies. The Committee noted with concern that research was removed from the Poverty Action Fund. The Committee strongly recommends that this omission be rectified.   

With regard to NARO, the Committee made the following observations:
Decentralisation of Research:
The Committee is happy with the development of the twelve Agricultural Research Development Centres (ARDCS). This is a new development in NARO to further decentralise research, technology dissemination and transfer through outreach as explained below.

In line with the decentralisation policy and the PMA, MAAIF has adopted a policy to decentralise agricultural research to each of the twelve broad agro-ecological zones in the country. Each zone will therefore, have an Agricultural Research and Development Centre (ARDC). The ARDCs will be established through the upgrading of the ten, out of the eighteen, existing District Farm Institutes (DFIs), which as you are aware, were divested to NARO in 1998. In addition, two NARO sub-stations will also be upgraded to ARDCs, making a total of twelve. The location of these ARDCs is shown in Appendix 1 to this report.

The upgrading of the existing facilities into ARDCs will therefore, not make Government incur huge investment costs for the construction of infrastructure, because this already exists. However, some civil works will be needed for the rehabilitation and upgrading of these facilities.  Some funds for the rehabilitation and operation of six ARDCs has been secured under the World Bank funded ARTP 2 projects, which support NARO activities. The staffing will be achieved through the redeployment of the existing staff at research institutes. This will be supported by minimal recruitment provided for in ARTP 2. In addition, the Ministry is currently looking for more funds to support the rehabilitation and operation of the remaining six.

The implementation of the ARDCs will be spread over a period of three years. Four are being implemented immediately, in the financial year 2000/2001, another two in 2001/2002, and the rest in 2002/2003.

The remaining nine District Farm Institutes not turned into ARDCs have been renamed Agricultural Development Centres (ADCs). They will be run and managed by the districts, to enable them undertake district based agricultural extension activities such as demonstrations, training of extension workers and farmers, and seed and stocking materials’ multiplication. However, the Central Government will retain the ownership of land.

Objectives of ARDCs:
The overall objective of the initiative is to re-sharpen research focus in providing relevant technologies, and enhancing NARO's research input on the producers and consumers. Specifically, it seeks to decentralise agricultural research and to shift it from a supply-driven service to a demand-driven service by improving farmer's ability to make demands on agricultural service providers. And also to enhance the effectiveness of intermediary organisations and farmer groups in meeting the knowledge and technology needs of their clients.  

The initiative also seeks to test new modes of rapidly scaling up and promising technologies and to test new approaches in building partnerships for extending technologies, knowledge and information to farmers. As operational arms of NARO, ARDCs will also play the role of knowledge brokers, linking groups of farmers with multiple sources of knowledge.

Mandates and functions:
The mandate of ARDCs is to serve as a zonal node for adaptive research and conduit for delivering technologies and information to and from farmers to the agro-ecological zones they represent.

The main function of the ARDC is to conduct adaptive research through on-farm trials (testing of promising technologies from various sources) addressing the identified needs, in partnership with the farmer and the agricultural development agents. They are also to develop recommendations and refine technology packages and deliver them to the clients and receive feedback.

Other functions include:
    • Technology demonstrations in conjunction with district/research institutes
    • Multiplication of foundation seed and stocking materials, where necessary
    • Training of extension staff, farmers and development agents of application of new technologies and methods
    • Collecting, documenting and testing indigenous technologies and knowledge
    • Building and managing effective partnership with farmers and development agents for testing and disseminating technologies and information
    • Developing and managing rural agricultural knowledge and information system, data base impact assessment.
    • Collect, collate and interpret information, germplasm Preservation of different zones e.t.c 
    • Monitoring, evaluation and assessment of impact of new technologies
    • Mobilising resources for agricultural research development.

ARDCs will access technologies from various sources, in collaboration with NARO’s research institutes, including NARO’s own sources and the international agricultural research centres. The ARDCs will also conduct limited applied research to support its on-going adaptive research, as assigned by the respective research institutes, for solving problems that do not require to be referred to the institutes.

The Livestock Sector:
The Committee is happy with the Government policy of re-stocking. The Committee hopes that this will help increase the national herd from the present 5 million heads of cattle, and will provide for beef export.

The Committee urges Government to come up with a final version of the beef master plan, and to implement its plan, which is the basis for the development of the sector. There is also need to come up with a comprehensive policy on animal disease control other than the present ad hoc policy. A vaccine for East Coast fever should be made available to farmers who may need to use it.

The development of small ruminants should be considered seriously for the local and export market. The effort by NARO to import he-goats from South Africa for onward sale to farmers is commended.

The Committee notes that Government partly lifted the ban on imported semen. We recommend that this lifting of the ban be extended to embryo and live animals, following expert veterinary advice.

I now turn to the summary of our recommendations. In light of the above observations, the Committee makes the following specific recommendations:

    1. Government should come up with a clear policy to address the rampant poverty, unemployment, particularly among the youth, and food insecurity in the country.  Uganda needs a deliberate policy on agro-processing and agro-industries.
    2. Government should review and restructure the marketing chain, provide marketing information and identify new market outlets for agricultural produce. We further recommend that Government should put in place appropriate measures to ensure that local agricultural produce is protected from international dumping and trade subsidies.
    3. Private Sector Development:
We urge Government to quickly adopt policies that will promote private enterprises. The thrust of this Government policy should be to create an enabling environment for the efficient and rapid growth of the private sector, with the aim of calling on the private sector to play a leading role in agricultural activities.

4.  Agro-Processing industries:
Government is urged to promote an industrial base for manufacturing in the food sector. This is because agro-processing is an essential link for diversification and lesser dependency on one or two commercial crops as well as for food security. 

5.	Research and Advisory Services:
Continued growth in Agriculture will steam from improved technology generation, information dissemination and farmer advisory services. The Committee recommends that Government realises that agricultural extension services can only be effective when there is an attitude change.

The Ministry of Agriculture, under NAADS, should consider the employment of social scientists in addition to the veterinary and agriculture graduates.

6. 	Agricultural Credit:
The committee recommends that Government comes up with a clear policy in the availability of agricultural credit. Affordable credit is necessary if the farmers are to improve on their agricultural implement stock and for the purchase of seeds, planting and stocking material.

7.  	Water for agriculture, irrigation and fishing:
Government must move very fast to formulate policies on water for agriculture, irrigation and fishing, and to make sure policies are known to the private sector and stakeholders.

    8. The Poverty Action Fund:  
Funding should be found to support research activities in support of poverty eradication programmes.

9. Government has provided for 6.8/= billion as non- conditional grants to sub-counties. This works out approximately 8.5/= million per sub-county on the average. It is recommended that since poverty eradication and food insecurity is a serious challenge at sub-county level, this money should target agricultural activities.

10. It is recommended that under utilised Government farms be advertised and disposed of to agricultural investors as a start off base for large commercial farming. We further recommend that Government invests more in market research for the production of market information to Ugandan farmers, to make it possible for them to produce promptly marketable produce.

11. The Committee has learnt, with shock, that Uganda has withdrawn from the International Red Locust Organisation. Considering that Uganda was invaded by red locusts as late as 1996, and they were brought under control by the efforts of this organisation, the Committee strongly recommends that funds be found so that Uganda can resume its rightful place as a member of the International Red Locust Organisation.

12. The Committee recommends that NARO scientists and NARO as an organisation receive special recognition for the role played in controlling water hyacinth on our water bodies.

    13. In view of the fact that water hyacinth continues to come to Uganda via River Kagera, funds should be found to construct a barrier on this river to stop the water weed from entering the lake.

    14. Knowing very well that bees contribute to crop production, and that honey and beeswax have economic value, the Ministry should renew its effort to strengthen the bee and honey (commonly called the apiculture) industry.

    15. The Committee recommends that the Dairy Development Act be fully implemented without any further delay.  Specifically, we urge Government to find the 1.5 billion shillings start-up capital for the Authority as stipulated in the Act.

    16. During the current budget consultations, the Committee received a petition from a group of gender activists. These activists convinced the Committee, when they pointed out that, although women contributed about 80 percent to Uganda’s agriculture, they were marginalised in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries’ projects and programmes. The Committee recommends that MAAIF examine its gender policy and it consult with the Ministry responsible for Gender and other gender activists and groups, to come up with a policy that advances gender in agriculture.

Having said all that and recommended as we have, the Committee recommends that for the financial year 2000/2001, a total of U.Shs 4.71 billion – recurrent expenditure and U.Shs 69.03 billion - development expenditure for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be approved by this august House.

Furthermore, the Committee recommends that a recurrent budget of Shs. 2.77 billion and Shs. 27.4 billion - development expenditure be approved for NARO. 

I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you.

(The full report of the Committee is to be found in Volume I, Sessional Committee Reports on the 2000/2001 Budgetary Proposals)

MR. RUKIKAIRE MATTHEW (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support and thank the chairman of this Committee for a well thought out and comprehensive report, which should give us a basis for making tenable recommendations to Government on modernisation of agriculture.  I will be extremely brief, because I have only one point to make.  

While this report is comprehensive and covers all areas fairly substantively, in the area of marketing there is a very clear weakness. I would have wished to see this report as well as the plan for modernisation of agriculture address the question of marketing in greater depth. I believe, and many other people believe, that is the fundamental scourge that is preventing the development and growth of agriculture.

In 1986 and 1987, the Government of Uganda embarked on a major campaign to stimulate the production of the basic foods, that was mainly beans and maize. Ministers, Government officials and others went out around the country, and that campaign was extremely successful.  The production of maize and beans multiplied many times during the two seasons in that year. But at the end of the day, because not enough emphasis, research or promotion had been done on marketing, most of the peasants ended up with lots of maize and beans, which they could not market. The prices either collapsed or eventually they could not sell them and they ended up with rotting food in their own houses. I know that the Government attempted to review the position, but I am using this as an example. Unless we deal with the question of marketing, whether we carry out research, agro-processing and many other aspects, which have been pointed out in this report, it will not help. It will be imperative on us to deal with the question of marketing if we are going to promote a feasible plan for modernisation of agriculture.

The second example is milk. I understand that the plant for milk production here in Kampala has now closed down, because it is being over-hauled. As a result, there is no milk really being bought. Also, over the last one or two years, peasants around the country have either been given very limited amounts of money because of the price or they have not been able to sell their milk at all. And that is why the emphasis on the question of establishing powdered plants aimed at exporting this milk is a very important component of this plan. That is an example.  

The final example I want to give is on beef. About four years ago, I travelled to Namibia. Namibia is almost an arid land. In fact, every animal requires about 18 acres of land. Here in Uganda, every animal, even on improved land, will require only about four acres. So, you can see the comparison. And yet Namibia, because it put emphasis on marketing, is one of the best exporters of beef to European markets. If God has endowed Uganda with such good land, we should really be in a position to compete and do even better than Namibia. I am pointing again to the question of marketing.

Finally, while I agree with everything that has been mentioned in this document, and also the recommendation about agro-processing, I would like to urge the Minister of Agriculture, together with the Government Committees, which deal with this, to deal fundamentally with the question of marketing. Otherwise, we shall find ourselves in the same position, even if we do everything that has been said in this document.

I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. OKIROR AUGUSTINE (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for availing me this opportunity. I want to thank the Committee for giving us this very versatile report. When I read the report and compared it with the one of last year, it seems that sense has come to the Ministry of Agriculture. The tone of the report today is very different from the one of last year.

I have a very few comments to make, and I am particularly going to talk about livestock. If it was possible, I have always thought, this Ministry should be split into two.  Many of you who were born in the 1960s and 70s, know very well that the Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries was far ahead with the modernisation and commercialisation of farming, but since the meagre, there have been a lot of problems in that Ministry. There has been a lot of confusion. There have been a lot of experiments going on, and it has really brought the Ministry down. For the last three or four years, there have been hardly any serious activities in the Ministry, which are actually realised on the ground. There has been too much bureaucracy, especially on the side of disease control. 

Last week, we had an opportunity to meet the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. He briefed us about the plan for modernisation of agriculture, but I made it clear to him that this plan of his was going to remain in the papers and the people of Uganda would not live to benefit from his plan. You say, you are going to put a lot of emphasis on research, but there is a lot of researched information on the shelves, which has not been able to get to the people who actually need this information. So, you should focus and change your emphasis to extension. The peasants of Uganda still want to see this information and these technologies going down to them so that they can translate that information into production. We shall not be able to achieve anything otherwise.  

The livestock sector has really suffered very much. The hon. Member, who has just sat down, was talking about Namibia being able to export beef to the European markets, but in Uganda, we are not able to export beef to the foreign markets because of the disease control system we have here. There are serious diseases, which will not allow us to penetrate the European markets, and nobody has paid emphasis to this. Even when you look at the report, the livestock sector is not given any priority. It is given only about three paragraphs, and yet if the livestock sector is really given the attention it deserves, it would be able to earn us a lot of foreign exchange.  

In Saudi Arabia, a kilo of beef costs about $7, supposing we were able to export beef to Saudi Arabia, how much money would we earn for this country? But most of the time, the emphasis is put on cotton, coffee and tea. When we get an outbreak like the CBPT outbreak two years ago, it took the Ministry almost six months to bring the vaccine here. This year we had another problem with the foot and mouth disease, up to now, some areas of Uganda have not received the vaccine for foot and mouth. It is now almost six months. So, I would like to urge the Ministry to focus on livestock. Many farmers of this country are also crying for seeds, but the Ministry is not paying any attention to that.

Let me wind up by saying that, if we want to benefit from the livestock sector, we must put emphasis and invest in that sector. It is the only sector that can give us income and foreign exchange for this country. I thank you.

MAJ KAZOORA JOHN (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will go straight to the report. On page 3, the last paragraph, on the provision of water for humans and agriculture, the report reads, “As we enter the fifth year, in spite of Government claims that the issue is being addressed, very little activity, if any, is seen on the ground.” 

Just at the top of page 4 of the report, it reads, “the Prime Minister assured the Committee and gave the undertaking that the undertaking that the provision of water for agriculture and other purposes would be addressed in the 2000/01 budget.”

Five years down the road, there is little, if anything, to be seen on the ground. I can assure this House and remind them that this is not the first time that Government is ‘making’ and ‘undertaking’. Now, I am really -(Interruption)

MR. KAYONGO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Kazoora that, what he is saying is reflected in the confusion between Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Water. Yesterday we were told that a list of 49 sub-counties is ready and these sub-counties are going to benefit from 5 million shillings per sub-county for water facilities. This morning, when I tried to inquire from the Minister of Agriculture about this list, he told me to check with the Ministry of Water. I wrote a note to the Ministry of Water -(Laughter)

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for a Member of this House to externalise a private communication between him and another Member as evidence against a Government department?  

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know what the note says. I have no idea. I can rule if it is read. On the other hand, if the hon. Member thinks that it is likely to prejudice his future chances of getting information, he should take the appropriate step.

MR. KAYONGO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your wise ruling.  I did not mention that I wrote to the hon. Buguma Isoke.  I was saying, I wrote to the Minister of Water Lands and Environment trying to find out about the list, and that Minister informed me that the only money he knows about for water is 50 million shillings, which is still in the Ministry of Agriculture. Then I inquired from the Ministry of Agriculture and I was referred to the Permanent Secretary. The Permanent Secretary told me that they transferred Shs. 258,938,220,000,000 to the Ministry of Water. This is the information I wanted to give to hon. Kazoora - (Laughter).  

MAJ. KAZOORA JOHN: I thank hon. Deo Kayongo. Do I need to say any more? This is what we continue to say time and time again, and we are going home after five years, empty handed, to our farmers.  

On 28th April this year, His Excellency the President addressed a referendum rally at Boma Grounds in Kamukuzi in Mbarara. He addressed opinion leaders and the LCs. He enumerated a number of achievements the Movement had made, but regretted that the Ministry of Agriculture was sleeping. Unfortunately, we did not have time for questions otherwise I would have asked him why he never poured cold water on the Ministry so that it would wake up.  Little did he know that actually, the Ministry was terminally sick, even with a broken spinal cord and in bed! This is the kind of situation this Ministry has been in up to date. It has been five years, and I mentioned this in year 1, year 2, year 3 and I continue.  

We have not been told about the messed up dams. We have finished dams, what will happen to them? I said here that, not until there is water and farmers’ cows start drinking that water, will that question be solved. And where is the money for the seeds, which was diverted to other sectors?  What will happen?  

Lastly, on page 16, on the livestock sub-sector, the Committee reports that they are happy with the Government policy on restocking. I feel betrayed because, when that part of the country was hit by the drought, hon. Elly Karuhanga and I personally went to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and told him about the bad situation that was taking place down there. I caused the Parliamentary Food Forum to move and visit parts of Mbarara, Bukanga, Kashari, and Isingiro. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in the original document on restocking, specifically included Kashari and Nyabushozi. We agreed at a meeting, and even in the paper that was presented on the Floor of this House, these two counties were there. We were surprised when this was presented here and there was a clique, I should say, that removed those two counties and we are not on the list today. Do we belong to this country? Do deserve services? Can our people be heard, what is happening? Can I ever trust that kind of meeting again?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Kazoora for giving way. The National Restocking Committee, which is under the office of the Prime Minister and chaired by the Minister of State for Northern Uganda and the Minister of State for Luwero Triangle, decided to carry out restocking in the restocking programme areas in phases. This was because we wanted to make an impact, and we wanted very clear monitoring. Therefore, I want to assure hon. Kazoora and hon. Karuhanga that Kashari and Nyabushozi of Mbarara are part of Luwero Triangle. They are within the restocking programme area and they will be handled in the next phase. We are waiting for the money from the Ministry of Finance so that we can go on to restock. We could not handle each area at the same time. Therefore, when we receive the next batch of funds, we shall handle those areas. It is not only Kashari and Nyabushozi that have been left out in this first phase of restocking. There are also other areas from other districts, which are within the restocking programme areas, which have been left out.  Therefore, I would like to inform you that it was not a clique but it was planning for the good of everybody.  Thank you very much.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, I am just worried about these continued and unfulfilled assurances on the Floor of the House. This was not even said, it was on the paper. How can I take the hon. Minister seriously that this time around, those people who lost their cows there will benefit from restocking?

Lastly, I would like to bring to the attention of the hon. Members of this House the fact that the Ministry of Agriculture is essentially a private sector Ministry funded by Government and farmers. We approve money here, but you see these Veterinary Doctors on their UV motorcycles go and treat the farmers’ cattle and the farmers still pay, even when they are already paying in this budget. The same thing happens with other extension workers. When and how will this mess ever be resolved in the interest of the people of this country? I thank you, Sir.

MR. LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also join others who have thanked the people who wrote the report, but I have a lot of noise to make with reference to the action, which the Committee recommended in regard to improving the Fisheries Sector. One of the recommendations was the need to intensify the marketing of fish. Indeed, since the collapse of the fish market, our economy has gone down.  Many people talk about economic growth, but since the collapse of that sector, it has gone down, and the shilling right now is 1700/= to the dollar. I would like to say that, on top of what they have attempted to recommend, there is need to check the quality of investment. A number of investors are looking down upon the fisheries sector, and they do not know what they are doing. They have no capacity to treat effluence, which eventually returns to the lake, and in the circumstances, the fish quality is affected. I did some research in the improvement of fish production and its environmental implications, especially following the poisoning of fish in Kampala. I discovered that, out of the landing sites I visited, about 7 per cent of the fishermen and women do not know whether toxic chemicals are dangerous to the fish! I would like to say that there is a need for us to intensify public advocacy on environmental friendliness, when it comes to dealing with fish.

I was alarmed by the recommendation 12 of the Committee, which reads as follows: “The Committee recommends that NARO scientists and NARO as an organisation should receive special recognition for the role played in controlling water hyacinth on our water bodies.”  

Alas! Let us not forget so soon. It is on record that the Vice President of Uganda had the grounds to recommend the use of toxic chemicals when wiping out the water hyacinth on the basis of the research conducted by NARO. And it is on record that, if it were not for public advocacy from people like me, many people had been convinced that we should use toxic chemicals to wipe out the water weed.  So, let us not forget. It is also on record that a whole Vice President in this country went on to encourage people to use –(Interruption)  

THE VICE PRESIDENT (Dr. Wandira Kazibwe): Mr. Speaker, is hon. Lukyamuzi in order to mislead this House by saying that the Vice President recommended use of chemicals? The Vice President, while Minister of Agriculture, presented the recommended way of getting rid of water hyacinth from all over the world, which included the use of chemicals.  

Is the hon. Lukyamuzi in order to mislead this House, when in actual fact, the Vice President physically, with a team of veterans and scientists, removed the water hyacinth from the dam manually, when he went around talking and making a lot of noise?

Is he in order to claim that he actually mobilised people, when afterwards he wrote to the Ministry and asked them for money to pay the people who were supposed to be volunteers?  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, if you are not aware of those recommendations, and you came here to mislead the House, then you are out of order.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just to follow up your wise ruling, it is on record that I persuaded volunteers in Luzira to use manual methods to remove the water hyacinth from the water. It is also on record, and if the Vice President denies, she may be forced to resign because –(Interruptions) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, if you continue that way, I will stop you from contributing. If you do not respect the Chair, I will stop you from contributing.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  So, let me abandon that line –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Proceed! You have abandoned it. In other words, you have withdrawn.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: I am not withdrawing, but I am withdrawing the words I had used. So, just to end the matter, I was saying –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, that line of approach might put you in some bit of problems or difficulties.  So, can you start on your next point? Hon. Abura Kene.

MR. ABURA KENE (Moroto County, Lira): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me start by thanking the chairman of the Committee and his Committee for the good report. I also thank the Ministry for coming up with a lot of theoretical points, which, I think, put into action, would help this country. However, I only want some few clarifications.

This report does not come out clearly to tell me what the role of Ministry is in the expansion of coffee production in the North, in particular, Lira, Apac, Kitgum and Gulu, and may be Kotido, where poverty is rampant. I would like to know the Ministry’s role.

Secondly, I would like to know what role the Ministry is playing in harmonising or settling the issue of cotton prices. Do they have a policy now that can help? This is where we have a problem. The farmers are now planting cotton, but they are still hesitant. They believe they can easily have the problems that they had last year. We want the Minister to come out with a proper policy on the prices of cotton and the provision of seeds and pesticides.

My third concern is on marketing, mainly of non-traditional crops. This is another area where this country can gain.  We need to export, if we have to solve the problem we are having with the dollar rates against the shilling, which has now gone down. This is because the coffee prices have gone down to about 30 cents per kilogram, the lowest I think for several years. If we can encourage the export of non-traditional crops, which are being produced in quite good quantities in the North, this would help improve our foreign exchange earnings.  Does the Minister have any policy to assist people get market for some of these crops, which could help us pick up and improve on our foreign exchange earnings?

Lastly, what policy does the Ministry have on the fishponds up country in the north, where we have problems?  We are just restocking, but we need protein. If our poor women in the villages were encouraged to produce, this is where we would get more protein. The provision of fish fillets - whatever they call them – can help the local poor women to get some income and also provide protein for their families.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. KAKUNGULU SHANNON (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a few remarks to make.  First of all, I would also like to congratulate the Committee for a job well done. Keep it up! I hope it does not only stop on paper, but it will be put to practice.

This country is sick, especially, the so-called ‘king Ministry’, that is the Ministry of Finance. Sometime last year, the hon. Minister in charge of Fisheries told us that he had secured money to the tune of not less than five million U.S dollars from the Peoples' Republic of China. This money was to be used in rehabilitating fishing landing sites for constructing and improving those landing sites. What amazes me is that, some officials from the Ministry of Finance decided to divert that money and instead bought Jiefang trucks. I do not what relevance these Jiefang trucks have towards the fishing industry. 

I come from a district, which used to depend on coffee as the biggest earner of money, but the coffee industry has been declining because of the coffee wilt disease and the changes in the weather.  We used - (Interruption)

MR. LWANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, Dr. Kakungulu. I want to inform the House that, because of this business by Ministry officials, of changing plans from income earning activities like fishing industry to buying Jiefangs, in the case of Kyamuswa, where we have over 43 landing sites and where the majority of fish comes from, at the end of the day, there is only one landing site at Kitovu going to be constructed. What a loss to this country!

DR. KAKUNGULU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like I was saying, Masaka had got to a point of relying on the fishing industry as its sole or biggest income generator. But now, when we are frustrated because our landing sites are not being repaired or renovated, it is very absurd. The people we represent in Masaka District are not happy, and we would like to question the Ministers of Finance and of Agriculture as to what happened to that money. 

I would like to comment on the issue of the Committee encouraging the private sector, under paragraph 12, sub section 4 on Private Sector Development. The report says: “we urge Government to quickly adopt policies that will promote private enterprises. The thrust of this Government policy should be to create an enabling environment for the efficient and rapid growth of the private sector with the aim of calling on the private sector to play a leading role in agricultural activities”  

Unless we change the Land Act to enable big investors to own large chunks of land in this country, we are wasting time in encouraging investors to come in a small way.  Unless we do that - (Interruption)

DR. NKUUHE: Mr. Speaker, an allegation has been made, and I was expecting some sort of response from the Front Bench. The hon. Member has said that money was diverted from one programme to another, and as a result, our farmers and fishermen suffered. Surely, either it is true or we demand an explanation.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr. Speaker, I kept quiet because I thought I would also have an opportunity to contribute. But, because of the importance of the matter now, I think I rather give information. 

The fact is, we have been dealing with China but on different programmes. The First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs, on his own initiative, approached China. In China, the Minister of Foreign Affairs is the one who determines the co-operation, unlike here, where Ministry of Finance controls everything. And through bilateral negotiations, I was made to understand he wanted to get the headquarters of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to be built with assistance from China.  At the same time, there was a programme on the fish landing sites and also a programme on feeder roads. So, the funds, which went to the Jiefang trucks, were not necessarily funds for the fishing landing sites.  

If there was any diversion, Ministry of Finance diverted money meant for the construction of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters to buy trucks for feeder roads. There had been a lot of correspondence on this matter, and I want to clarify that China is going to assist with other funds. They are going to assist us on one fish-landing site, and negotiations are going on with Japan to assist us on four others. Some other funding will be sourced to assist the other three fish landing sites. Thank you

MR. AWUZU ANDRUALE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Member, for accepting further information. The information my Senior Colleague has given you is quite correct, but you also asked how these trucks could benefit fishing. I would like to inform you that these trucks have arrived, they are 60, and we are distributing them to all the districts for the feeder roads. The districts with 600 kilometres of roads and above, including Masaka, are getting two each. And small districts, with 300 kilometres and below, are getting one truck each and these are for helping in improving the feeder roads. These feeder roads are the roads that lead to fishing points. If you produce fish, even if you have got landing sites, and you do not have roads, then you cannot take your fish away, and it will rot. Therefore, these Jiefang trucks actually help the fishing industry.  Thank you very much.

DR. KAKUNGULU: Mr. Speaker, we have had very nasty experiences as Members of Parliament with Jiefang trucks. And of all trucks, they decided to accept Jiefang trucks! 

Finally, I will summarise on the question of seeds being given to Karamoja. Has it come to the attention of her Excellency the Vice President that the chemical on the seeds she gave the farmers in Karamoja has been carefully washed off and the seeds are now being used as food by the starving people of Karamoja?  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your indulgence. The previous speaker wondered whether it had come to my attention that the wanainchi in Karamoja are actually washing the seed and eating it instead of doing what they should do with it. I would like to take this opportunity to inform the hon. Kakungulu and the House that actually, the seed, which was taken to Karamoja, is being planted in most of the villages that it was targeting for. I wish the Minister responsible for disaster preparedness would indeed come here to give a full report of the programme that we started there.  

The Ministry of Agriculture is represented by hon. Kibirige Sebunya. The Ministry of Defence is represented by hon. Kavuma. The Ministry of Health is represented by hon. Wabudeya, who handles issues of nutrition and children's' health and the President's Office is represented by hon. Basoga Nsandhu, for purposes of setting up a radio station there. Almost every Ministry in Government is represented, but the championing of the programme and implementation is being co-ordinated by the Prime Minister’s office, under hon. Butime and hon. Kuka.  

I can not comment on the issue of washing seed because I have not got technical people to say so. Actually the newspapers reported that a Member from that place went to a certain village and farmers were washing seed. I want Members of this hon. House to note that a few years ago, when we had a similar problem of famine in the east, the when farmers were given the seed, some of them washed it.  When we verify exactly what is happening, we shall tell this august House what is actually on the ground. 

I want to inform the hon. Members that the plan is not only to actually avail seed, it is also to do other things, but we have agreed that instead of the wanainchi being given food once a month, the food be given once a week. The children have been given high-energy biscuits, because the children under five in the villages were not being targeted. We may have problems with implementation, but I want to assure this House that it is a noble programme. We are calling upon all of you, especially our Colleagues from Karamoja, who indeed have been part of the planning from the beginning, to be part of this initiative. We can stop our people from begging for food and being treated like people who are not citizens of this country. So, we shall avail this House with a report on the exact position, so that the press, which has been under reporting or over reporting, is actually also given the right information and we move ahead.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. BITAHWA SAMSON (Igara West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also wish to start by thanking the Committee for a very precise report. Unlike last year’s report and the years before, this report is to the point, and I would like to congratulate the Committee for that. 

I would also like to congratulate the Ministry, especially on its achievements to export fish. I was very pleased when I visited one of the very remote areas in Europe and I found Uganda’s fish as one of the delicacies in that city. People would actually time it, they knew exactly when the fish from Uganda was coming. It was valued because it was organic and because it comes from the fresh waters of Lake Victoria. This gives me reason to believe that the Ministry should find other ways of expanding our fish export by improving on organic feeds as the Committee clearly indicates. The fish in Lake Victoria is maintained by organic matter, and it may be a bit difficult to get specialised methods to use in producing organic foods.  

Talking of organic farming, probably one of the ways we can expand our market is by exploring ways and means of exporting products which we organically produce. There are a variety of products, where we do not use chemicals to produce them, and there are a number of markets on the European market and in the North American market that value organically produced foods. This is probably a chance for us. We can extend our market abroad through exporting our organically produced agricultural products.  

Last year, we were made to understand that there was a very dangerous disease called coffee wilt that attacks coffee and it has no cure. The only cure was to produce as much coffee as possible so that, when some of it dies, some of it survives. I want to find out whether the Ministry now possesses a way of curing this coffee wilt disease –(Interruption).

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr. Speaker, we do not as yet have a cure for the coffee wilt disease. We are only saying that we have two fronts. One is development, where we insist that we shall continue planting coffee using clean seedlings, planting in clean gardens, and ensuring that it is well maintained. The second dimension is a scientific one, where we have put in place a technical force to study the characteristics of the disease and how it can be overcome. Meanwhile, we are also developing other varieties of coffee, which may be deemed to be resistant to the coffee wilt disease. When we are ready, we shall pronounce ourselves on this matter.  

THE SPEAKER: Ask or pose any questions you wish to pose, I will give the Minister concerned an opportunity to respond so that the debate can flow smoothly.

MR. BITAHWA: I am very grateful for this information because it is very important to our coffee industry.

Lastly, I would like to ask the Minister to give us an explanation concerning extension services. Extension services upcountry do not exist. It is very disappointing that in many villages, some of the farmers actually say that they have never seen extension workers since colonial days! This is very dangerous because our farmers continue to use old fashioned and unscientific methods in agriculture and naturally, the product cannot be positive. I would like to have an explanation on this issue.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. SEMBAJJA SULAIMAN (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to continue from where my Colleague, hon. Bitahwa, has left off. 

The Committee has recommended, on recommendation five, that Government should realise that agricultural extension services can only be effective when there is an attitudinal change. The question is who is the attitudinal change directed to? Is it directed to the Government, to the extension workers or to the population? The role of the extension services in the production sector is paramount. This country has trained a lot of agricultural officers. We have agricultural colleges.  I do not know whether the confusion is because these agricultural colleges have been taken over by another Ministry. And I do not know whether it warranted the statement that the farmers cannot even be reached by the agricultural extension workers. 

The Ministry of Agriculture has the biggest fleet of vehicles you can think of, maybe followed by Ministry of Defence. You can only realise that they have so many vehicles when they have a workshop. You will see so many Pajeros and Double Cabin Pickups. Now, who is going to mobilise who? This is my dilemma. In the past, the agricultural extension workers were carrying out a noble duty to serve the population. Now that there are so many colleges and there are so many people coming out, we should be told. This report has not told us whether there are enough extension workers in this country. The report has not also told us whether Government has put a ceiling on the recruitment of agricultural extension workers.  This is what we are interested in. If that is the problem, then we ask Government to lift the ban so that the extension workers can carry out their duties.  

You can now see, the whole Vice-President doing the work of extension services, when there are people who are supposed to do it!  She is supposed to oversee, but in the absence of the extension workers, a whole Vice-president is running around doing the job. I want the chairman to tell me whether there is any problem as far as the recruitment of agricultural extension workers is concerned –(Interruption)

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr. Speaker, my mandate, according to the detail from the appointing authority, is mobilisation. My job is to mobilise. I cannot do extension work because I am not an expert in that field.  So, I mobilise people to take up hon. Kisamba’s policies, I mobilise people to internalise hon. Kiyonga’s policies under Health. I mobilise everybody in the country to take up policies and to internalise what this Parliament and the Executive have agreed to put on the ground. So, I just wanted to inform hon. Sembajja that I am not an extension worker in the Ministry of Agriculture.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, first of all, hon. Sembajja and the Members should know that extension services were decentralised. The local governments appoint and employ.  Secondly, it is Government’s policy that at every sub-county, there shall be an extension crop agriculturist and an extension veterinarian. As far as we know, the majority of the local governments have moved to employ these people. I visited some districts of the country last week and I was at least told by the local leadership that much of this had already been done. I was even told, in one district, that there are actually as many as 30 graduate veterinarians employed by that district -  (Interjections)- Yes, that is what I was told.  I did not do any physical auditing, but I was told this.  

I would like the hon. Member, if he cares to find out, to go back to his district and his constituency and find out whether his local government has actually carried out the policies of the Government. What the central Government does is to pay the salaries. So, no local government should have an excuse that they cannot employ these people because they have no money. We guarantee payment. All they need to do is to recruit these people and to supervise them.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. SEMBAJJA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am happy with the information given by the Vice-President. I am not very happy with the information given by hon. Kagonyera, because he said he visited the districts and only found out that many veterinary officers are in the sub-county.  He forgot to tell me how many agricultural officers are in those sub-counties. That means the area of agricultural extension services is not catered for.   

I would like the hon. Minister of Agriculture to inform me about origin of the coffee wilt disease. Where did it came from and how did it come to Uganda? Is it because NARO is not vigilant in monitoring coffee being moved from one country to another, for example from Rwanda to Uganda or from Zaire to Uganda? Is there no control on this coffee so that we can detect in advance whether the coffee being received in Uganda has got this disease? I want to find out whether Government has put in place a mechanism to control this. And I want the hon. Minister to assure my people in Bukomansimbi, who have embarked on planting clonal coffee, whether clonal coffee, as a hybrid, will not be affected by the coffee wilt disease.  They had told us that this type is resistant, I do not know whether it has been tested. I want to help him mobilise, so that I can tell them to grow more, if he can assure me that the coffee wilt will not affect the hybrid clonal coffee.  

Finally, in recommendation number 9, the Committee mentions that Shs.8.5 million will be given per sub-county. I want to impress it upon the Ministry that they are not merely sending and decentralising the activities of the Ministry by sending 8.5 million shillings to sub-counties. The Ministry has a duty to supervise and monitor and see whether this money, which is going to be sent to the sub-counties, is going to make an impact.  Districts and sub-counties’ management, as we know, have misused funds. They have misused graduated tax funds, and this is very common, hon. Members can bear witness.  Therefore, do not only say you have sent Shs.8.5 million and then you sit back here.  Follow it up and see whether it will make an impact. If it is not followed, and you leave it to the district chairmen of LC V, I can assure you, they are going to divert this money, and Government will be blamed in the long run. This is the practice.  PAC activities in these districts are not very vigilant.  Money is being consumed left and right and the centre is only looking on!  

Those are the few issues that I want the hon. Minister to clarify to my people of Bukomansimbi and to me. At least, they should continue getting out of the poverty line and advancing so that they can get money to educate their children. I thank you very much. 

MR. RWAKOOJO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Committee for the lesson in modernisation of agriculture. I was having a problem understanding it, but after reading the report and talking to the chairman, I think I do understand it now. And I would like to read it out so that I compare my notes with the chairman and make sure that we are at par.  ‘I want to appreciate MAAIF for its input in PMA and working so hard to decentralise ARDCS, working with NARO replacing extension workers with NAABS to promote DIS - and I am told DIS is Data Information Systems. The co-ordination of NARO and IARC is a masterpiece especially in as far as PSDS is concerned.  The hard work of DDA, CDO, UCDA, UTA and of course, UNSIA will one day deliver this country to MA, which means modernisation of agriculture.’  This is what I understand.  I think that once we have mastered this jargon, we will have realised the modernisation of agriculture –(Laughter).  

Seriously, however, when the President was campaigning, and when we were all campaigning, we all said we wanted to modernise agriculture. Day in and day out, since 1996, we have been told that agriculture is the backbone of this economy. When I go to my constituency, and I am passing through other constituencies, I look for this promise that we have given to the people of Uganda and I cannot find it. We have talked about UPE, and wherever you go, UPE is visible and alive, and it is right up there, where is MA, where is the modernisation of agriculture? The only thing I have heard from the Ministry of Agriculture has been shifting directorates into departments, closing some of them, opening some, doing away with extension workers and replacing them with something else. At the end of the day, the farmer does not get the help he needs and the farmer does not benefit from whatever we are doing.  

When the chairman of the committee was reading his report, someone said that unless modernisation of agriculture is delivered by speed delivery, the farmer will never see it. Definitely, it is not going to be in the term of our sixth Parliament. It is not going to be possible, because we have not even debated it.

We are trying to improve the income of our people. Our policies are not going along with us. What sense does it make to have expensive equipment rotting when people in Lwemiyaga are asking for only one dam, just one lousy dam! 

I want to appeal to Government, if they really cannot privatise Ministry of Agriculture, they should seriously consider it, because there used to be five departments, now they have been reduced to about three. The other bodies have been eliminated or privatised. Can we privatise the remaining part of it, because there is nothing?  In the years -(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, your time is up.

MR. RWAKOOJO: One concluding remark, Mr. Speaker. All I know is that, when I was growing up, Ministry of Agriculture was present and visible. Today, there is nothing.  Thank you.

MR. NDAWULA KAWEESI (Kiboga West, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to thank the chairman of the Committee for a good report. My submission is about the mandate of this Ministry of Agriculture.  

Throughout the report, the farmer, who is the critical component of agricultural activities, is not mentioned.  All that the Ministry of Agriculture is going to do for him is to promote, guide and support. All these are peripheral activities. Why can’t the Ministry of Agriculture be responsible and cause production of crops? 

You remember, some two weeks ago or so, we had a report from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness that some people were starving in this country. So, it became clear that it is the responsibility of Government to feed its people, but within the structure of Government, looking through all the Ministries, there is no agency that is primarily responsible for the production of food. Now we have heard that the Ministry of Agriculture, which is so close, is meant to support, promote and guide, with assumptions that the farmer has good seeds and good livestock. This is ridiculous! Ministry of Agriculture, we know very well, is the one Ministry closest to the farmer. It must take up the responsibility of causing production.  

The other issue I would like to comment on is taxation on agricultural equipment like tractors and harvesters. I find this tax ridiculous. We all know very well that nobody can board a tractor to go to a wedding. Why do we have to pay VAT on them? We pay import duty, excise duty, so much tax, to the extent that whoever buys a tractor here has got to buy a used one, so that he can accommodate the cost. Or if you buy a new tractor, instead of ploughing, it is used for carrying sand and the like.  

It is very important for us to recognise that food is primarily what a citizen requires. We talk about food security, sometimes it is in the Ministry of Planning, sometimes it is in Agriculture or Disaster Preparedness, and that is very bad. We have to get the Ministry of Agriculture to cause production. Once there is production of foodstuff, for sure there is bound to be a country somewhere starving. We can sell that food there. The argument that when the tractors were brought, there was a lot of production and we lost produce is inconsequential.  Some people were negligent, but that cannot be the principle for Government to deny farmers services to enable them to produce more.  

The other issue that I would like to comment on is these silos, which we all know, were built with our money. I understand they are being privatised. They are looking for a private investor to take them up, but really, this shows no seriousness at all!  We are crying because of the hunger and the famine we have now. The food that is being supplied to some areas of this country is not imported to this country. It moves from one village to another village, showing that some people are producing and others are not producing. What does that show?  The people to help them are absent, otherwise, why should your neighbour have maize and you do not have anything to eat. So, I believe it would be good to consolidate our policies so that Government retains these silos. We can increase on production if Ministry of Agriculture causes production, and then the produce is stored by Government.   What use is it to let the produce get wasted. I do not see how a private man, who buys a silo, will be compelled to store food to ensure food security for Uganda.  

I would like to plead with the Ministry of Agriculture and the entire Government on this idea that because of restructuring of Government Ministries, the role of the Ministries has become supervisory and regulatory.  How do you supervise what is not there? How do you regulate what is not there? Nobody is going to tell you that the private sector can make money in farming. That is not done all over the world, and Uganda cannot be unique. It is just an obligation of Government to ensure that there is food. Finally, in my plea, I hope the leader of Government business will cause restructuring to include, in the mandate of Ministry of Agriculture, causing production of crops, livestock and fisheries. I thank you.

MR. BAKU RAPHAEL (West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the general policy of the Ministry of Agriculture and the recommendations of the Committee. It seems there is not much time so I am going to focus on matters of interest and concern to my constituency. 

I would like to start by making some corrections on the report, on annex 1, page 8. Among the list of Technology Verification Centres (TVCs) mentioned here, one of them is supposed to be Pakele in Moyo District. I would like to submit that in Moyo District, there is no location called Pakele, therefore, I think there is an error here.  

Also, when I look at the other centres that are mentioned here, they all refer to District Farm Institutes, which are also marked as TVCs. So, the one for Moyo should be Moyo DFI, like Kitgum DFI, Abi DFI and so on. So, I think there is need for some correction there.  

Secondly, I would also like to echo the reaction of the people of West Moyo and Moyo District generally, on the problems they are having in agriculture. There was a survey, which was conducted by Uganda Participatory Poverty Assessment Project. Within that project, Moyo District was one of the pilot projects. The people of Moyo had the opportunity to air out their feelings and their desperation concerning agriculture. In the report, which was released by the project, the people of Moyo expressed the following:

    1. The agricultural related problems, which they have been experiencing, are pests and disease control. There is lack of pest and disease control and as a result, most of the crops they try to produce get destroyed.
  
    2. Insufficient and expensive agricultural farm inputs, these include pesticides, fungicides, seeds and ox ploughs. So, when we talk about modernisation of agriculture, meaning that farmers should make use of these drugs and inputs, it is impossible for the people of Moyo because they are too expensive.

    3. The problem of vermin, baboons, monkeys and hippopotamus, which destroy the crops saved from the pests.

    4. They also complain about unreliable markets, which discourage people from growing more crops. 

These are just a few of the many problems they have raised in relation to crop agriculture. In relation to fisheries, I will read a quotation, which was got from a person from Moyo. It goes to prove the point that although we are budgeting to support the people who are supposed to be extension officers, they also demand a lot of money, and other costs are incurred by the peasants as they try to make ends meet. These are quotations from people in Moyo: 

1. “We now fear that the fisheries officer will come to access us in order to make us pay licence fees”. So, the first problem is that they fear the licence fee.  

2.  “The landing site is even tendered out of our 100 percent from fish catch. We give away 25 percent to the tender organisation or individual, this is the second cost to the fisher man”.  

    3. “Although there is free education, there are books, uniforms and other scholastic requirements to be attended to. On top of that, we pay graduated tax of 10,000/=.” They do not see why they should pay graduated tax because they also pay for tendered landing sites.
 
    4. “The boat licence is 13,000/= per boat, per year and we feel we are over taxed”.  This is a quotation from a man who spoke to the researcher who compiled this report. This reflects the uncoordinated taxation policies that have been implemented. 

A person who wants to be a fishmonger has to get a licence from the fisheries department, and then at the end of the day, when they see the person going to the market, they have to pay the market dues. So, members of our public feel that these departments of Agriculture over tax them. 

The third department, which I would like to comment on, is the department veterinary services. Here the quotation says, “when you go to the veterinary department, they ask you to pay money to the tune of 4,000/= per animal for treatment. Further still, when you slaughter an animal, they ask for revenue, as if they assisted you in raising the animals.”-(Interruption)  

MR. WANGUBO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the speaker on the Floor talks about the taxation, I wonder what he wants in place, because the one catching fish is a producer, the boatman is a different person, and the one going to the market is a different person. What would you really want to see in place, because these are three different people being taxed differently? Do you assume it is one person doing all the three?  Thank you.

MR. BAKU: Well, I was quoting the problems with the veterinary department. You first of all pay for the drugs, 4,000/= per animal, and then when you slaughter the animal, you also pay for inspection. And thirdly, even when you go to the market, you pay market dues. So, these are the different taxes being imposed on the same person. Even if was not on the same person, it gets reflected at the end of the day on the final consumer. The final consumer has to incur the cost, which they all paid before. If you are buying fish, you should also pay for the one who paid for the boat licence, the one who paid for the fishmonger’s licence and the one who took it to the market and so on. So, it makes life very difficult for the end user of these products. 

The last point I would like to make is in relation to the good policies that are being put in place by the Ministries, but are not sometimes implemented as they are programmed. I have one example, which I read in the policy statement of the Minister of Agriculture, on page 73. The Agricultural Sector Program Support was supposed to be implemented in Bundibugyo, Kabarole, Masaka, Rakai, Pallisa, Tororo, Moyo, Busia and Sembabule. Last year, we were kept hoping that Moyo was going to be a beneficiary under this program. When the component that deals with agricultural training and information centre came up, we were supposed to be one of the beneficiary districts because we are within the program. Our people kept hoping that they would be benefit, until the day of signing the agreement, that is when we realised Moyo was no longer on the program.  

Her Excellency the Vice President visited Moyo last year and this issue was very strongly put to her. In her capacity as Minister of Agriculture, she undertook that Moyo would remain there. We tried to make a lot of contacts, but at the end of the day, we lost out on one component called DATIC. I hope we shall not lose out on the remaining components that are outlined in this policy statement. My appeal is that, when these kinds of programs are laid out, to give confidence to our people and even to enable us propagate and mobilise people to support them, they must be implemented as programmed, otherwise, we will be made liars. When you go and say Moyo is in this program and at the end of the day you find it not there, what will people think about you and about the Government on whose behalf you are talking? I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KAJARA ASTON (Mwenge South, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also wish to support the Committee report, but in supporting it, I would like to express concern on the implementation of the plan for agriculture modernisation. I would like to particularly express my concern for the Ministry of Agriculture in spearheading the eradication of poverty in this country.  

We have been told that NARO is spearheading investigation and research to bring out new technologies and varieties of crops and seeds. But, I afraid that these technologies and varieties remain only show cases of NARO, as far as the rural population is concerned. 

I would like to emphasise the lack of availability of seed, inputs, planting materials, and in particular, improved seeds, for example maize, beans, soyabeans, sorghum, to mention but a few. I am even surprised that her Excellency the Vice President has been distributing these seeds in Karamoja, because I had opportunity to go to Kawanda last Friday and I wanted two tones of maize, but they said, they are rationing the seed because there is no seed there. There are no beans in sufficient quantities, and yet you are telling us that you have to modernise agriculture using improved seeds. When I asked why there were no seeds in Kawanda, the first reason they gave was that there was no funding being provided to the seed project because the seed project is being privatised.  They have formed what they call the Uganda Seed Company, but it is still on paper. So, the funds that were used to run and multiply seeds in the seed project are no longer available because there is a delay in divestiture of the seed project. Consequently, there is a lot of adulteration of the seed that is on the market.  

First of all, there are no chemicals available in Kawanda. Even the available seed they have in stock cannot be processed for the farmers because they have no chemicals. And the reason they have no chemicals is because they have no funds. So, all the funds that were available in that project, after they had sold the seed were banked with the Ministry of Agriculture and they cannot get those funds until they go through the Ministry of Finance.  The result of all this is a dire shortage of the improved seeds that would have otherwise helped this country in poverty eradication.  

We are also talking about the coffee wilt disease. The coffee wilt disease has hit the majority of districts in this country. For most of us, at least in Kabarole District, coffee was the leading revenue earner for the household, but today, the coffee wilt disease has hit most of the coffee trees. The Ministry tells the farmers, everyday, to plant clonal coffee. There are limited nurseries in the area, and where there are nurseries, the coffee plant is Shs. 500, and therefore very expensive for the ordinary farmer to afford. 

I remember when I tried to take coffee plants to Kabarole, I had to go to Kawanda, I had to go to Luwero, I had to go to Mpigi in order to carry 400 or so of these coffee plants to the farmers in the whole county. I did this well knowing that coffee was a very good earner to the ordinary farmer. The information from the Ministry of Agriculture is available because we have been told to plant coffee, but the seedlings are not with the people. If they are there, they are very expensive  -(Interruption)

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I thought I should put the record right. It is true that seeds are very expensive, and it is true that quite a number of people have now been motivated to plant coffee. But also, in this budget, if it is passed, we have provided for 1.5 billion shillings just for coffee. Tomorrow, the District Agricultural Officers are converging in Kampala to be briefed by Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) so that they ensure that these seedlings are available at an affordable price. The only problem is, because of the coffee wilt disease we do not want to move seedlings from one area to another area. We are now encouraging the use of clean seed. I think we shall over-come this. 

MR. KAJARA: Mr. Speaker, I hope, with the Minister's explanation, the farmer will be able to get clean coffee, as he called it, which clean coffee has been a nightmare in availability. I hope what he calls affordable will really be affordable to the farmer. If you plant 500 plants, you would need 250,000/= at Shs. 500 each, and if you put in the element of transport, hiring a pick-up from Kawanda or from Mubende to take coffee to Toro, it would cost you another 400,000/=. So, that is not affordable in the true sense of it.  

About other planting materials, we have read in the policy statement that they are trying to promote banana growing in areas that did not grow bananas before. Hon. Members will be surprised to learn that a banana sucker in Kawanda costs Shs.700/=. One banana sucker would cost 700 shillings, so, to plant 500 of them, you would need Shs.350,000. Even then, availability is a problem. I went to Kawanda the last season and they told me that there were no banana suckers. Those which were there had been booked for areas like Gulu and Kitgum. So, I really wonder how the country will be modernised and how food security will be attained with the scarcity of planting materials.

There are cassava varieties that have been developed by NARO. I had the opportunity of visiting Namulonge, were these cassava stems are being developed. One sack of cassava stems costs between Shs. 20,000 and 30,000, and you need a full lorry of about 50 to 100 bags for a sub-county.  This is still very expensive, and when they are not available, it even makes matters worse.  

I would like to implore the Ministry of Agriculture not only to stop at promoting NARO to research and develop new varieties and technologies. These new varieties and technologies should be availed to the districts, they should be availed these centres, which are being established, and they should be multiplied at local level in order for them to be available to the common man. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
  
MR. KUTESA SAM (Mawogola County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join my Colleagues in congratulating the Committee on their report. I would also like to congratulate Colleagues who have been making contribution on this very important subject. But most of it seems to be lamentation. You lament about water, you lament about coffee, you lament about cotton, you lament about seeds, you lament about marketing!  

In my view, if you are going to talk about modernising agriculture, you must make a bold decision and invest in agriculture. How do you modernise it? If you want to modernise industry, what do you do?  You invest in it. If you want to improve education, what do you do? You invest in it. If you want to improve the health of people, you invest in it, but you do not just sing about it. You can say modernisation, modernisation and modernisation, but you will end up sloganeering. I think it is time we, as Members of Parliament and the Government, together make a bold decision to invest in agriculture. 

Why do I say this?  I say this because I think, as a country, the only comparable advantage we have above others around us is agriculture. That is our comparative advantage. Secondly, we have over 90 percent of our population engaged in agriculture. Now, when you look at the budget that hon. Kanyike wants us to approve, I am told that it is 8 percent of our national budget. This is a remarkable improvement. I want to, first of all, congratulate Government, because you started from 2 percent in 1989 and you are now to at 8 percent, that is a remarkable improvement. But you are talking about the backbone of your economy here! Do we really deserve to invest only 8 per cent of our national budget in the backbone of our economy?  Are we deceiving ourselves or are we going to make any headway? I understand that we have national reserves for us to rely on when we have a problem. We have national reserves in dollars! I think we now have about US $700 million that is five months’ worth of imports. What is the surest way of maintaining foreign reserves other than investing in agricultural exports?

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, hon. Kutesa is a senior legislator, he is a widely read person, he has travelled, and he has a lot of knowledge. He is now concerned about lamentation of Parliament, and I am sure the point he is making will also end up in the Hansard, and it will remain a lamentation. With all that experience, can hon. Kutesa advise this Parliament on how we can cause Government to make sure that we seriously invest in agriculture and we do not end up lamenting all the time. 

MR. KUTESA: I can see where hon. Kazoora wants to lead me, but I was very careful in my opening remarks. I said, both Members of Parliament and the Government must make a bold decision. If we do not do it jointly, another group, which can make bold decisions, will replace us. You, Members of Parliament and Ministers who lament only, another group will replace us. In other countries, when an administration fails, another one replaces it, and if we are not careful, that is where we are headed for. That is part of my experience. 

I was saying that we have about $700 million as reserves, and this is hard currency. The best way to maintain credible reserves is for you to increase your exports, and you can only increase exports in Uganda, in my view, by investing in agriculture. Where else are you going to get your reserves?  Are you going to get them from your mines? Yesterday, we were talking about mines here and we are speculating about oil. We have been doing that for many years now. Where are you going to get your money, unless you invest in agriculture? Why can’t we take $100 million out of our reserves and invest it in agriculture, in exportable crops like coffee. 

The report mentions beginning to invest in new crops. My friend, the old saying goes 'make new friends but do not forget the old'. Have you invested sufficiently in cotton?   Have you invested sufficiently in coffee, so that you abandon them to go to new crops? I agree that we must have research, but we must put in about $100 million not 60 billion shillings. Let us take that $100 million, invest it in coffee, cotton, fisheries, water for cattle and in powder milk plants, then you can be sure that in the next five years, your reserves will continue to increase because you have increased your levels of export. 

The Banyankore have a saying, ngu norya ebikuhwaho nkembeba yomwitongo. When people shift and they leave their houses, rats do not normally follow them, they stay there. The rats begin to eat what people who have shifted left, and in time, that gets finished as well. So, let us not be like rats, which depend on food that is left over by people who have migrated. Migrate with them and you have assured food. Invest in agriculture, then you have assured reserves.  I thank you.

MRS. BABA DIRI (Representative, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this report. First of all, I would like to thank the Committee of Agriculture for the report. It has covered a lot of very important issues that we have been discussing since the beginning of this Parliament.  

I would like to comment on the modernisation of agriculture, which we have talked about since the beginning of this Parliament. I would like to appreciate the Government’s efforts in trying to modernise agriculture by providing information, raising loans for the farmers and providing seeds. My greatest worry is that, what we are doing is not reaching the farmers right at the grassroots. They are still using old seeds, and this is an example of the ignorance of our farmers due to lack of information.  

Secondly, we have talked about having large-scale agriculture. The kind of settlements our people have in the villages does not warrant any massive or extensive agriculture. In the villages, homes are distributed close to each other leaving very little space for agriculture. The farmers grow all types of crops like beans, maize, sorghum and millet but in very small quantities, and many times, these crops get consumed before the next planting season. 

Another problem we have is that, there are people who have big chunks of land, but they do not want to use it and they do not allow large-scale farmers to use it. In developed countries, Government identifies good farming land and then the people there are moved to a place, which is not really very fertile and this place is used for growing food crops in large amounts. I would like our Government to look into that. People may not like the idea of putting people in one place, but where shall we get a place for large-scale farming? 

I would like to comment on extension workers. At the beginning of this Parliament, I informed the House that people with disabilities are also farmers. They carry out a lot of agricultural activities and livestock rearing. I insisted then, that there was a need to have a desk for disability in the Ministry of Agriculture to address the needs of farmers with disability, for example those who are deaf, the visually impaired, and the physically handicapped. All along, the Ministry of Agriculture has paid a deaf ear to our recommendations, and now, our term of office is coming to an end, and it seems that we have never made any efforts to that effect.  

I would like, again, to comment on the re-stocking programme. I appreciate the work of the Prime Minister in trying to see that the re-stocking exercise is carried out, everybody is involved, and the cows are given to the poorest of the poor. The policy and the implementation programme are there, but what is happening on the ground?  I have been following the distribution, and I have discovered that, in the districts, there are very few women and no people with disabilities on the restocking committees. At the parish committees, you may get a woman or no woman at all and no person with disability. The process of getting the livestock is tedious. You must first apply and then they will analyse your application. When they analyse, they are looking out for whether you have a piece of land, whether you have experience in livestock farming and whether you will be able to manage those cattle. But, I think that should not be the case.  If you are talking of the poorest of the poor, he or she may not have those skills. It is the duty of Ministry of Agriculture to provide training, so that women and people with disabilities can benefit from this programme.

I would like to find out from the Minister of Agriculture what the connection between the Central Government and the decentralised government is -(Interruption)

MS. NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Baba Diri for giving way. The hon. Member is raising a lot of queries, but when you read the guidelines for restocking in the implementation manual, you realise that what the hon. Member is raising is included in the implementation manual, which was delivered to the districts. We had a consultation meeting and we invited people from all the 30 districts. They converged here in Kampala, and we made the final copy of that manual together with the beneficiaries. For example, the women are supposed to benefit 60 percent. The real target is the active poor.  There are some people who are poor, but when you give them the animal, they will not even be able to look after it, because they are not interested. There are those who are poor but active, once you give him or her something, he or she will be able to use it profitably.  

People with disabilities are also mentioned in our implementation manual, and the youth are specifically mentioned. The committee that is selecting the real beneficiaries is the Parish Restocking Committee, elected by the parish that is benefiting. So, we put into consideration everything that the hon. Member is raising.  We are only left with moving down and making sure that what we put down is being implemented. Thank you very much.

MRS. BABA DIRI: Thank you very much for that information. I think you are just emphasising my point. We have the policy, we have the programmes, but the issue is that people with disability and the women are not benefiting.  What can the Central Government do to ensure that these marginalised groups benefit? Everything is in writing, but the implementation is the problem. That is my concern.  I do not know when you are going to move down to the districts because they are already distributing the livestock. So, my question still stands. I want to find out how the Central Government can influence the decentralised government –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, we do not like interrupting Members too often, but on this question, I would like the hon. Member to know that we actually monitor what is happening in this restocking exercise. I did precisely that. And also, when we launched the restocking programme in the District of Mbale, the first recipient of a cow was a woman. So, it is not correct to say that we do not make sure that the guidelines are followed. We actually do.  I thank you. 

MRS.  MUKWAYA: With all due respect to my senior Colleague, hon. Kagonyera, I think the Ministry of Agriculture should take hon. Baba Diri’s concern very seriously. I want to inform this House that we have reviewed the entandikwa scheme and it is doing very well.   In the entandikwa manual, we specifically gave a percentage for women, for the youth, for the aged and so on.  But in the actual implementation, the committees are not yet sensitised and may not allow women and people with disabilities to benefit. So, I think we must be conscious, we should actually monitor and see that these interest groups benefit.

MRS. BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, our Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development for that information. I would like to get some clarification from the Minister who talked previously as to whether they have a monitoring team at the district to see that everybody gets cattle.  

I wound like to wind up by saying that, in modernisation, it is very important for us to go down to the grassroots and involve everybody. We must also put in practice what we have put down on paper.  Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr. Kisamba Mugerwa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Aware of the time constraint, I would like to be brief. I would like, in the first place, to thank the Committee, with whom we have met several times, for having internalised the problems, solutions and challenges experienced by the Ministry and the agricultural sector in general. This report reflects the problems, solutions and challenges that we are experiencing in the Ministry.  

Secondly, I would like to thank all those Members, whom I cannot mention by name, but whose contribution has given us insight in these various areas where we need to carry out more sensitisation to which we need to internalise.  

Before I go to specific areas, I would like to give one general remark. The problem we are facing in the Ministry and in the agricultural sector in general, is its mandate, in light of the atmosphere that we operate in and the expectations of the public, even Parliament. 

I welcome the contribution made by hon. Kaweesi. He said that once you are appointed a Minister, you have to carry out those duties in light of the mandate, the functions and the policies governing the Ministry. And this is exactly what I am doing. In the modernisation programme, we are emphasising the peasants. In fact, the plan for modernisation of agriculture focuses on the peasants. We estimate that the peasants are about 70 percent of the farming population in the country and the majority of them are the women and the disabled and they are poor.  And we think that in order to get them out of poverty and ensure food security, we have to first increase productivity. 

How do we answer the question of increasing productivity?  If we are given even one shilling from the Treasury, we shall spend it on research, in order to improve on the technologies that can give a farmer so much yield per unit area. That is why we emphasise technology. And that is why we are saying that NARO is spearheading modernisation in generating these technologies. A question that has arisen here is why these technologies are not available. They are in Kawanda, they are in Namulonge and hon. Kajara had to travel all the way to get assistance. Now we are decentralising research through Agricultural Research Development Centres (ARDCs). We will focus on ecological zones, where we shall focus on production and research pertaining to that area, in order to increase concentrated production. This will also increase the marketing of our crops.  

We are going beyond creating outreach, so that the researcher does not stop only in Kawanda and in these Agricultural Research Development Centres. We want them to also reach the district through ADCs, that is why you see a list of technological development sites, which, we think, should be at sub-county, even at parish, level. We want tem to work with the farmers and to identify their problems in a guided manner so that NARO responds. We need poverty-oriented research, which, will respond to poverty eradication. If there is any public money to be spent on research, this is where we want to spend it. When the technologies are made available, the farmers will need continual guidance through the agricultural advisory services, which hitherto, we call extension services.

We should remember that extension is a decentralised function now under the districts, but we have 2701 extension workers in the country. 1268 of them in the crop sector, 873 vets, 397 fisheries and 163 entomologists. Besides this, we have numerous NGOs, which provide these services one way or another. The problem is how can they be organised to be effective. And that is why we have introduced the National Agricultural Advisory Services under the PMA. It was created to ensure that public money goes directly to the sub-county. And we want to make the farmers have a voice in whatever problem. Now these extension workers in the sub-county are seen as small kings. They are not assessable. The farmer should now have an advantage over them because he will be the one receiving the money through farmers’ forums and councils. These are going to be put in place so that the peasant at that level, together with the technocrats and the all NGOs, have a voice in how the money is going to be used, and this will increase accountability.

We have not been facilitating extension workers. It is only recently that I acquired motor cyclists, and I have only managed to distribute to about 244 only, and yet we have recruited 533 graduates. What do you expect all these people to do when they are not facilitated with transport? In this budget, which you are about to approve, there is 2 billion shillings, which is going straight to the sub-counties, to do nothing but to facilitate extension workers so that they can be effective.  

Training is going to be emphasised, so that they are inducted. Some of them are quite young men and women so they have not really eternalised how to work. We need to orientate them to work in these rural areas. I believe, with your support, we shall put in place effective agricultural advisory services supported by agricultural research, through outreach and these agricultural research development centres.

I do not know whether hon. Ken Lukyamuzi is still around, but for all those who share his views, I want to inform you that, sometimes, when we are here contributing, we need to sort out national issues. I do not want to use the terminology someone used, that one may wish to make noise, I do not think he meant that, I think he misused the word, but we have to sort out what the national issues are really. This issue of the water hyacinth and poisoning fish are so crucial, and the international community is watching us. Many times I have stood up to say that we did not use chemicals, it was biological control. And many countries, which have this problem, are now visiting us to see how we managed to achieve this. They are borrowing our scientific knowledge. The problem is not over, because the source is still on River Kagera. We persistently maintain that we have used chemicals, but if this goes public, who will deal with us, if we are using chemicals in the lake where we fish?  

Secondly, we knew some about some malpractice going on. People were using some agricultural chemicals to agitate fish so that fish can be driven into the nets. We have fought this, and now the fisher folk are organised in different groups. They are polishing themselves, because they know their plight. Now, if we go on saying that this poisoning is continuing, what do you think would happen? We have managed to lobby everywhere, to convince the world that Lake Victoria is safe. The ban is now being partially lifted and we can export. And on 25th August, the day after tomorrow, we shall start exporting. In October, the inspection mission from the European Union will come to this country to see whether all this is in place. All that we have done is to ensure that there is a policy. We have streamlined the policy, in terms of inspectors, manual instructions and keeping records, so that we can recall these people when they have rejected the fish. These things were before. 

We are also working on improving the landing sites.  It is expensive for us. The Minister of State in charge of this sector is travelling to Tanzania, which is already exporting, to compare notes. All these are expensive measures, which should not be damaged by contributions on this Floor. We can talk in confidence. I can afford to take you around so that you see what is happening and how those who are involved in the fishing industry are concerned. This is an appeal, which must be taken seriously. In your contributions, you expressed concern about the little foreign exchange we are getting and how it is running down. Now we are trying to open a door, but by your word of mouth, you are killing these efforts. 

Hon. Sembajja, I cannot assure you that the coffee in Bukomansimbi cannot be affected by coffee wilt. Just as you cannot assure me that the people in Bukomansimbi cannot contract AIDS. All coffee, especially in the robusta family, is susceptible to coffee wilt. The only effective measure we have is to ensure that what we plant is from a clean source. We should have clean seedlings, plant in a clean garden, and maintain it. Most of the coffee that is dying is aged coffee, which is also ‘malnourished’. This is the coffee that is in dry areas. But the young ones have also now been affected in one way or another. But we are saying that those young coffee trees that are dying are not compared to the number of trees, which are old and weak. When the old ones are attacked, they easily give way. So, we are working on this very seriously. We have a multi-sectoral task force, where all scientists are helping us.

On marketing -(Interruption)

MS. BIBIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. The majority of the farmers in Rukungiri had their gardens completely destroyed by coffee wilt. They got this coffee as part of a loan from one of your departments. What help are you extending to those farmers who had all their crops destroyed because of the coffee wilt disease?

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I would like some clarification. Hon. Kutesa said that he needs more capital in this economy, is the Minister suggesting that his budget should be given much more money so that the agricultural sector is revamped? Or is the Minister trying to attract heavy investment from companies like Kakira, Kinyara and Lugazi so that agriculture gets off the ground? Or, is he trying to change the policy from being catalyst to producing as Eng. Kaweesi had said earlier?

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: The issue of how much money is going to the agricultural sector is a bit tricky. That is why, when we shall discuss the PMA, you will realise that, even the funds going to roads, education, health, in one way or another, support the agricultural sector. But in most cases, people who hold that view talk about the funds that go to the Ministry. Obviously, I will need more money for research. I cannot say that all that I want is taken care of. I will need more money for the agriculture advisory services, the 2 billion shillings is just for facilitating these extension workers and it is not enough. I will need more money for technical backing. I will need more money for supervision. But how big is our national envelope? That is why we identify areas. If there is any money, it should be for research and then for agriculture advisory services. Thirdly, epidemic and disease control and then promoting water conservation, irrigation and management. But as you said, they give you a lump sum, and they tell you to set your priorities. 

In making the Diary Development Authority operational, I had to go back to my budget and find 220 million shillings to get it moving, otherwise I had no money.    So, the strategy of money should be born in the mind, but I need some more. We have gone through many steps in order to get the little we have got, but there are other ways of getting money in agriculture and I still need the money. 

Production is a problem. My Ministry cannot be compared to Education, Works or Health. I am not going to open up any garden like Health is going to open up an Aids Post or Education is going to build a Primary School and you see it there. In fact, within the policy we are now operating, even departmental farms and schemes that were under my department are now being leased to the private sector. We have to create an enabling atmosphere for investors in the agricultural sector. In fact, we are not exporting because, in most cases, we do not produce in sufficient quantities and the quality of our products is also poor. 

Since we came to this Parliament, we have been talking about macro-economic policies and structural adjustment programmes. We have now reached a stage where we are talking about manufacturers and attracting them to the country. I am happy that everybody is now talking about agriculture and how we need investors in agriculture.  Now, if you are attracting investors in agriculture, you have a lot to bear in mind. If you have one person to produce in Bamunanika, how many peasants will you have displaced? And then, we shall have to go to that while other sectors, the social service sectors and manufacturing sector are picking up to absorb those who may not be absorbed in the agricultural sector –(Interruption)

MR.OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to give information based on a point articulated by hon. Sam Kutesa that we should invest in agriculture so that we can create an export base. As of now, Bank of Uganda is supporting the shilling with hard-earned dollars from the reserve, to the tune of an average of 5 million to 10 million dollars every other week. If that money was invested in sustaining exports, we would bring in more money, and then we shall not spend all that money from the reserves to support the shilling. I think that is the point we are stressing. We can look for money to strengthen the export base of our agricultural products.  I thank you.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Money is being injected in the economy to support the shilling for many other reasons. It is being done for exporters, for importers, if we are exporting, even for investors. If the shilling is so weak, we may not even get investors. If any of you is interested in farming, just identify your project because we are trying to prevail on finance to ensure that, besides the technologies, which NARO is producing, and besides the agriculture advisory services, we avail and access credit, which is becoming very difficult. So, when the Micro-Finance Bill comes here, please get rid of it.  When the restructuring of Uganda Development Bank comes here, if ever it comes, please get rid of it. 

Well, I would like to windup by thanking you all very much. The PMA is becoming a reality. We are putting it in place. The heavy machinery in Namalere has been disposed of through a private agreement and districts like Nakasongola, Kabarole, Kitgum, Jinja, among others, have benefited. I am only left with two caterpillars now, which have not been disposed of. They will be disposed of so that they go into active production.   

The Powdered Milk Plant is a bit tricky. We are working out a programme with Ministry of Finance to see how we can support the private sector to invest in this area.     

Marketing is another area, which we need to address seriously, but is it in Agriculture? The real marketing and promotion of marketing and exports is for the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Wildlife – (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please speak into the microphone. Who is disturbing you there? I request the hon. Member for Rukungiri District not to disturb the Minister – (Laughter). The Minister is scared and he is looking that way -(Laughter).

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr. Speaker, she would not disturb me, but I am used to rallies, where I have to control the audience -(Laughter)- but here you forget all these people, when you need people like Maj. Kazoora and others to go along with you.  

We are organising a workshop for all Members of Parliament, where we shall brainstorm on the final version of the PMA. Now that Cabinet has approved it, we shall clear all these issues. I am soliciting for support for the little which is available in this budget, so that I can implement the programmes given within the mandate of the Ministry. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KANYIKE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am not going to take a lot of time over this issue.  

First of all, I would like to thank the Members for the support they have given to our Committee report. They have discussed issues, which they think Government should focus on in order to improve agricultural delivery in this country.

I am happy to note that the House is full while we are debating this report. Government is well represented and I am quite sure they have heard what the Members have had to say about the Ministry of Agriculture.

We have been saying this for five years, and we had not been able to get people from the Ministry to speak the same language with Parliament. I am glad to note that today there is some change. People at the Ministry are beginning to understand what Parliament has been pressurising for some time, and I hope this continues.  If we are going to deliver to the people we represent in this House, it is important that the Executive arm of Government listens to the concerns of Parliament, so that we do not continue lamenting.  

I would like to thank the Members of Parliament for their contributions, which have actually enriched our report. And I want to assure them that the Committee entirely agrees and supports the position that has been mentioned on the Floor. We are asking Government, through the Ministry of Agriculture, to take serious note of the concerns of Members of Parliament, so that they can make sure that the Ministry of Agriculture delivers to the population.

I would like to make two very important ones comments on poverty, food security and unemployment. These issues have to be solved and Parliament has got to emphasise this. We should let Government know that these challenges have got to be faced, because the people we represent demand that something has to be done in that area.

I would like to take up the point raised by hon. Kutesa about modernisation and development. We have been telling this Government, for a long time, that it is indeed time for them to invest in agriculture, if there is going to be any development at all. In simple terms, development means resources, knowledge, and a change of attitude. It is high time Government changed its attitude towards agriculture, because 80 per cent of the population of this country depends on agriculture. If you do not deliver to the population through agriculture, you are delivering to nobody. So, it is important for the Government to change its attitude towards agriculture and for the necessary policies to be put in place to ensure investment in agriculture. It is useless to talk about reserves of 700, 800 or even 500 US dollars when the people are not benefiting from those reserves.  

Lastly, as a Committee, we do not agree with the comments made by hon. Lukyamuzi in this House, regarding the water hyacinth. As far as we are concerned, we were briefed that the method in the control of the water hyacinth did not involve any chemicals. This is the message we must deliver to the country and to the entire world. The water hyacinth was controlled through biological means.  

On that note, I want to take this opportunity to thank the Members of my Committee for the great work we have done together over the past five years. This is the last report we are presenting, and we wish the next Parliament a very happy debate on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  I thank you - (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Before I put the question, I would like to ascertain the quorum. At 6.02 p.m., there were 120 Members of Parliament in the Chambers, and shortly to be joined by two other Members, making it 122. So, we have the necessary quorum, and I will put the question that the report of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be adopted.  

120 Members voted for the adoption of the Motion
1 Member voted against
2 abstained

THE SPEAKER: So, the Motion has been carried. Hon. Members, I have realised the difficulties you have had, because of some of you have to attend to Committee work and at the same time you are required here. So, while we are trying to synchronise sittings between the Plenary and the Committees, I will adjourn the House until 2.00 p.m. tomorrow to allow the Committees to do some work.  The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 6.02 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23rd August, 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)
