Wednesday, 26 August 2009

Parliament met at 10.14 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. As you recall, we agreed yesterday to start at 10.00 a.m. so as to be able to dispose of the number of items we have today. However, it is sad that only a few have turned up. But anyway, I will ask the Chairman of the Committee, if he is here, to proceed with the report.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY 
ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS

THE SPEAKER: Who is the Chairman of the Committee? Okay. Let us suspend proceedings for 10 minutes so that we resume at 10.30 a.m. 

(The House was suspended at 10.16 a.m.)

(On resumption at 10.26 a.m., the Speaker, presiding_)

10.27
THE VICE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr John Bosco Lubyayi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am presenting a report of the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry -

THE SPEAKER: The only problem, hon. Chairman, is that we were here and we did not see you.

MR LUBYAYI: I am sorry, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR LUBYAYI: I am presenting a report of the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for the Financial Year 2009/2010. I will start from page 4. 

The overall budget performance of the ministry stands at 79.7 percent with the non-wage component over-performing at 103.9 percent. The wage component over-performed by 3.9 percent as a result of the supplementary allocation of Shs 300 million for the Hotel and Tourism Institute, that was not part of the ministry’s initial budget. 

In the financial year 2009/2010, the non-wage component is expected to increase by 8.12 percent. However, this does not match the employees’ numbers, hence leading to the unutilised funds remaining redundant in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. A case in point is in the Financial Year 2008/2009 where, out of the approved budget of 1.52 billion, only 0.984 billion was utilised to pay employees’ wages. 

The committee observes that 35.3 percent of the budgeted funds in the financial year 2008/2009 were not utilised.

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, here you mean that there is no capacity to utilise the funds?

MR LUBYAYI: Yes. They did not use all the funds allocated. 

The committee recommends that in order for the ministry to absorb its budgeted wage component, staff recruitment should be carried out to fill the vacant posts in line with the ministry’s functional analysis of 2006.

Vote 015 - Ministry of Tourism Trade and Industry
These are the achievements for the financial year 2008/2009:

1.	Industrial Development, Research and Standards

The National Textile Policy was formulated together with its strategic implementation plan and submitted to Cabinet for approval. The Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act was amended and submitted to Cabinet. The ministry promoted the jua kalis. One hundred twenty five exhibitors were facilitated with transport to participate in the 10th East African Jua Kali Exhibition in 2008 in Kigali, Rwanda.

In addition, the contract for construction of the Common Facilities Centre at Makindye was awarded and the site secured in order to promote product value addition, the “one village, one product” concept to poverty eradication was introduced in Masaka, Bushenyi and Soroti districts. This will be rolled out in the coming financial year.

2.	Trade Development

A number of Bills and laws that facilitate trade have been formulated. These include the draft Consumer Protection Bill, the Trade Licensing Amendment Bill, Sale of Goods and Services, Private Public Partnership, Intellectual Property Rights and the draft National Standards Policy. A study on tariffs under COMESA and the East African Community was completed; harmonisation of regional integration efforts; bilateral agreement signed between Algeria, Iran, North Korea, Nigeria on investment flows.

3.	 Co-operative Development

A draft National Co-operative policy was developed. 453 co-operative societies were registered between July 2008 and June 2009. Of these, 309 were SACCOS, 42 agricultural marketing, 33 livestock and 16 multi-purpose.

4.	Tourism, Wildlife and Museum Department

During the Africa Asia Business Forum Conference, 2009 hosted by the ministry in collaboration with UNDP and TICAD, a platform was provided for business linkages between hoteliers, tour operators and other businesses in Africa and Asia.

The ministry hosted the 9th governing council of the Lusaka Agreement on the corporative enforcement operation against illegal trade in fauna. Initial steps to involve stakeholders in the development of a ten-year National Wildlife Conservation Development Plan which will provide the requisite integrated framework for inter-sectoral collaboration were taken.

The Uganda Tourism Act, 2008 was enacted by Parliament to guide tourism development. Habituation of two additional gorrilla groups was completed; two giraffes were acquired by Uganda Wildlife Education Centre and a museum building at Moroto was completed. 

The number of tourists went up from 641,743 in 2007 to 843,864 in 2008, contributing US$ 540 million to the Uganda economy last year. Wildlife trade contributed about US$ 3 million to national revenues from the export of crocodile skins, snakes, chameleons and butterflies raised on private land while apiculture contributed about US$ 17 million to the national economy. 

As part of fostering the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) in wildlife management, Albert Safaris Ltd was granted concession for the management of Kabwoya Wildlife Reserve. The agreement creates a partnership arrangement where the company will manage the reserve jointly with the Uganda Wildlife Authority and part of the revenues generated will be paid to the communities and the district government. 

Pilot sport hunting project around L. Mburo National Park yielded revenue of US$ 91,000 of which 85 percent went back to the community, and the local governments, reserving only 15 percent for the Uganda Wildlife Authority. 

These are the key planned activities for the Financial Year 2009/10 for Vote 015:

i)	Industrial Development, Research and Standards 
National Leather Policy to guide leather sector; a National Accreditation Policy to foster international recognition of local testing bodies; 50 artisans will be facilitated to attend the East African Jua-Kali exhibition in Arusha. The foundation of the jua-kali common facilities centres at Makindye will be constructed.

Ten small medium enterprises (SMEs) will be incubated; acquire equipment for: Carpentry and works for commercial cow horn product production and wood product fabrication; milk powder processing; fruit processing; security telecommunication; yoghurt and ice-cream making,; power stabilisation systems; and equipment calibration.

ii)	Trade Development

Draft policies on competition, standards, sanitary and phyto-sanitary will be finalised; bills on trademarks, intellectual property and copyrights, e-commerce, consumer protection and trade licensing amendment will be submitted to Cabinet. A white paper on technology transfer will be formulated. Trade officers will be posted to Geneva to boost market for Ugandan products. 

A National Trade Negotiating Team and an Inter-Institutional Trade Committee will be trained in trade negotiating skills. Sixty members of the private sector will be sensitised on WTO, East African Community and COMESA matters. 

Demand and supply surveys for honey and beehive products will be carried out. Service, handicrafts, horticulture, oilseeds, pulses and cereals, spices and natural ingredients from selected animal products, new product development for five new bio-trade products, that is food; cosmetics; Aloevera; breeding of wildlife animals, for example crocodiles; and establishing a cold storage facility in Kasese; and participating in the international trade fairs in Milan, Rwanda and Sudan, will be facilitated.

iii)	Tourism, Wildlife and Museum Development

Emphasis shall be put on tourism development and marketing/promotion. The ministry will construct trails on Mountain Rwenzori; prepare bills of quantities (BoQs), architectural drawings and visual drawings for 30 hotels in protected areas. This is intended to attract the private sector and other government institutions in investing in protected areas. 

A migratory bird observatory post or platform at Lutembe landing facility and Ngamba Islands will be contracted. Three more gorrilla families habituated, a regional museum constructed in Kabale to increase the tourism products in the area and a cultural centre constructed in Mbale to tap the Imbalu culture. 

The ministry will also expand its presence in international trade fairs to promote tourism investment and arrivals in Uganda. To improve the quality of tourist facilities; 100 tourist facilities and business will be inspected; fifty tourist facilities graded and classified; and private tourism entities will be equipped with skills. Three departmental staff will be trained in tourism and conference planning, in addition 30 classification officers will be trained in quality assurance of hotels. 

Furthermore, regulations and guidelines on tour guides, rafting and mountain climbing, will be developed and disseminated to effect the Tourism Act, 2008. 

iv)	Cooperative Development

The Cooperative Societies Act, 1992, and the regulations and model bylaws will be amended. In respect to guiding activities of cooperatives, the ministry will continue inspecting and supervising these societies.

In addition, three rural information centres will be established in Arua, Katakwi and Kyenjojo to provide farmers of the selected cooperatives with market information. 

Here are the observations and the recommendations of the committee on Vote 015.  

i)	The Committee noted with concern that Government sectors under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry that do not have a vote status like the Management Training and Advisory Centre (MTAC) and the Uganda Export Promotion Board (UEPB), which have almost nothing written about them in the Ministerial Policy Statement. The Committee observed that the absence of such organisations from the policy statement denies members of Parliament the knowledge they need to debate matters pertaining to the said organisations from an informed point of view, yet they are expected to approve funds for the same organisations. 

The committee was informed that the new format for the ministerial policy statement is output-based and presents outputs by independent votes. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should revise the format of ministerial policy statements to ensure that members of Parliament get a meaningful insight of the activities of the different Government bodies for which they are expected to approve funds.

ii) 	Recruitment and Promotion
 
The committee was concerned that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry has had many of its officers in acting capacity for a very long time, and noted that the situation is irregular and needs to be rectified. The Committee was informed that the recruitment process is currently out of the ministry’s control. The ministry has already done its part that constitutes the submission of its promotional and vacant posts to the Ministry of Public Service. These include the pending approval of some 34 posts that were recommended in the ministry’s functional analysis of 2006. It is now the Ministry of Public Service to complete the recruitment process.

The committee recommends, therefore, that the Ministry of Public Service should expedite the process of recruitment, and conduct interviews for promotion and confirmation of the officers who have been in acting capacities.  

Uganda Wildlife Authority
 
iii)	Destruction of crops by wildlife

The committee was concerned about the fate of regions where wildlife often destroys people’s crops. A case in point is Amuru District where elephants have become a menace in this respect.

The committee was informed that the best way forward in these areas is for people to engage in wildlife related economic activities as opposed to crop cultivation.

The Committee recommends that the leaders from such regions in liaison with UWA should encourage their people to engage in wildlife-related activities.

Management Training and Advisory Centre

iv)	Land Titles for MTAC land 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee was informed that MTAC owned three separate pieces of land but the land titles for these pieces of land are not in the names of MTAC. MTAC has for a long time been struggling with the lands office to get the titles in its names to no avail. To help this situation, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry has done the following:

a.	The permanent Secretary has written several letters to the Uganda Land Commission in support of getting MTAC land titles. 

b.	The Minister of State for Industry and Technology has also written to the Uganda Land Commission about the same issue. 

c.	The Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry has pledged support to help MTAC get land titles.

The committee noted that with the land titles not in the names of MTAC, the pieces of land in question cannot be developed, and recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry should ensure that the Management Training and Advisory Centre receives its land titles within one month. 

v)	The Need for the services of MTAC upcountry

The Committee noted that MTAC is key to the National drive towards industrialisation and diversification of the private sector. Businesses in Uganda have a very high failure rate because they are not organised. The purpose of MTAC is to train entrepreneurs by imparting in them the knowledge they need to keep their businesses afloat. The services of MTAC are, therefore, needed countrywide.

The committee was informed that MTAC has made efforts to take some of its training programs upcountry and, during the 1960s and 1970s MTAC used to have mobile vans that would be used to train people countrywide.

The Committee recommends that the Government of Uganda should adequately finance MTAC to train entrepreneurs countrywide with a view to promoting the Government’s agenda of Prosperity-for-All and ultimately industrialisation of Uganda.

vi) 	Training of vulnerable groups 

MTAC informed the Committee that it takes special consideration of vulnerable groups. Of its trainees last year, 54 percent of them were women. It has also trained persons with disabilities and pledged to prepare free business plans for these people. The committee commends MTAC for these services.

Uganda Export Promotion Board

vii) 	The Quality of Exports 

The Committee noted that there have been reports that the quality of Ugandan exports is often compromised by the dubious activities of some unscrupulous traders who add wrong substances to the products with a view of inflating their volumes. For example, they add water to goods like cotton, coffee and vanilla to increase the weight of the cargo, and in the process, the goods ferment and rot. As a result, goods from Uganda have been blacklisted in some markets and in others, they attract very low prices. This is a disservice to our genuine business persons who end up victimised because of the unscrupulous few. The committee called upon the Uganda Export Promotion Board to get concerned about the quality of our exports.

viii) 	The safety of Ugandan traders in Southern 	Sudan

The committee observed that Uganda exports a lot of products to Southern Sudan, but their security in the area is greatly threatened. There have been several reports of Ugandan traders being attacked and in some cases killed.

The committee was informed that the Uganda Export Promotion Board is working towards creating a trade zone where Ugandan traders will be safe. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is also working to create harmony between the Southern Sudanese and Ugandans.

Uganda Export Promotion Board is planning to hold a big trade fair in Southern Sudan during the month of September 2009 with a view to improving Uganda’s public image in Southern Sudan.

ix) 	The Exporters Award

The committee noted that during the most recent award ceremony for exporters, all the awards went to exporters of foreign origin. The committee observed that this could act as a disincentive to our indigenous exporters. The committee recommends that Uganda Export Promotion Board creates an award for the local exporters so that they too are encouraged.

The Private Sector Foundation of Uganda

x) 	Foreign donations stifling Ugandan industries

The committee noted with concern that Uganda is receiving foreign donations irrespective of their impact on our local industries. A case in point is the newly commissioned firm in Luzira that produces antiretroviral drugs for treating HIV/AIDS. Government received a donation of similar drugs from the developed world causing those produced locally to lose market. If the trend continues, Uganda’s infant industry could just close down.

The committee recommends that Government should set conditions for some donations that are bound to have a critical impact on our economy, for example, in the case of the ARVs, Government could have asked the donating country to procure the drugs from our local firm.

xi) 	Pay As You Earn (PAYE) threshold

The Private Sector presented the committee with a complaint that the current PAYE threshold of Shs 130,000 is too low. This limits the purchasing power of Ugandans, and in turn impacts negatively on the private sector by limiting the market for their goods. Private Sector Foundation of Uganda proposes that PAYE threshold should be raised to Shs 250,000. The committee agrees with the private sector on this matter and recommends that Pay As You Earn threshold be raised to Shs 250,000.

xii) 	Sale of imported agricultural products locally available in Uganda by foreign-owned supermarkets operating in Uganda 

The committee is displeased that most of the foreign-owned supermarkets in Uganda import agricultural products like irish potatoes, eggs and vegetables from their countries of origin, yet the same products are available in Uganda. The committee was, however, informed that the reason many of the supermarkets import agricultural products is that many Ugandans are not consistent in the quality and quantity of the products they supply. The committee observes that many of the products in question are available in Uganda, but the local producers are not properly mobilised to meet the required standards.

The committee recommends that Uganda should take deliberate efforts to address the supply side constraints that render Uganda’s producers uncompetitive, and these supply side constraints include storage, packaging and proper transportation.

xiii)The ban of polythene bags

The committee noted that the Budget Speech for Financial Year 2009/2010 banned the use of polythene bags without creating alternative use for the machinery that had already been imported in the country to produce the bags. Producers of this item had invested in the industry and some of them had even capitalised their factories through loans. The sudden ban on the product without creating alternative use for the machinery already imported will cause the investors to incur heavy losses.

Secondly, Government did not come up with clear guidelines to effect the ban. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Uganda Government should intervene to upgrade the said machinery to make them recycling plants for plastics, and two, the government should come up with clear guidelines to effect the ban.

When we came to Vote 110, the Uganda Industrial Research Institute, these were the achievements of the Financial Year 2008/2009.

Vote 110 - Uganda Industrial Research Institute

The Uganda Industrial Research Institute established agro processing factory facilities for mushrooms, meat, potatoes, bamboo and peanut butter. They carried out trainings in standards, lab testing and fabrication technologies. They acquired refrigeration equipment, developed energy efficient technology in form of a biomass dryer and a zeolites cooler, and established a comprehensive ICT learning centre. 

These are the activities they plan for the 2009/2010 Financial Year. 

The Uganda Industrial Research Institute wishes to become a centre of excellence in value addition, business incubation, innovations, product process designs and technological transfer. They also wish to balance the value chain in light of higher value products, incomes and elimination of post-harvest loss. 

Observations and recommendations of the Committee

Industrial Parks

The Committee noted that development of industrial parks is a case of misaligned mandate. The institution that manages the project does not have the technical knowledge to do so. Different factories or industries have different structural requirements. For example, a building meant for a ceramic factory is different in structure from one meant for a meat factory. Unfortunately, the planners of the industrial parks seem to have thought uniform structures would serve all forms of industries as can be evidenced in the case of Mbarara Industrial Park.

The Committee recommends that the whole strategy should be rethought by involving all relevant stakeholders, one of whom is the Uganda Industrial Research Institute. And, the guiding policy for the development of industrial parks should be developed. 

Vote	154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards 

These were the key achievements in the Financial Year 2008/09: 

•	They provided standardisation and quality assurance services to the manufacturing and trading sectors.

•	They consolidated the activities of the fuel-marking programme where all fuel entering the country is marked and monitored at fuel stations to ensure that all fuel imports are taxed and illegal dumping guarded against;

•	They prepared the Pre-export Verification of Conformity (PVOC) Bill that is now before Cabinet, so that goods destined to Uganda will have to be inspected for conformity.

•	They facilitated small and medium enterprises to improve the quality of their products through affordable laboratory testing.

•	They also verified over 421,000 weights and measures in the country.

•	These are the key planned activities for Financial Year 2009/10: 

•	They intend to construct the UNBS home to address the longstanding problem of office and laboratory accommodation.

•	The rental expenditure saved will be used for staff recruitment and infrastructure development.

•	UNBS will increase coverage for service delivery and sensitisation of the general public for standards and quality awareness.

•	§	Newcastle vaccine production will commence this financial year. 

•	§	They also intend to procure five mobile generators; public address systems; and digital cameras, to enhance public sensitisation on standards, and facilitate the fight against counterfeits.

These are the observations and recommendations:

1.	Confiscated Goods 

The committee is concerned that the public cannot differentiate between counterfeit products, and genuine ones.

The committee recommends that for purposes of making the public aware of some of these products, it is important that the confiscated goods are publicised.

The committee was informed that the counterfeit law will go a long way in curbing the problem of counterfeits.

The Committee further recommends that Cabinet should bring the Counterfeit Bill to Parliament expeditiously. 

2.	Differences in fuel prices

The Committee noted that fuel prices are different between petrol stations even within the same locality, and this is irregular.

The committee was informed that the price differentials are an anomaly that could either arise from adulteration of the fuel, the suppliers tampering with the dispenser or fuel procured from smugglers.

The committee was informed that the marking of fuel by UNBS will curb the problem.

The committee was, however, concerned about the exhaustiveness of the marking process and recommends that fuel stations charging abnormally low rates should be investigated.

3.	The absence of UNBS at most border points

The Committee noted with concern that the presence of UNBS is very thin at the border points. UNBS is actually only present at the official border points and yet a lot of goods enter the country through the informal border points. It is at these informal points that most of the counterfeit and substandard goods enter Uganda.

The Committee recommends that government should facilitate UNBS to recruit more staff so that all the entry points into Uganda are covered by the organisation so as to curb the entry of sub-standard and counterfeit goods that fleece the local population of their hard earned money and are in some cases poisonous for human consumption. 

Vote 117: Uganda Tourism Board

These are the achievements in the Financial Year 2008/09:
 
•	The Uganda Tourist Board participated in a number of international trade fairs, namely, the British Bird Watching Fair and World Travel Market in the UK and ITB in Berlin, Germany.

•	It facilitated the private sector to participate in other trade fairs like BIT in Italy, Indaba in South Africa and JATA in Japan.

•	They held a domestic fair in Kasese District to mark World Tourism Day.

•	UTB has participated in a number of East African Community meetings to discuss strategic tourism issues relating to branding and promoting the region as a single destination, and to chart a way forward for a single visa.

•	These are the planned activities for the Financial Year 2009/10 for Uganda Tourism Board:

•	Tourism Promotion and Marketing – this will involve participation in local, regional, international trade fairs; conducting in-bound familiarisation tours for foreign press, tour operators and celebrities, production and distribution of promotional materials.

•	Quality control in form of inspection, registration and deregistration, licensing, classification, grading and monitoring of tourist facilities will be carried out.

•	Financial and technical support to the private tourism entities calls for the establishment of the tourism development levy. This will help in training and sensitisation of tourism stakeholders and encourage the adoption of e-commerce through the website and the newsletter.

•	UTB support services involve the reorganisation and restructuring of the organisation, hence the need for sourcing and recruitment of staff, and acquisition of new offices.

Observations and recommendations

i)	Marketing of Uganda’s Tourism Sector

Mr Speaker, on the marketing of Uganda’s tourism under Vote 117, the committee noted that Uganda’s tourism marketing strategy is pathetic compared to that of our neighbours. It appears the sector is not doing much to promote our image abroad. This is evidenced in the fact that many people abroad continue to ask about the late former President Idi Amin, who left 30 years ago. May his soul rest in peace! 

The committee recommends, therefore, that Government should provide funds for the marketing of Uganda’s tourism abroad as a matter of urgency. 

Secondly, that Government should adequately finance Ugandan embassies abroad to enable them fulfil their mandate of marketing Uganda, instead of wasting resources to pay salaries of staff employed in there, and yet they just sit on their desks without facilitation to do their jobs.

ii) 	Fragmentation of Ugandan bodies mandated to market tourism

The committee was informed that Uganda’s neighbours have all the organs mandated to market their countries abroad under one organisation unlike Uganda where they are fragmented into different bodies like Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) and UTB. 

Whereas Uganda Wildlife Authority does focused marketing of tourism, UTB does the generic marketing of tourism. The arrangement to have these organisations run under one management makes it easier to mobilize resources.

The committee recommends that the marketing of Uganda’s tourism should be put under one roof so that our limited resources are not spread out too thin to the extent that their impact is not felt at all.

iii) 	Domestic Tourism

The committee noted that Uganda’s focus in the promotion of tourism is hinged more on foreign tourists as opposed to domestic tourists.

The committee was informed that the East African Community is working towards a common East African tariff in areas of domestic tourism. This will go along way in promoting domestic tourism.

iv) 	Negative adversaries abroad

As a committee we were concerned about negative adversaries abroad who tell their citizens not to come to Uganda because of insecurity, poor roads and bad water, among others. 

The committee was informed that the negative adversaries about Uganda abroad are not one-sided; they have a basis. These countries have embassies and missions in Uganda and they gather intelligence information that they give to their countries. For the adversaries to give a better picture of Uganda, the country needs to create a conducive environment for tourism.

It is also important to note that in the tourism sector an isolated case of insecurity impacts negatively for a long time. A case in point is the murder of a tourist in Queen Elizabeth National Park in 1999. This incident is still fresh on the tourists’ mind.

UTB, however, informed the committee that they are working together as the East African Community to promote the region as a single tourist destination.

At the country level, UTB has spoken to the embassies and missions of the countries concerned. Sometimes the impact of such discussions is positive, sometimes not.

UTB assured the committee that with the inauguration of the new board of directors and the four-fold increment in their budget, they are very optimistic that the situation will change for the better.

v)	Recent increment on park entry fees

Mr Speaker, I would like to report that the committee noted that Uganda Wildlife Authority recently increased park entry fees exorbitantly. The committee was concerned that the increment could deter tourists from coming to Uganda because some of them could take the long journeys to the parks expecting to pay much less than the current fees. Those who fail to pay will go back to their countries and negatively publicise Uganda.

The committee was informed that even with the increment, Uganda’s park entry fees are the least in East Africa. 

vi)	World Tourism Organisation

Mr Speaker, the committee is concerned that Uganda fell out of the World Tourism Organisation because of non-payment of membership fees amounting to Euros 171,698.76.

The committee noted that it is very dangerous to our tourism sector because this is the forum where we could promote our tourism and try to reverse the effects of negative publicity about Uganda.

The committee recommends that Uganda should secure the funds to get the country back on the World Tourism Organisation as a matter of urgency.

vii) 	Foreigners running Uganda’s hotel industry.

The committee was concerned that most of Uganda’s biggest hotels are being run by foreigners and that the practice is to completely open up the Ugandan job market to them without restrictions. The end result is an increased incidence of unemployment among Ugandans.

The committee was informed that Kenyans have helped Uganda revamp her hotel industry and in the process they have even helped train some Ugandans on the job. The task left to Ugandans is to train her own local professionals in the hotel industry. 

The committee was also informed that the training of Ugandans in the hotel industry has a brighter future because of the school of tourism in Jinja that has, after a long time, received a budget under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry this financial year. They received a billion Uganda shillings. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that:

1.	Government should put in place procedures that should be fulfilled before a foreigner can work in Uganda

2.	Government should upgrade the school of tourism in Jinja to international standards so that the graduates of this school are competitive on the job market.

Tourism Development Levy

The committee was concerned that the Tourism Development Levy is not yet operational despite the fact that the Tourism Act was passed last year. The committee was informed that the Tourism Bill and the Local Government Tax Bill were passed at about the same time, but the Ministry of Local Government moved faster to implement the Local Government Tax which taxed many of the people who were to pay the Tourism Development Levy.

As a result, the private sector raised a complaint that if the Tourism Development Levy was introduced in addition to the already existing taxes, it would be a case of over-taxation with the same category of people paying the Local Government Tax, Local Hotel Tax, Kampala City Council Trading Licence and the Tourism Licence by the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. The complaint was appreciated by the then Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry who proposed that all the taxes should be consolidated into a single tax so that the stakeholders then apportion it among themselves.

The committee noted that it is not clear at which point the Tourism Development Levy would be collected and recommends that the Uganda Tourism Board should agree on this matter with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as a first step before beginning to implement it.

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry should, as a matter of urgency, issue regulations and guidelines for the implementation of the Tourism Act.

viii)	Uganda Egypt Coffee Manufacturing Company (UGEMCO)

The Deputy Speaker referred to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, a delegation from UGEMCO, a coffee roasting factory in Egypt that is a joint venture between Uganda and Egypt. It was initiated by H.E. the President of Uganda as an avenue for adding value to Uganda’s coffee and fostering economic co-operation between Uganda, Egypt and the entire Arab world. The factory started its operations in 2002 and Uganda holds 60 percent shares while Egypt holds 40 percent shares. The Uganda shares are held by Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) in trust for Uganda National Coffee Farmers Association, Uganda Coffee Roasters Association and Uganda Coffee Traders Association. 

The achievements of the venture so far include:

•	Two brands of Uganda coffee which meet Egyptian tastes, that is, ILDUCCI Premium Coffee and MAZAG Turkish Coffee, have been created and are selling well.

•	The volumes of coffee exports to Egypt by other Ugandan companies have increased due to the efforts of the joint venture.

•	Uganda coffee is now known within the Egyptian and other neighbouring Arab countries.

•	A market comprising of 54 hyper markets, 563 supermarkets, 10,000 grocery shops and 243 hotels has been created.

The company is, however, in need of some additional Government assistance of US$ 540,000 to help acquire the much needed equipment and promotional activities. The amount currently cannot be obtained from the UCDA budget.

The committee observed that the company is doing a great job in promoting Uganda coffee in the Arab world. This region has great potential of opening up huge markets for Uganda coffee because of the very high consumption rate of the product.

The committee, therefore, recommends that government should source for a loan of US$ 540,000 to facilitate the activities of UGEMCO.

Mr Speaker, the committee has just received corrigenda and here below are the new monies that we ask you to approve. 

The committee recommends for the approval of a grand total of Shs 47, 481,557, 000. This total includes both areas and taxes for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for the financial year 2009/10 broken down under the four votes as follows: 

Vote 015, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry: Recurrent expenditure Shs 8,771,984,000; development expenditure Shs 15,599,693,000; and the total is Shs 24,371,677,000.

Vote 110, Uganda Industrial Research Institute: Shs 4,526,000,000 as recurrent expenditure; the development expenditure is Shs 7,030,000,000; and the total is Shs 11,556,000,000.

Vote	117, the Uganda Tourism Board: Shs 1,728,888,000 with the same total.

Vote 154, the Uganda National Bureau of Standards: Recurrent expenditure is Shs 6,215,000,000 and development expenditure is Shs 3,610,000,000. This gives a total of Shs 9,825,000,000.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Chairman. 

11.25
MR ZAAKE KIBEDI (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairman for having read to us this report. I would also want to thank the ministry for finally considering the school of tourism in its budget.

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me. I am sorry to interrupt you. I would like to welcome hon. Godi from his new status. You are welcome. (Laughter) We have only six minutes.

MR KIBEDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get a list from the ministry of the names of the 125 exhibitors facilitated to participate in the 10th East African Jua-Kali Exhibition, 2008 in Rwanda, because I have received complaints that there was unfairness in the way exhibitors were selected. I would like to look at this list to see if there was fairness in the matter. 

I would also like to look at the list of the 50 jua-kali exhibitors selected to attend the East African Jua-Kali Exhibition in Arusha.  

I would also want to find out from the ministry what other jua-kali facilities will be constructed after those in Makindye. Yesterday, I raised the same matter. I am very interested in this issue because the areas they talked about last year were concentrated in Kampala. Yesterday they said the facilities were for the whole country, and now I see they have set a programme for constructing the foundation for Makindye. We would like to know what other facilities will follow and in what district. This is because as the principles and directives of the 1995 Uganda Constitution say, there is supposed to be equity and regional balance in every programme. 

So, as an MP representing the youth of Eastern Uganda, I would like to know how my jua-kalis from the areas of Busia, Malaba, Mbale and Jinja are also going to benefit from this programme. I thank you. 

11.28
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman and the committee for this erudite report. 

I would like to raise a few queries on page 6 where they talk about the “one village, one product” concept for poverty eradication, introduced in Masaka, Bushenyi and Soroti districts. If it was introduced in Bushenyi District, then it must have been in very low tones because I have never heard about it - it must have been in a whisper. So, can we find out, because I do not know what time of the day or night it was?

Secondly, I agree with the committee on the move on polythene bags because they rightly point out that without creating alternative use for the machinery that had already been imported into the country to produce these bags – Mr Speaker, I think we need to approach this issue of polythene bags with more seriousness. Uganda is like one big dustbin; this is a classical tragedy that we are living in. 

The other day when there was the Smart Partnership Dialogue, I passed the road from Clock Tower near Munyonyo and I said, “My God, how can we even talk about tourism when we are exhibiting polythene bags on our roadsides?” It is terrible. 

When you move around the country, you really wonder what has happened to our community; that we cannot even dispose of these polythene bags. I do not know if it is the Ministry of Environment, but something must be done; otherwise this is a joke about tourism. 

I have travelled with tourists and they think we are not serious because you look at the polythene bags and you know we are very dirty. When Evangelist Joyce Meyer was here a few years ago, I was in Nakivubo and she pronounced herself on these polythene bags. She said, “As long as you have this litter here, I will never step in Uganda again.” 

Let us be more serious than we are now on counterfeit goods. I would like to thank the body concerned because a lot is being done. However, these are some of our tragedies. The other day if you saw the front page of The New Vision with a picture of locals carrying away counterfeit goods that were being burnt.(Interjection) Well, there was only one known police officer whose manhandling by the locals was understandable.

But, Mr Speaker, with due respect, if we are going to get rid of these counterfeit goods, how then do we ensure we are doing it thoroughly? When you say no to temptation, you do not leave a forwarding address. But this is what was being done.

On page 26, I want to thank the minister. I think something is being done although it is not enough. We have said this repeatedly; we are concentrating on the animals and so on, but community-based tourism which is doing very well in Tanzania is not being considered here. Our diverse cultures, traditional foods and way of life can all attract a lot of tourism, and can bring income to our communities down there. So, if you can work on that so that we do not just have animals and so on, we could be happy. 

We are not going to have tourists when we are as dirty as we are. And when you talk about adversaries, we have some of them here. The day I read that our water was contaminated with faeces, I did not take breakfast for a week. Even though it was a corrective measure so that we can do something about it, we are shooting ourselves in the foot when we have it as a headline. 

When I again read that three quarters of our meat has got TB - I mean who would want to come here? I think we need to take some of these issues to the concerned ministries and not bring them on the front page of the newspapers.

Lastly, on the question of Idi Amin - may his soul rest in eternal peace! - I think it is not the fault of the ministry that the world still refers to us as the land of Idi Amini. I think it is us the political leaders to inform the world through the Internet that now there is a civilised government and there is a better tourist attraction in Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.34
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also want to thank the chairman and the committee members for their report. I just have some few comments. In this report, they talk about the trade between Uganda and Southern Sudan. We are at the border with Southern Sudan; for me to reach Yei it takes fewer hours than reaching Kampala. Therefore, I know a lot of things happening in Southern Sudan. 

I have noted clearly that our traders suffer a lot in Southern Sudan; they lose their goods. When business was booming in Southern Sudan, many Ugandans went there with equipment like fridges to do business. Now that business is reducing, they want to come back with their things, but the people of Southern Sudan do not allow them to return. When they try to come back to Uganda, they take away those equipments. They say that whatever property that enters Southern Sudan should never come back to Uganda. So, to come back with their property, they must sneak out of that country - and the people are suffering. 

Another thing, whenever our traders are entering Southern Sudan, they pay entry fee of Shs 70,000, in order to stay there for three months. And, whenever you are entering again, you have to pay again that Shs 70,000. On the contrary, when the Sudanese are coming to Uganda, they pay nothing. Are we here just to help the people of Sudan; don’t we need revenue as Ugandans? Why can’t Uganda also consider the border points like Alaba and Kerwa so that we establish our markets within the border points? That way the people of Sudan should come and buy these goods from Uganda, and we get revenue, and our people will not be tortured and traumatised the way they are. 

Mr Speaker, in the committee’s report, they talk of the local industry of ARVs in Luzira. They are saying that this industry has been established, and at the same time, Uganda is getting a lot of donations of drugs which makes this industry lose market. On the contrary, the Ugandans who are HIV positive still lack the drugs. Even in Yumbe Hospital, we do not get those drugs. This means that the donations we get are not enough. 

Therefore, can the government allocate some money in its budget to buy the drugs from Luzira and supply them to these hospitals? We should not rely on donations because they are not even enough. We should allocate money in the budget so that we buy these drugs and give them to the patients. This will help to preserve this local industry and in the end, whatever we get from the donations will be enough for the rest of the country.

11.40
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairman and the committee for this report, but I want to be educated on three things: On page 12, on the destruction of crops by the wildlife, you say that the leaders should educate their people to deal with activities related to wildlife. To me who is far from the park, I would imagine that hunting is one of the activities related to a park. So, I want you to educate me; what is it that these people should do that is related to wildlife? 

Then, I want you to educate me on the trade between Uganda and Southern Sudan. For me, it seems to be a trade between individuals; between Ugandans and Sudanese. Someone buys a cow from Uganda and when taking the cow to Sudan, he is almost taking three things at once: He is taking the beef, the hide, the horns and the manure inside the cow. Why don’t we think of just exporting beef to Sudan and retain the hides which we can as well export. You talked of working on the horns, how do we work on the horns when they have taken them to the Sudan? 

So, we should think of exporting beef only and retain the hides so that we can get revenue out of the hides. We retain the horns and see how we can get glue out of the hides, and even retain the manure so that we can fertilise our land. But we are exporting all those things in the name of one animal – the cow. In addition to that, Government gets revenue that is paid by the local people; that is revenue paid to the sub-counties, and revenue paid to the vet departments; but if we dressed these animals here, the slaughtering would pay revenue of about Shs 10,000 to the city council here. Dressing of these animals would be done by our people and we would be benefiting from that but all that is taken to Sudan and our people do not get any jobs here. 

Finally, you told us about the National Bureau of Standards verifying 421 weights in measures, but against what number? Supposing there are three million weights and measures to be verified, and you have done only 421, would you brag about that as being an achievement? It would have been wise for you to tell us what number of weights and measures we have. If you told us that you verified 421,000 measures and weights, we would say yes, that is a job well done; but you could be talking about 421 against three million. That is not a good fraction. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

11.43 
MR CHARLES ANGIRO GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for this report. However, I want clarification on achievement 4.1.1(i) - industrial development, research and standards, as far as the Uganda Spinning Mill Lira is concerned. The committee went there and indeed saw what it looked like, but their report has not come out yet. We have been requesting that this industry, which used to be very important in cotton production in Lira, be revived. In reviving it, it should be given to another entrepreneur, and we are really concerned because it is now in a very degenerate state and all the assets in the factory have been sold, except the building that is being hired for other purposes.

We are also concerned about rolling out the Jua-kali to Lira. Of late, Lira is one of the most important hubs of industrial development and we expect to embrace even what has been said about the “one village, one product” concept to poverty eradication, which I have actually seen here and I want to criticise the planners. I think it is high time that you considered all the four regions equally when planning development in this country, because this is a very important concept. But you find that it is only in the west, in the central and in the east, and Lira in the north is left out. 

If you are not careful, you will find that some people can easily unreasonably say that Kony was right to fight for the rights of the people of Northern Uganda because it is always neglected. So, I want to know if it is true, like I have heard, that it is also not in Bushenyi and I have been tipped off that there is also nothing in Soroti. Can you include Northern Uganda and Lira in particular, where the industry is now coming up, for that concept, and that will  bring a balance. It is now time for us to plan regionally. That is one thing that I wanted to put forward. 

When you come to the co-operative development on page 10, I think we need to know how many co-operative societies we have in production and how many SACCOs and other microfinance institutions, because it seems the production part of it is more important in order to enable the SACCOs to succeed. And with production, we are concerned with the state. When you come to the quality of our products, I am surprised and I am still concerned, Mr Speaker, that last year we complained on the Floor of this House about the CDO performance as far as organic cotton production is concerned, and money was appropriated to go and buy organic cotton. I am not aware of whether that cotton has been sold as organic or conventional, but I think it is still hanging somewhere and has not got market because of this mismanagement. My question is, are we going to allow Government to participate in the buying yet we are talking of private sector involvement? 

I recently met the organic cotton farmers and they complained about two operators in the same area, especially in Aromo organic production joint. Originally, there were ball weevil sellers who have been organising the farmers to produce this organic cotton, chillies and sim-sim. But recently, I am told the CDO also organised the North Bukedde Cooperative Society to again register the same farmers in the same region. Are we going to allow this to happen? Therefore, I am requesting the minister concerned to move in very fast, otherwise, we will soon have problems in organic cotton production, and eventually, a strike may arise, yet it can be avoided.

Mr Speaker, I want to address the issue of wild animals destroying our crops. I have been one of the victims, and in the last season, my beans were all destroyed near the border of Amuru in Oyam, and many farmers were affected. And now, here is a nice statement that we should get involved in wildlife-related activities. What are these activities in the first place? (Laughter) Have you done a wildlife activities survey to tell me that since at the moment we are fighting famine, we can survive if we get involved in these wildlife-related activities? I think what is lacking is to sensitise us about these wildlife-related activities so that we can go and be attracted to them and join hands. Otherwise, we still demand compensation for our crops because this is a very serious matter. We are now going hungry because what we had planted has been destroyed and this is an issue that we cannot shut our eyes to. So, get ready; we are going to soon submit our claims to you. 

Mr Speaker, the ban on polythene bags. Yesterday, we launched proper waste management of some of these related materials at Nateete grounds in Rubaga Division. It was launched by the Minister of State for Water. And then, it is soon going to roll out in Kampala District. But when you study the recommendation of the committee, I think we are concerned about two issues. Should we continue to produce the same thing, which has been banned and then what we have already received? How fast are we going to remove it from the soils and then from the environment, because the sooner we do it, the better?  

And then, what measures are we putting in place to address those traders who pretend to be taking some of these unwanted materials from Kenya or Tanzania to Southern Sudan, but they end up in Uganda? How are we going to manage this, because it seems we put the ban, but then some people defy it and no measures have been taken to address this?  

We have already opened up some industries for recycling some of these wasted materials and some tokens have been put in place. If you take a kilogram, you get Shs 300 and then if it is the other one with more carats, you get Shs 500. Now, how are we going to encourage people to get involved in this? Yesterday, we resolved the Bill for Kampala and Uganda. We have to resolve it without fear or favour and this ban should be implemented because transforming some of that machinery - 

THE SPEAKER: I know, but there is the issue of those who lawfully invested in the business, and I think that is their concern. What will you do with them? 

MR ANGIRO: These are very important investments, and our investors must be flexible. I think Government should come in to facilitate them into either recycling, or they go into other industries. Since this is now raised, we cannot allow them to continue. If we allow them at the expense of tomorrow’s generation, we are doing a disservice to our country. I think that one is clear. The government should come and negotiate with these people about the lines of production they can take up. There may be a need for compensation and then the machines can be taken elsewhere, but I think, internationally, this kind of production is not going to be allowed. Why do we allow it in Uganda? This is the question, which we have here. 

And now, part of it, with which we were concerned about yesterday, what has been put in place to sensitise the people in Uganda about the polythene bags from say, Kampala and rolling it out? 

I am one of the members of Parliament who participated in the Uganda National Academy of Sciences (UNAS) Scheme, and my department was this department of the polythene bags, which is actually a menace to this country. Unless we also support this ban and then Government takes it up, we are just wasting time. This is already a danger that we know because the moment the soil is contaminated, we cannot produce any quality goods in this country. (Laughter) 

11.54
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe South Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. And I thank the chairperson for giving us this report. If I refer you to page seven, the chairperson talked about the number of tourists going up. I want him to tell Parliament how many of these are Ugandans, because at the end of the day, we must start at home. For instance, if all of us are 333 and we are made aware, we would spend at least two of our days in a year visiting one of these areas, they would be generating a lot of money instead of thinking about the other people who are coming from out. 

We did a lot during CHOGM to tell them about Uganda. Some of you saw it on CNN but what are the end results? I prefer, as we give you the money, if you want more money generated, start here.

It is surprising that when you are coming into Uganda on arrival at Entebbe Airport, what do you see? What pictures are there? You only see Coca-Cola and Ronaldo. You do not see the pictures of our country. What is so special about Coca-Cola? Yes, we want the money from the advertisements, but these are some of the things, which should greet the people who are coming here, even if they do not know about Uganda. They should get it first hand on arrival. 

And then on the same page, he talked about exports of butterflies and chameleons raised on private land. I think they should be more elaborate on this. Which private land? Because, we are about to pass a loan to restore eco-systems. Unless they tell us exactly which private land these individuals are operating from, most of these organisms are going to be exported and they are going to be endangered. I think the committee should come clean and tell Parliament such that we do not endanger the eco-system. 

And also, since we are about to approve the money you want, you should tell us which areas you are going to conserve. Recently, one of the media houses was talking about the snow cap on Mount Rwenzori being threatened. What have you done and what has been the effect of climate change? You should tell us what you want Parliament and Government to help you with in this endeavour to conserve some of these areas. If the snow disappears and the water is threatened, and everything is threatened, where are you going to get the tourists and where are you going to get people who are willing to go there? 

I refer to page 17 - sale of imported agricultural products; where the committee chairperson observes rightly that our goods are not being welcomed in the supermarkets because they are of low quality. I am bringing to your attention this information which I gathered, that our things are good, but I think this is malice aforethought. Hon. Omolo can tell you that all our oranges they produce in Eastern Uganda go to Kenya. The ones we consume are coming from Tanzania. This means our goods are saleable. No Government is doing the same - exporting good things. 

Recently, we had a battle between Ugachick and our counterparts in Kenya who never wanted Ugachick to be exported through their country, and Ugachick was exporting to Rwanda. They were trying to sabotage them. We are producing the Tooke and have passed money for this Tooke project which is putting matooke into powder form. Even if you visit the select stores, you will find that most of our goods are there, and they are being sold. So what is so special? Unless we come out boldly as we pass the budget for this ministry and fight for Ugandans, we are going to be left behind. Even if you train these jua kalis, they are going to be overwhelmed, and as we open up the East African borders, we may not even compete. The onus is on us to put up the fight. Our goods are saleable; they are going to Sudan, DR Congo, they are coming here, even as far as Kalerwe; much as we have got floods there. Sometimes they even buy them from here and later pretend our goods are not the best. 

Lastly, on counterfeits, I think most of us have been victims of this. These days they have coined a word, apart from the “Bafere”, they call it “Pelegesi”. When you hear someone say “Pelegesi” that is vocabulary to mean fake goods. Right from edibles to the clothes you put on – you buy shoes today, it is written in a language you cannot understand, yet what is written on them says, “For temporary use.” This is what is brought here. 

I beg the people who are asking for this money, to put up a spirited fight to save Ugandans, because right from spare parts to edibles, people are eating poison. It is good you saw it on TV. Even when you are destroying most of these goods, make sure that the public does not come near them. What is the use of taking them to Kiteezi and you first allow people to rummage through them and then you destroy them later. If you do not have the money to destroy them, charge the traders who bought them so that they destroy them themselves or take them back to the port of origin. Because, even with us, when we take things there, they are returned to Uganda. I think that should be the way forward with this case as well. Thank you.

12.00
MS SYLVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two issues to raise on the report. One is on page 6, on cooperative development. I want to congratulate the Ministry of Trade for having registered 453 cooperative societies, but I think the ministry should not stop at priding themselves in only registering cooperative societies. I know that there are so many cooperative societies in Uganda but many of these just stop at registration. 

I am disappointed that out of the 453 cooperative societies which were registered, only 42 were for agriculture marketing and 33 were for livestock. In other words, most of the cooperative societies which are registered are not enterprise oriented. So, the ministry should go further to help build the capacity of these cooperative organisations. If you look at the total, 309 are SACCOs which are supposed to save and provide credit. But experience shows us that there are hardly any savings in many of these SACCOs that have been recently formed. 

Actually, many of them were formed in anticipation of getting Government funding, and once they recruit members, they stop at that. I thought that in the activities planned for this year, there should have been an activity which includes capacity building for these SACCOS, and also to help Ugandans learn the culture of saving. 

I am also concerned that cooperative development is placed in two ministries. The registration is placed in the Ministry of Trade whereas other components are placed in the Ministry of Finance, and I think this is not good for cooperative development. It would be better that instead of segmenting the different components of cooperative development, they are put in one ministry, which can follow up and ensure that we get the best out of the cooperatives that have been formed. 

MR WOPUWA: Thank you for giving me way. I have also observed the issue of cooperative development, but I want to inform you that the Ministry of Finance in most cases does not want an activity that involves money to go to another sector, and that is why they are hanging onto the cooperative societies. 

MS SSINABULYA: Thank you, honourable member, for that information. Since Government is very committed to developing the country through SACCOs, I think the minister has taken note of that and we shall see how we consolidate these activities in one ministry. 

I also want to congratulate the ministry upon expanding trade opportunities, more so in the area of the coffee sector. But my concern regards one of the achievements of the venture which was put in place, the Uganda-Egypt Coffee Manufacturing Company. One of the achievements is having two brands of Uganda coffee which meet Egypt’s tastes. But I am concerned that when I look at one of the brands called MAZAG Turkish coffee, the coffee seems to be more Turkish than Ugandan. I really do not know whether this coffee comes from Turkey. I would have been comfortable if it was branded with a Ugandan name such that the ordinary Egyptian who is taking this coffee would know that it comes from Uganda. 

Otherwise, I would like to thank them for the new ventures and maybe, it would be important that Government increases investment in this sector too. I thank you. 

12.05
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you. In debating this report, I would like to draw the attention of the House to page 17 where the committee is talking about PAYE threshold. 

For the last three years that I have been a Member of Parliament, this is an issue that I would term as a perennial recommendation by various committees of Parliament. I remember at one time when Dr Suruma was Minister of Finance, he made a commitment in this House that in the next financial year, he would ensure that the PAYE threshold that currently stands at Shs 130,000 would be raised to Shs 250,000. I am surprised that even in this very report, this particular matter is still part of the committee’s recommendations. This is an issue that affects so many citizens in this country. The fact of the matter is that the current Shs 130,000 is too low; we should raise it to 250,000.

I would like to ask the Minister of Finance to make a final commitment – personally I do not want to leave this House after years before this matter is handled. If six months elapse without any action being taken on PAYE threshold, I am going to sponsor a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament urging Government to consider revising this. We shall not keep acting on promises, which are never acted upon. This matter is affecting so many of our young people who are teachers, nurses; it is an issue that we must act on. And the time for action is now. The Minister of Finance should give us his final commitment on this matter. If that is not done, I think this House must take action based on our Rules of Procedure.

On page 12, regarding the issue of destruction of crops by wildlife, I would like to emphatically and clearly say that these elephants are not only destroying crops; they are also a threat to human life. There are cases of people who have been killed by these elephants. This has happened in Amuru and there was another case in Moyo. Unfortunately, when they destroy crops, that is considered illegal, but when villagers turn against them by killing some, they are arrested and prosecuted.  What I am trying to put across is that these elephants are not only a threat to crops, but also to the human race in those areas. I thank you for the opportunity.

12.09
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take the Floor just to make four brief points. The first one is on page 7. I just want to congratulate the Ministry of Trade, given this big jump in the tourist arrivals, that we are now recording 843,000 from 641,000 tourists. This is over 30 percent increment in just one year. This is very important because the tourist industry is one of the sectors that are assisting to employ our young people who seek jobs. 

One of the inputs for the tourist industry to give people confidence so that they can travel from one part of the country to the other and from abroad to Uganda, is the issue of security. I am not talking about security in Uganda alone, but in the whole region. As Parliament, we have always supported security and stability. We should continue to do so for the sake of boosting our tourism and other benefits.

I also would like to comment on the issue of destruction of crops. I support all those colleagues who have taken the Floor expressing concern about what the committee has said. If you take Rwenzori sub-region, for example, we have a lot of game reserves and national parks. We have the Queen Elizabeth, Rwenzori and Semuliki National Parks. We also have Kibale Forest Reserve. The most important thing is that in all these, you have animals that do frequently move into the population and destroy crops. It is insufficient for the committee to come here and say that we just tell our people to engage in activities that are friendly to the animals. What activities are these when we are talking about huge populations? 

For example, in my constituency, more than half of the population – (Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, hon. Chripus Kiyonga for taking this information. I am also wondering how the committee came up with this new recommendation. If they had not suffered from institutional memory, they should have looked at the recommendations in the report for the last financial year in which we looked at all options of making sure there is harmony between the national parks and the people. 

One of them was for the people to dig trenches. The other was doing electrical fencing. We even went to Mweya with the minister to talk about how to implement these resolutions. I am surprised that people are telling peasants to engage in tourism related activities. How can peasants afford that? Why didn’t you look at the recommendations in the report of last financial year to determine how to cause harmony between the national parks and our people? Instructional memory for this House is a dangerous thing. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Fully-fledged contribution.

DR CHRISPUS KIYONGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank hon. Kibanzanga for that comprehensive contribution –[Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_]- hold on hon. Nandala, I will give you time. 

My colleague, the Minister for Trade, in his response was more comprehensive than the committee. This recommendation by the committee is a non-starter. I do not need to repeat what hon. Kibanzanga has said – we need to be more comprehensive. We need to take a number of measures to secure harmony between the population and animals that earn us so much money.

On page 15 is the issue of security in Sudan, particularly the security of our traders who go there. I would like to request members, while they express this concern, to take into account other factors that need to be addressed in dealing with this matter.

First, the Government of Southern Sudan, as we all know, is a young government. They just recently came out of a conflict. So, it will take them time to get firm on the ground to control matters such as these.

Secondly, some of these criminals that are operating in Juba - in Southern Sudan are actually Ugandan criminals working alone or in collaboration with some of the brothers in Southern Sudan.

And Government’s perspective is that we remain engaged with our counterparts in Southern Sudan in order to address this problem. So, I would not like an impression to be conveyed that the Parliament is just one-sided on this issue. Sudan is friendly to us and everything possible is being done to ensure that this matter is brought under control.

My last point is on page 17. I listened to my good friend, hon. Mutumba, from Kawempe saying that we should fight very hard to ensure that our products are not crowded out by imports from neighbours or from abroad. My understanding is that this is not a dumping issue. I do not believe that Kenya, for example, is dumping their products into Uganda. Dumping would mean that you just put in products irrespective of costs, just to dominate the market. What we need here is a more comprehensive analysis. Uganda has competitive advantage in the production of certain products like pineapples, oranges and mangoes and other things. There is no way Kenya would beat us.

But what we are suffering from now is the issue of supply. If you go to a factory like Britannia which is producing Splash juice, you will find that until recently, they have been getting their raw materials from India in form of concentrate for pineapple and mango. It is only this year that the producers in Uganda have met their demand for pineapples. And that is only pineapple. When it comes to mangoes and oranges, we are still far from meeting the demand even of a single factory like Britannia. So, first is the issue of supply. Are we able to meet the supply? How much are we producing? 

Secondly, there is the issue of marketing. Most of our peasants are producing as they normally do and just bring the goods straight from the garden into Nakasero or even into the hotels. However, our neighbours are more sophisticated in this respect. They are able to package very well and in that way you find that they beat us.

So, here it is not an issue of physical fights; it is not an issue of tariffs. I think it is an issue of more organisation, more production and improved marketing practices. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.19
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report. My observations start on page 7, chapter two, where it says, “Ten SMEs will be incubated to acquire equipment for: carpentry and works for commercial cow horn product production, wood product fabrication, milk powder processing, fruit processing…” I am interested in knowing where these are based, because the people of Ibanda would have the potential of, for example, dealing in commercial cow horn products as well as milk production and processing, and food processing, because we keep a lot of cattle. 

Again on page 7, we are also talking of wildlife trade having contributed about US$3 million from the exports of crocodile skins, snakes, chameleons and butterflies raised on private land. I would also like to know where these are raised because I would also wish to learn from these hoping that my people could learn and gain from this export - (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Of keeping snakes? (Laughter)

MS KIBOIJANA: Page 9, tourism, wildlife and museum development. This is of course very good for our country. But the tourists are complaining of poorly trained guides. The guides are not fit to do business. There is no association of known tour guides. I do not know whether these tourists just go to the sites and just pick the people on site. Recently, it appeared in the newspapers that the tourist guides were very poorly dressed and that hygienically, they were repelling to these tourists. They were even almost manhandling the tourists because they were scrambling for them and at the end of the day, they ask for tips. This is a concern which should be addressed.

I will now turn to page 11 of this report. I am concerned about the lack of votes for MTAC and Uganda Export Promotion Board. Recently, the Minister of Education tried to merge MTAC with UMI, and MTAC had to fight for itself because the mandates of UMI and MTAC are completely different. So, the recommendation that these institutions should have their own vote is really crucial and it is a move in the right direction.

I will go to page 12 on destruction of crops by wildlife. A case in point is Kiruhura District in Nyabushozi. There is wildlife from Lake Mburo and in the dry season these animals were roaming in the villages and the people of Kiruhura were complaining that when they kill one animal they round up the whole village and you are all put in jail. So, they were wondering; what is more important - is it the keeping of the animals or the life of the population? They were saying that their life is at stake.

Lastly, my observation is on page 31 of this report, and it concerns the Uganda-Egypt Coffee Manufacturing Company (UGEMCO).  The move is very good for Uganda, but my concern is on the recommendation for the money that is still needed. I am wondering - at the time when we introduced this company, how much did Uganda put in? How much did it invest? And over the years from 2002 to 2009, how much has been realised? Has this company been able to break even and if so, why couldn’t it recoup to invest more money in this venture? I am wondering why we should go ahead and approve these monies before we look at how much it has been able to achieve in terms of the money given. I agree it has expanded to the areas of the Arabs and the Far East, but how much has been put in, and how much has been realised before we put in more money. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, we have two other ministries to go. What we should do is that those who have not contributed to this one will contribute to the next one. But for balancing this up, let us hear from the member from Apac –(Interjections)- what I want is that by one o’clock, we should finish the Committee of Supply for this particular ministry and then after lunch we deal with the other. 

12.27
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start my contribution from the recent Cabinet reshuffle. There were a lot of media reports that hon. Kahinda Otafiire was dropped; he was given a less important ministry. I think this was done out of ignorance because people do not know the contribution of this ministry to this country. I felt that was very unfortunate, because it went on and on. It showed that the journalists who were reporting and those giving them information are ignorant of some of the most important entities within our economy. You cannot ignore trade and industry let alone tourism.

There was also a recent press report about Tororo Dry Port. I saw a document where a certain PS committed this country. I also saw a report where the minister, Kahinda Otafiire, made a statement that he was going to cancel that agreement. I want to know the implications of that to both importers and exporters.

I want to know the contribution of this ministry, especially the department of trade to local trade. Many people have talked about local products. But it looks like we have just left the local traders to find their own level; we are not guiding them. The focus is on what we can export. But internally, there seems to be less guidance. 

Thirdly, some of the bodies under this ministry were established by a statutory instrument. That meant that they are self-accounting even to Parliament. For instance, Export Promotion Board, Uganda Wildlife Authority and Uganda Tourism Board. These entities come into being because there is a need to have them run with some degree of autonomy without interference from the parent ministries. This allows them deliver without the necessary bureaucracy within the ministry. But this is not the case. 

This also allows them to access funds directly from the donors or to get their share from Government and utilise them based on their priorities. It is also to allow them link up with other entities in other ministries and other bodies outside that would be difficult to relate with when they are within the bureaucracy of the ministry. For example, Wildlife Authority might fall under two ministries, but when these entities are autonomous, they will be able to link up and interact easily. 

I raised this because the parent Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is not giving the necessary freedom to allow these statutory bodies under it to operate with some degree of independence and autonomy to deliver, based on the objective for which they are established. And, by doing this, they are undermining the contribution of these bodies. 

Some of these bodies, like Uganda Tourism Board, have nothing other than salaries. You tell them to promote tourism, but what do you expect them to do if you do not invest? So, people are seated there getting salaries without any contribution.

My concern here is that if we establish these bodies, we should allow them to meet the objectives for which they were put in place. If you look at the role of Uganda Tourism Board and Uganda Wildlife Authority; yes, the other one works more on conservation, but on top of that they benefit from the money of tourism more than Uganda Tourism Board. Sixty percent of the money collected in these national parks remains in Uganda Wildlife Authority. 

Therefore, they are an interested party in the promotion of tourism. But their mandate is not so. Government should find a way of merging some of these entities because they have common ends at the end of the day –[Mr Kibanzanga rose_]- before I give the opportunity for my colleague to give information, let me finish this.

I recently travelled to Egypt. I went to one town on the Red Sea. There is nothing there other than the Red Sea and the desert. The government has put perfect structures in place. There are 86 five star hotels, and the smallest hotel had 600 rooms. And you cannot even walk in any of those hotels unless you book two weeks in advance. That is just one small town in Egypt.

When I look down here, even on our beaches, we can do a lot more. But now, if you drive around Lake Victoria, the beaches smell. So, you wonder; will tourists come to a smelly beach? There are other sectors which have to be more responsible. And unless we tackle this, we may not be able to move very far – (Member timed out_)

12.33
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by urging this House to consider and debate a report that was read before this House by the chairperson of the Committee on the Economic Partnership Agreement, because while we are talking about trade, that Economic Partnership Agreement has very vital issues which have to be discussed by this Parliament. 

The report was presented by him; the Minister asked for opportunity and he also gave his point of view, but Iam disappointed that up to now, we have not debated this report. There are many issues the report has not raised, which are very vital in the trade sector, and I want clarification from both the chair and the minister. 

The issue of other barriers to trade, and one of the biggest barrier to trade which we have seen of recent, arising out of relations with our neighbouring countries, is the question of us being landlocked; the route for trade - and trade related issues – on which many traders and their containers were stuck in Mombasa because of the hiccup we had with Kenya. 

I am disappointed that in this report, the whole Ministry of Trade does not address the question of alternative route for Ugandan traders, whose products can go through that other route to reach Uganda. This is a critical aspect that has to be addressed by this country. And, if trade cannot be at the forefront, then it is very unfortunate. 

The second issue I want to raise is the question of the border policy. We have talked about the question of quality of Ugandan goods versus the quantity, a reason purportedly why many supermarkets - foreign supermarkets - I want to use “foreign” because when you go to local supermarkets, even in the markets you cannot fail to get eggs supplied by Ugandans in excess; even pineapples. So, I don’t want that excuse to be given. 

But I want to know because many countries would have a support integrated policy right from supporting the farmers into getting the quantity required and the quality required. Now, in this policy statement, you are stressing the quantity and quality; you are not telling us what your policy is to ensure that you support these farmers; these traders - to achieve both the quality and the quantity. 

Can you tell us as a ministry? Because, when I talked about EPA earlier, one of the biggest contentions that we are raising as African countries is that USA and other European countries subsidise their farmers, but they want you to be in the same market system with them when they are subsidising their farmers -(Interruption)- So, you want clarification? Ok.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Amongi. You talked about the report not giving us information on EPA, and I note that the report also does not give us information on AGOA, and I am conscious that we continue to fund AGOA activities in this country. So, why is the report not telling us what is happening with AGOA? 

I learnt recently that there has been an extension; is there no need for you to educate the country and Parliament on the extension of the provisions under AGOA? Is there no need for you as a committee to account to us on the funding that we give to the AGOA Office in this country? Thank you, hon. Amongi. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you. The other issue I want the committee and the minister to also address is the question of the impact of the economic downfall on trade. Because, as of now when you go to traders, the dollar rate is so high; the prices of goods and services have increased; and you are not telling us the linkages of the economic impact vis-a’-vis how we need to address it.

The last issue I want to deal with is the question of Uganda Bureau of Standards and the Uganda Industrial Research. In the last financial year, we appropriated Shs 10 billion to Uganda Industrial Research Institute for research on bananas, improving them and bringing the yield high. This is missing as an achievement; it is not mentioned anywhere; we do not know what Shs 10 billion has done; you don’t tell us what has happened with that money vis-a’-vis the standard and development of bananas. (Member timed out_)

12.40
Mr Kawanga John Baptist (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Just brief comments. The kind of remarks that have been made by honourable members recently, emphasise on the point which is repeated here every year, but Government does not appear to understand the importance of this ministry in funding; in publishing it; and in supporting its activities in various areas. We pray that this be done from now onwards.

Two, the question of foreigners running our hotels. Virtually all our hotels are run by foreigners. The report refers to Kenyans, but it is not only Kenyans, it is also Indians. Ugandans are not being employed in our hotels; they are being discouraged to work there. There is not sufficient training for our people to get involved in this industry, yet it is the most intimate to us. We pray that whoever is concerned with this matter ensures that Ugandans actually work in our hotels. 

Three, I think it is high time we separated ownership of certain hotels from management, particularly Munyonyo Resort. It is such a big institution that it is high time its management became totally professional and divorced from ownership. Most people who go there find it a very wonderful place when they get in, but by the time they leave, they are so discouraged by the kind of reception, and the handling in the hotel itself. And, the complaint of most people is that it appears management is centralised in one place, and that leaves out other things not done. 

MR OKUMU REAGAN: Mr Speaker, I just want to inform the Shadow Minister that even in the absence of a law, which the committee has not mentioned, a law on public-private partnership, which Government should actually bring here- Munyonyo has a public share of 25 percent.

MR KAWANGA: Four, the quality of our exports. 

It appears nobody cares about this, and there is no institution to handle this. And if this goes on, Uganda may soon find it has no exports.

Five, cooperative societies. 

The management of cooperative societies is critical. Year in, year out we talk about having legislation to handle SACCOs, to handle what, but nothing comes. If quality has to be handled, we must have a powerful management of cooperative societies and it is one of those areas which are most understaffed in the ministry. So, please, we pray that everything is done to ensure that the cooperative societies are managed in a manner that is productive to the country. 

Finally, we should pay our dues to international organisations. It is a shame that year in, year out, we continue not to pay our dues and we lose on the benefits that we should otherwise gain from those organisations. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Be brief so that the minister can come in and we conclude this debate. 

12.44 
MS RUTH NVUMETTA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for the report. On page 9, there is a paragraph on Tourism, Wildlife and Museum Development, where landing sites facilities are going to be developed on Lutembe and Ngamba islands in the area of snakes and birds, and we have forgotten that there is an island called Nseera in Lake Victoria which is so beautiful. It has very beautiful snakes and all the birds from the North come this way when it is winter time but it has been completely forgotten and nobody ever thinks - 

THE SPEAKER: Is it true?

MS NVUMETTA: Yes, the snakes are very beautiful at a distance. You do not need to sit in them or with them but at least they can be viewed. (Laughter) There is so much to see and I have always commented about this with the Minister for Tourism. 

We have the expansion and development of 100 tourism facilities; either the committee has tactfully refused to give us information on the facilities that will be developed or the ministry did not provide this information and I just hope that the tourism industry on Ssese Islands is going to be promoted and looked at seriously. 

Mr Speaker, to start with, nobody is going to die on the islands, and from the recent experience when we had the visitors - the right honourable speakers that you took to the islands enjoyed it and even wanted to stay there longer. There is no security problem, but we are always thinking about where the rebels will be and whether animals will eat us. The animals are not there on the islands; they will not eat or kill anybody. The snakes won’t bite; they are just beautiful to look at. 

So, I really feel that the ministry needs to learn to think out of the box instead of always thinking about going to where the wild animals are and forgetting all the beautiful beaches that are on the islands and the fresh air. 

Mr Speaker, on page 24, we are trying to look at the websites, the newsletters and so forth, but then you have such remote areas that need to be promoted. There is no electricity and new infrastructure is not there. So, how are we going to promote them or how are the people there going to be able to access and give information on what is in these places? 

On Bukasa Island, there are very beautiful falls. I have tried on several occasions to get the minister there or anybody working in the Ministry of Tourism to come, and none of them has ventured there. “Oh, we fear water” is the only thing they say. I have never seen anybody being eaten by water, but still, we get those kinds of comments. So, we should get the committees of Physical Infrastructure and ICT, to seriously look at the supply and the facilities in these areas which we need to reach and promote, to get more and more money for us as Ugandans. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

12.48 
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to limit my contribution to one aspect of the report which is cooperatives. 

Government has on a number of occasions, and in different statements, come out to say that the cooperatives will be used as a vehicle of development in this country, and proposals have been made to the effect that the cooperative structures will be built from down to the top. 

But when you go to the area where you come from - and I believe many of you do not find this one being actualised - you do not find parishes which are supposed to have a cooperative organisation functioning, and one of the reasons for this is poor or inadequate funding. 

When I looked through the budget proposals for this year, the entire cooperative department is provided with Shs 1 billion and it is for the cooperative department and Ware Housing Receipt System. Actually, the department is supposed to use Shs 500 million for the whole country. Now, how serious can we be that we are going to supervise the formation and the rowing of the cooperatives right from the villages with Shs 500 million? 

I think Government is not just talking. If we don’t address the matter of cooperatives, the poorest of the poor will remain where they are. For example, when discussing the formation and financing of the SACCOs, we provided Shs 30 billion for strengthening the Uganda Cooperative Savings and Credit Union. UCSCU is a private institution; we provided Shs 30 billion for strengthening and staffing it, but a Government department with a mandate to supervise the cooperatives is provided with Shs 500 million.

Mr Speaker, are we serious? A private institution that does not submit its audit reports to Parliament is provided with Shs 30 billion, and a department is provided with Shs 500 million, and yet the mandate of UCSCU is to supervise over 800 SACCOs. SACCOs are savings and credit institutions but the mandate of the department is 3,800 cooperatives. What mathematics is this where you give an institution supervising 800 societies Shs 30 billion and a government department supervising 4,000 societies, Shs 500 million? 

Another matter that is of concern and is not highlighted in the policy statement is a matter of Government indebtedness to cooperatives. As far as I am aware, Government owes more than Shs 14 billion to cooperatives and especially cooperative unions but we don’t see any statement as to how Government wants to pay this money and yet we are talking of using these same institutions as vehicles of development.

My prayer is that in addition to having a programme of paying this money, Government should even consider the possibility of cancelling some of the loans owed by cooperatives to Government. If we can do it for individuals and support them, why can’t we support institutions that support the bulk of our people?

Another matter that is of concern and overtime has not been reported on is the matter of the Cooperative Bank. The Cooperative Bank was put under liquidation in 1998 and 11 years later, the assets and properties of cooperatives and unions have been massively attached and sold at giveaway prices. Eleven years later, we don’t have a report as to how this liquidation was handled; how much money was realised; how much the balance is; whether the Cooperative Bank is coming back at all, and what the status is. 

Can the hon. Minister inform us as to the status of the liquidation of the Cooperative Bank; how much money was realised, and how much should go to the owners of the Cooperative Bank?

Last is the matter of the Ministry of Microfinance. In relation to other cooperatives, SACCOs are really cooperatives. The only difference is that they have savings and credit, but there are also other forms of cooperatives. There are housing cooperatives, transport cooperatives and production cooperatives; so, the SACCOs are only a financial arm of cooperatives, and belong to where the rest of the cooperatives are.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Minister, briefly respond to some of the points.

12.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TOURISM (Mr Serapio Rukundo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the members for the interest they showed in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. It is not a junior ministry, and the development of this country depends on our ministry. As such, we who are in the ministry take our portfolios very seriously. 

If you look at tourism, Uganda is a country endowed by God. If you look at our weather and what we have; the River Nile, Lake Victoria and other lakes; if you look at the mountains, we have everything. Of course, it is a question of time; looking at where we are coming from, and where we are going. 

In Uganda, we have patterns of rainfall, rivers and water. As such, we can carry out irrigation, process and trade. If you look at tourism, industry and trade, they are the basis for the development of this country, and I am happy that the members showed interest. I am going to try to answer their concerns.

Somebody asked for a list of the Jua Kali participants. I don’t have it here, but we shall give it to him. Then he also asked where the Jua Kali at Makindye will go when the centre is completed. I am also going to look at that and we shall give him the answer. 

However, we are definitely aware of the regional balance, but we also look at the endowment of each of our regions, that is, what does each region have and what can we, therefore, do to develop and process. 

The issue of regional balance and what we can do in the Eastern Region will be looked into. But as far as I know, in the Eastern Region we are looking at the processing of oranges. A lot of emphasis is being put on growing oranges as there is a lot of land, and the rainfall patterns favour orange and mango growing, as well as the processing of those fruits and their packaging. 

Answering the issue you were talking about regarding the quantity of our production - the productivity of what we are growing and the standards of what we are processing is an attempt to fill supermarkets. 

I would like to say that if you bring in the issue of cooperatives and “one product, one village”; if you empower our cooperatives so that they can produce enough and supply the markets; if you bring our organisations like Uganda National Bureau of Standards so that you can regulate the standards and standardise production; you will then be able to supply all these supermarkets, regionally and domestically, as well as penetrate the regional and external markets. (Interruption)

MS WONEKHA: Thank you for giving way, hon. Minister. Talking about standards, in the report here, the committee has said that you have a draft National Standards Policy. so which standards are you referring to? Thank you.

MR RUKUNDO: Thank you very much. In the report somewhere, both Uganda Industrial Research Institute and Uganda National Bureau of Standards are mentioned. One tries to help fabricate machines and another one sets standards for different sectors. While we are still working on the general national policy, Uganda National Bureau of Standards sets the standards for each of the sectors.

Hon. Mary Okurut talked about the effect of polythene bags. She brought up an important issue. When you are a tourist and you come to a country, wherever you go the state of hygiene matters. If you have kaveera everywhere, the first impression to a tourist - and she talked of an evangelist. For a beautiful country like Uganda littered with polythene, all the beauty and all the good weather become nothing. So, your point is very important. As members of Parliament who represent the people, it is important to sensitise the populace about cleanliness.

Regarding counterfeits, some of the emerging economies are reproducing massively: If you look at the economies of China, India, Taiwan and others. And, if we do not pull our socks and start production as fast as we can, most of these goods will keep coming into our markets. Some people copy what looks like the original product, but most of the goods coming here are not the original high quality goods, and that is where Uganda National Bureau of Standards comes in; not only to regulate and improve the standards of what we produce, but also to ensure that we have value-for-money on what comes into this economy. 

So, I thank the members who stressed this point. We need as much money as possible to make sure that we have more staff to man the entries, and to subject whatever comes into Uganda to tests, especially when it is food, because it can be poisonous. 

Someone talked about community-based tourism and advised that we should look at other forms of tourism rather than just the parks. 

I totally agree with that, and as I said earlier, Uganda is well-endowed. If you look at culture, I think we are one of the few countries in the world where we have kingdoms – people who are governing themselves; we have them in Buganda, Busoga and Bunyoro; where a big man like me kneels before a five-year old king. (Interjection) Yes, culturally, it makes a lot of sense. Somebody in Britain will not understand this; how can it be? It is in my veins that if say I am a Muganda or a Mutoro, I should kneel before this five-year old king. So, these are fascinating issues to tourists, especially Japanese who cherish culture. 

We are also lucky to have faith-based tourism. How many people go to Israel? In Uganda, we also want to take advantage of this and ask people to come for prayers, especially around June, at the Uganda Martyrs Shrine. So, I agree with you that we have a lot to market to the world. 

Trade in Southern Sudan. I think the hon. Minister in charge of Defence talked about it. They are our good neighbours; there are lawless people there, but I think that is being handled.  

Somebody talked about the big and near market of Sudan, and how we should take advantage of it. I agree with this. When I was in Arua, we talked about industries which could be set there, that are geared towards supplying goods to DRC. 

When I was in Moyo – I am moving around the country because we are making tourism development plans for each of these districts and for each of the regions; and when we are there, we look at how we can develop each of these areas. And when I was in Arua and Moyo, these are some of the things that we talked about; which industries can be set up in Uganda that are intended to supply what is required in our neighbouring countries. 

The entry of 70,000 people into Sudan, and yet they come here freely. I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs will look at that. 

On donated drugs which kill our industries. We are going to look at that as Government and see how we will regulate it and protect our industries.

Then, the destruction of crops and the killing of people by our wild animals. The report suggests sensitising people, but in our plan, we want to study when and why does an elephant move from area A to area B. For example, an elephant killed somebody in Moyo and I went there. So, there is a pattern. 

Elephants migrate from Sudan and come into Uganda around November-December, then they return later. Particularly in Moyo; we have got these fruits in November-December; that is when they ripen, and when they come and eat these fruits. They get tipsy and I am told in the evening you see them dancing. 

Now, our recommendation was that during that period, we should get more rangers from Uganda Wildlife Authority, and move them there, but we should also encourage tourists to go to that area so that it becomes a tourist attraction, and we make more money while we protect our people at the same time. 

So, we are trying to study the behaviour of these animals to find out when they are aggressive to people. For example we know that if a lion is not hungry - and you sit there, just looking at it - but if you make some noise and you walk backwards or run, it will jump on you. 

We also know the behaviour of hippos, especially a female hippo, when it has a young one. If you come anywhere near it, to protect its young one, it will fight you. And this is why we have got Uganda Wildlife Institute in Kasese. One of the issues is to study the behaviour of these animals. When and why do they respond to this or that; when do they move? And then we can appropriately respond with the right measures. 

But that aside, we have also looked at our national parks, for example, Queen Elizabeth National Park. How much money do we need to fence it? And, how do we fence it? If you are dealing with elephants, you dig trenches. An elephant will not go there, and if it goes there, it will walk in the trench and stay there until you give it an inlet back to the park. If you are talking about lions or leopards, you talk about using an electric fence. We have carried out studies. For example, we need Shs 12 billion to do that in Queen Elizabeth National Park. When elephants destroyed crops in Kasese, again I was there to asses the damage and see what action we can take. 

Somebody talked about the number of tourists. Yes, it is true the image of Uganda is improving with the number of tourists coming to Uganda increasingly. The issue now is how to strategically come up with a marketing plan for each of the areas. We are looking, for example, at USA and Canada to determine what they want to see when they come here. How do we attract them? 

We are also looking at the European Union. I can report that we have already started a marketing mechanism using the money that has been given to us; sooner than later, there will be two million tourists coming to Uganda.

We are also looking at increasing the number of domestic tourism. You people, how many of you have actually relaxed in those parks? I know that some of the problems are due to high costs, but from next year, we are going to come up with packages – we are about to get tourism vehicles within three months or so from now. We have negotiated with hotel owners to come up with packages that are affordable, especially during the non-peak periods. So, soon you will receive some papers detailing affordable packages for you to go and relax –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, allow me seek a simple clarification from the minister. I have been to some of these national parks and seen the kind of hotels that are there. But I am also told that the Madhvanis own some hotels where some people are not allowed to go. I have also been told that some people are not allowed to build hotels in some of these parks. For example, Serena Hotels was stopped from building a hotel there. So, how do you expect the honourable members to go and enjoy themselves when the rooms are not enough?

MR RUKUNDO: Mr Speaker, because of the limited time, I cannot answer all those questions. Anyway, the issue of the exclusion zone held by the Madhvanis in Queen Elizabeth and Murchison Falls National parks is being handled. I have set up a committee; we also have an opinion from the Attorney-General. I can report that by the end of this year we should have solved it.

The issue of not having enough hotels in the parks: We have been moving around. I told you that I was in Moyo and Arua. We have covered the whole country and come up with scenic sites upon which if you put up a hotel, whether you are in the bathroom or dining and you look outside, you will see something special. 

Mr Speaker, I want to inform the House that within the next year, we should have started at least 30 hotels. How are we going to marshal the money? I would like to say that we have already selected sites. We are also going to appoint people to do architectural drawings, visual impressions and bills of quantity. Once we get those in place, we will then look around for investors. 

I already have some investors from Turkey who we think will partner with Uganda Wildlife Authority. That is when we will be able to answer the question of separating ownership and management. And if I had more time, I would explain our integrated tourism development plan. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Now, I think we go to committee stage. Yes, hon. Minister, do you have something to say?

1.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr FRED OMACH): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank you and the members of Parliament for voting for the Ministry of Public Service and Local Governments yesterday –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we are going to handle votes; I would request you to stay around so that we can finish the supply to this ministry.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House of the figures that were changed. I have brought a typed copy, which I would like to table now.

Secondly, there were one or two issues that were raised by Members today, one of which was by hon. Okumu. It was about the law on PPPs. I would like to bring it out clearly that this law is in the offing. We shall soon be sending it to Cabinet and subsequently to Parliament.

There was also the issue of payee threshold, which was raised by Hon. Dennis Obua to move it from Shs 130,000 to Shs 250,000. I would like to say that we have taken note of this. However, let me say that for this year, we have been able to only increase the salaries of civil servants moderately; that is all we could afford this financial year.

The issues about SACOOs have been noted. At the moment we are holding these SACOOs as Ministry of Finance, but we are in the process of tabling to Cabinet, regulations that will deal with issues relating to SACOOs in this country.

Mr Speaker, we did send Corrigendum No. 1 –

THE SPEAKER: Before you move to that talk, more about the movement of threshold from Shs 130,000 to Shs 250,000, which you have been promising many times.

MR OMACH: Yes, Mr Speaker, this has been raised many times, but this financial year, given a number of constraints, we are unable to handle it. But as I have said, we have been able to give some modest increments in salaries for civil servants.

Now, the corrigendum No.1 –

THE SPEAKER: You are talking about civil servants, how about other people being employed in the private sector?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, we have looked at the figures to increase the threshold from Shs 130,000 to Shs 250,000 and discovered that the amount in losses in revenue would go to almost over Shs 100 billion. Now, given the downturn on the global economic crisis, this cannot be an appropriate time to handle this issue.

Mr Speaker, we did send to the Clerk to Parliament, Corrigendum No.1 and copies were given to all chairpersons of respective committees. Allow me table a copy for this debate to continue.

In today’s presentation, we also have, following this corrigendum, some corrections to make, which I would like to read verbatim and request that copies be given to members of Parliament.

Let us move to the Report of the Parliament Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry – see page 41 of the draft estimates.

The first one is on the recurrent for Vote 015, Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry. It should read Shs 8,771,982,000. Now, this has been affected by a figure of Shs 71 million, which was transferred through this corrigendum from Ministry of Education to the Uganda Wildlife Institute and Uganda Tourism Training Institute, Jinja. The development component is Shs 19,085,686,000. This brings in the figure of Shs 3,490,000,000, which takes care of the tax component.

For Uganda Industrial Research Institute, the figure reads Shs 4,526,000,000 and the development budget is Shs 8,230,000,000 to include the tax element of Shs 1.2 billion.

For Uganda Tourism Board, the figure comes down to Shs 1,328,880,000 after making a transfer through the corrigenda of Shs 324,918,000 to the development side, to cater for transport, computers and infrastructure for the offices - tables and desks - for the new recruits under the Uganda Wildlife Authority.

Under Vote 154, Uganda National Bureau of Standards, the recurrent figure reads Shs 6,215,000,000 and under development, which includes taxes of Shs 787,000,000, the figure now reads Shs 4,397,000,000. These are the figures that I request for this ministry and the departments under it. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we go to the Committee of Supply?

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 015 – Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 8,771,982,000 under Vote 015, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry be provided for as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 19,085,686,000 under Vote 015, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 110 – Uganda Industrial Research Institute 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 4,526,000,000 under Vote 110, Uganda Industrial Research Institute, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 8,230,000,000 under Vote 110, Uganda Industrial Research Institute, be provided for as development expenditure for Financial Year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 117 – Uganda Tourism Board

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,728,880,000 under Vote 117, Uganda Tourism Board, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 324,918,000 under Vote 117, Uganda Tourism Board, be provided for as development expenditure for Financial Year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 154 – Uganda National Bureau of Standards 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the sum of Shs 6,215,000,000 under Vote 154, Uganda National Bureau of Standards, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for FY 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 4,397,000,000, under vote 154, Uganda National Bureau of Standards, be provided for as development expenditure for Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman and colleagues, I move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

1.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the budget proposals for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry - vote 110, Uganda Industrial Research Institute; vote 015, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry; vote 117, Uganda Tourism Board; vote 154, Uganda National Bureau of Standards - and supplied with some amendments. I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

1.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of Supply.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank you, honourable members, for your time and contributions. I think it is the appropriate time to have a break and go for lunch. Will an hour from now be enough? We shall come back and with ICT. Proceedings suspended. 

(The House suspended at 1.34p.m.) 

(On resumption at 2.53 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: I welcome you. We have students who have come to hear the proceedings. I will introduce them when I get the details about them.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY

2.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nathan Nabeta): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The sessional committee on ICT received, examined and discussed the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates of Ministry of Information, Communications and Technology, and the affiliated bodies namely, Uganda Communications Commission, Broadcasting Council, Uganda Post Limited, and Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology, for the Financial Year 2009/10.

I now beg this august House to consider and approve the committee’s report on the findings, observations and recommendations on Vote 020, the Ministry of Information, Communications and Technology. 

I will rash through to page 3 to look at the key sector performances for Financial Year 2008/09. Some of the key achievements for the ministry include harmonising the regional framework for ICT policy and cyber laws. The National Information Technology Uganda Bureau was passed by Parliament and the cyber laws were approved by Cabinet and tabled in Parliament, and the committee is considering them now. 

I go to page 4 and look at some of the key affiliated institutions. 

Uganda Communications Commission 

Some of the key achievements include: 

increasing the number of service providers with the entry of a fifth cellular network operator, Orange Telecom; 30 percent of the population now own telephones; there are 8.6 million mobile subscribers and 168 fixed land connections; 75 percent GSM geographic coverage, and close to about 100 percent population coverage.

I now rash through to page 6, and look at the budget performances for the Financial Year 2008/09. The ministry had a release of Shs 5.982 billion out of the approved Shs 6.504 billion last financial year, thus performing at 92 percent. 

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, just give me a minute. The students here are from Border College Academy in Bukwo District, from the Sebei area. You are most welcome. (Applause) 

MR NABETA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The ministry performed at 92 percent. This was attributed to low performance of the wage bill, which had a release of 64 percent due to slow recruitment of staff in the ministry. The ministry currently has 74 staff, compared to 43 in Financial Year 2007/2008, out of the required 110. The process of recruitment is ongoing to fill the 36 vacant posts. Out of Shs 5.982 billion release, actual expenditure was Shs 5.953 billion showing a 99.5 percent actual performance. The details are in annex Table 1.

The budget outlook for the sector for Financial Year 2009/2010 amounts to Shs 17.925 billion. Shs 615 million is for wages and Shs 1.65 billion is non-wage, hence a total recurrent of Shs 2.265 billion; Shs 7.26 billion for development expenditure, and Shs 8.4 billion for taxes.

If you look at the key planned activities for 2009/10, the Ministry of Information, Communications and Technology is looking at: 

•	Implementing phase II and phase III of the National Data Transmission Backbone, and implementing the e-governance infrastructure project 

•	Operationalising and managing the national backbone and e-governance infrastructure. 

•	Establishing and operationalising NITA-U which, among others, is to promote and market the business process outsourcing industry.

I beg to move to page 9 to look at some of the key constraints of the ministry: 

•	The ministry is faced with inadequate funding to meet the planned project outputs. 

•	Slow pace in recruitment of the ministry staff to fill the approved ministry structure continues to be a challenge to the ministry. 

•	The lengthy procurement procedures and inadequate release of funds, delay the implementation of some of the ministry’s key strategies.

Uganda Communications Commission’s key challenges are: 

•	Provision of power in rural areas. 

•	Taxation of telecom services, which is pushing costs up. 

•	Postal development for Uganda. 

The establishment and development of postal services in Uganda, which is a multi-sectoral approach, needs involvement of local governments. 

•	Movement from analog to digital broadcasting.

I will move on to page 10 and briefly look at key observations and recommendations of the committee. On the basis of the discussions and considerations of the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Information, Communications and Technology for the Financial Year 2009/10, the committee made the following observations and recommendations: 

i)	Slow recruitment of staff. 

There has been a slow recruitment in the ministry, especially for technical positions. The committee observed that demand for these high calibre officers is high and competitive. However, some of the requirements of the Public Service Commission tends to hinder the recruitment of potential staff. It is, therefore, difficult to recruit such high calibre officers in the ministry. 

The committee recommends that the Public Service Commission relaxes some of the requirements for these positions, given the fact that the Ministry of ICT is a new ministry. The Public Service Commission should also consider increasing the benefits to these high calibre officers to match the market rates.

ii)	Taxes on telecommunication equipment

The committee observed that despite the pronouncement by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in last year’s Budget speech where the taxes on telecommunication equipment were removed, the Ministry of ICT asserts that it is continuing to be taxed by the Uganda Revenue Authority on the exempted equipment. Last financial year, 2008/2009, Parliament approved Shs 438 million as taxes accruing on equipment and machinery. Although the Ministry of Finance had released Shs 2.1 billion for taxes, the ministry actually used Shs 238 million. 

Based on these inconsistencies, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and Uganda Revenue Authority pronounce themselves clearly on the exemption of taxes on the telecommunication equipment.

iii) District Business Information Centres (DBICs) 

The establishment of district business centres closely linked with e-governance initiatives was a government response to the challenges of enhancing productivity and fighting digital marginalisation of the rural and sub-urban areas. 

The DBICs services also contribute towards achievement of the United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by bringing ICT to the rural communities. This enables individuals as well as small and medium enterprises in the surrounding areas to exploit the significant potentials of ICT towards the creation of employment and thus contributing to poverty eradication. 

The committee applauds the initiative of setting up the DBICs. However, some glaring gaps were observed as highlighted in the report.

The committee recommends that:  

•	All activities and recurrent budget lines of DBICs must be transferred to the National Information Technology Authority for better management and technical oversight. 

•	The strategy should be revised to cater for sensitisation of the public on the benefits of these reports.

iv)	Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) 

Business Process Outsourcing continued to be underfunded despite Parliament’s recommendation to have it allocated Shs 6 billion, instead of the Shs 250 million provided in the Budget, because of its ability to create employment.

The committee recommends that: 

•	The BPO implementation strategy and all current budget lines must be shifted to NITA-U. The national backbone infrastructure should be handled expeditiously so as to facilitate this implementation strategy. 

•	Government provides the BPO strategy with Shs 6 billion; and 

•	The BPO strategy should be remodelled after more successful ones like those of Ireland, India and Malaysia. 

v)	Use of Ugandan Code 256 in Southern Sudan 

The committee observed that Uganda’s code, 256, was still being used in Southern Sudan yet the Minister for ICT informed the committee that Southern Sudan currently now has its own code.

The committee has not yet seen an agreement between the Government of Uganda and Southern Sudan that stipulates the terms and conditions of the use of the Ugandan code. The committee, therefore, recommends that this matter be investigated further to resolve the terms and conditions of this agreement. 

vi)	Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) 

The committee observed that UCC was distributing computers to schools. In areas where there was no electric power supply, solar panels were provided. However, in some schools where the solar panels were provided the panels had been stolen. It was also noted that there were no computer labs in some schools where computers were delivered, and technical capacity maintenance was lacking.

Mandatory Levy by UCC 

The UCC Act 1997, mandates UCC to levy a percentage on all licensed operators in order to create revenue. Currently, UCC relies on audited accounts as supplied by licensed providers to charge this levy.

Additionally, there are a lot of complaints about the pricing of the telecom services.

The committee also observed that under the Commonwealth preparatory arrangement, an amount equivalent of US$ 5 million was earmarked to purchase a communication system code named Terrestrial Trunk Radio (TETRA) communications system. This was meant to help the security organs in the country to enhance their operations during CHOGM in Kampala. This amount was solely for the acquisition and installation of the system; it did not include operational costs such as mast rentals for hosting the antennae. This system was installed and handed over to Uganda Police Force.  

Currently, the TETRA equipment (antennae) is hosted by Uganda Telecom Limited on their masts, who charge rental fee of US$ 1000 per site for eight antennae sites. The arrears are for 25 months effective from October 2007 to October 2009. The amount is to the tune of US$ 207,500.  

The role of the Ministry of ICT was to provide technical support and advice during the acquisition, installation and operation of the system. The security agencies were to meet the recurrent cost. The Uganda Police Force has accumulated mast rental fees of over Uganda Shs 300 million since the installation of the network in 2007.

The committee also observed that the Communications Tribunal that was mandated to be established under the UCC Act 2007, has not been funded. However, when the ministry officials came to the committee, they informed the committee that because of the convergence between IT and communications, they were going to create a more comprehensive tribunal to oversee the whole sector.

I would like to report that the Ministry of Finance promised to take up this matter as a funding requirement in the FY 2010/2011 Budget preparations. The Ministry of ICT is working on the harmonisation of the tribunal to cover issues of communications and ICT. 

The committee recommends that:

•	Security for the solar panels must be taken care of either by the school or UCC as a condition for the supply of these computers.

•	ICT policies should be strengthened on the ground to ensure computers distributed to schools are put to good use.

•	UCC acquires an Intelligence Network (IN) system for the purpose of monitoring the revenues generated by operators, as well as pricing, and a report on its implementation be availed to Parliament within four months. This report will be able to inform the committee on how they are going to operationalise that intelligence network that will be able to monitor the calling and pricing.

•	A permanent and sustainable payment mechanism should be worked out to involve all stakeholders in paying the recurrent costs - Shs 300 million - accrued by Uganda Police Force as mast rental fees to Uganda Telecom Limited.

•	The Ministry of ICT should cost the tribunal in its budget for FY 2010/2011.

vii)	Broadcasting Council 

On the Broadcasting Council, the committee observed that:

The broadcasting infrastructure is still in the Ministry of Information and National Guidance, despite the policy that it should be under the Ministry of ICT. Television stations also did not have sign language interpreters to cater for those with hearing impairment.

The harmonisation of the Electronic Media Act and Uganda Communications Act is taking long, yet it is critical to the operations of the ICT sector, for example, on the issues of spectrum and license allocation.

The committee recommends that:

•	The broadcasting infrastructure be shifted to the Ministry of ICT, while the content and media centre remain under Ministry of Information and National Guidance.

•	The Ministry of ICT should direct all television broadcasters to provide for sign language presenters in all news bulletins within six months; and

•	The process of harmonisation of the Electronic Media Act and Uganda Communications Act should be completed within six months.

viii) 	Uganda Post Limited

I would like to report that the committee also looked at Uganda Post Limited upon which it made the following observations: 	

•	Part of the financial problems of Posta Uganda stem from changes in technological development over the past few years, which have reduced the relevance of postal services as a whole.

•	The Uganda Communications Commission is mandated by law to protect the monopoly of Posta Uganda with respect to handling and postage of mail not exceeding 350g. However, this is not being effectively implemented. As a result, private couriers are encroaching on the courier of parcels, which should be a reserve of Posta Uganda.

The committee recommends that: 

•	Posta Uganda addresses its financial requirements and develops new products that can effectively compete in the highly competitive market.

•	Uganda Communications Commission should protect that reserved area of Posta Uganda; and

•	The Ministry should undertake a forensic audit of Posta Uganda as a basis for determining the financial needs of the organisation.

ix)	National Backbone and E-government Infrastructure

Mr Speaker, allow me report that the committee also looked at the National Backbone and E-government Infrastructure projects. The Ministry of ICT is implementing the National Backbone Infrastructure (NBI) and Electronic Government Infrastructure (EGI) Project comprising of two areas:  

The first one is the EGI for connecting all government ministries, departments and local governments into an e-government network to enable provision of e-government services. It is also doing a National Data Transmission Backbone that involves the laying of approximately 2000 kms of fibre optic cable countrywide to provide high speed data transmission throughout the whole country supplementing the private sector initiative. 

This project is being implemented under the mandate of the ministry to develop and regulate telecommunications, postal services and information technology in all spheres of life, in support of national development. 
The Parliamentary Committee on ICT had a tour of Phase I of the National Backbone and e-government infrastructure project. The committee visited various project sites and made the following observations:

a)	National Backbone Infrastructure

•	Although Phase I was reported to have been completed in 2007, Kampala to Jinja and Kampala to Bwaise are not operational. The fibre optic cable was damaged in many parts by contractors working on the roads, for example, that at Namanve, Bweyogerere and Bwaise. It was also noted that efforts to make repairs and relocation of the cable have up to now not been made by the Ministry of ICT.

•	The Ministry of ICT reported that a certificate of completion for Phase I was issued to the contractor, Huawei Technologies, in February 2008.

•	In Namanve, the cable was laid way beyond the road reserve into land belonging to Uganda Investment Authority, without permission, hence hindering the construction works being carried out by the authority.

There were other observations made. We observed that some of the Uganda National Road Authority guidelines of laying cables were not fully respected as illustrated in the table below.

According to the UNRA report to the committee, some of the cables instead of being laid one metre into the soil, were being laid at 0.2 metres depth. It also said that instead of 0.8 metres in some places, they were laid at 0.3 metres.

Further, we observed that transmission sites at Mukono, Bombo and Nalufenya are non-operational.  It was also noted that the cables at the sites were not terminated. Some devices - routers and termination panels - had not yet been installed.  There was poor coordination between the ministry and other government bodies during the installations.

Generators installed at Mukono and Jinja were missing. There is a UETCL fiber cable running from Malaba, Kampala to Mbarara over power lines, which is competing with the NBI, yet if harmonised, it would give the NBI a competitive advantage to have international broadband early.

The committee was told that the cable being installed was G652 in Phase I, so it will not be able to handle national traffic in the near future. This is because it does not have enough provision for a future upgrade path.

The G652 cable also requires longer length of Dispersion Compensating Fiber (DCF). This leads to higher signal distortion due to non-linear effects of DCF, thus a better cable - G655 or higher - is recommended for any future instalments.

The committee further observed that although money was approved by Parliament for the Project Implementation Unit in the Ministry of ICT, it failed to supervise and manage the National Backbone Infrastructure. It was also clear to the committee that it had no control of the project. There was no network operating centre, which is more of the brain of the network in terms of overseeing its activities.

The committee also observed that there is no adequate data centre and disaster recovery centre for the national backbone yet. The original design of phase I, II, and III had not incorporated the northern region of Uganda.

In comparison with other projects, the cost over this project seems to have been over-estimated. We looked at Rwanda and it will be spending about 16,522 per kilometre on laying fibre. We also received information that MTN Uganda approximately spends between US $9 and US $10, which is about 10,000 per kilometre, while the Ministry of ICT will spend approximately US$ 30,800 per kilometre on a similar project. This does not include the EGI; we are just looking at the laying of the fibre and not the e-Governance components of the project.  

The committee, therefore, makes the following recommendations:

b)	E-Government Infrastructure

1. 	A special audit for Phase I should be conducted by the Auditor-General within one month, to address the terms of reference given by the committee.

2. 	The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and its line supervisors in the Ministry of ICT should be interdicted immediately to allow for the Auditor-General’s investigation.

3. 	As the audit report is awaited, Phase I should be operationalised as follows:

•	The ministry relocates the cable from Uganda Investment Authority land as soon as possible to reflect the required specifications of 15 metres from the centre.

•	There should be provision for security of equipment at the transmission sites to avoid any further losses.

•	Permanent structures should be constructed for the transmission sites in the subsequent phases.

•	As Phase I is repaired, and in subsequent phases, there should be a provision for conduits in urban and swampy areas.

•	There should be a provision for conduits in the Ministry of Works’ budget for road construction for every road reserve, to save the costs Government incurs in repairing damaged cables, water pipes, etc due to construction works. These conduits will be managed by Uganda National Roads Authority.

•	NITA-U should supervise the remaining phases of the NBI/EGI Project, and must strictly follow the agreement between the Huawei Technologies Company Limited and the Government of Uganda, specifications in bills of quantities and guidelines by other ministries like the Ministry of Works.

•	A higher specification cable should be laid such as a G655 fibre cable that can handle national traffic and also has better provisions for future upgrades. So, we are recommending to the ministry that for all future laying of fibre, they should use either the G655 or a higher calibre fibre to handle the increase in traffic that will be expected with the lower rates of Internet. 

•	The UETCL line between Tororo, Kampala and Mbarara should be transferred to the NBI/EGI and will, therefore, be complementary to allow redundancy. This helps in that, in case one fibre is down, this one can be able to help in providing capacity to those who are depending on the Internet.

•	All the transmission sites of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) should be transferred to the NBI/EGI (NITA-U). This will help in creating a single carrier as well as reduce on masts, since infrastructure will be available. It will also enhance the services provided by the NBI/EGI, and fasten the analogue to digital migration. The reduction in masts will also address environmental concerns.

•	Funds for non-core competencies by the contractor, especially in e-governance, should be put on laying of the fibre, instead of e-governance such as video conferencing, due to its limited usage in the areas that already had it installed. 

•	For security reasons, the Network Operating Centre (NOC) should be built immediately for the NBI by NITA-U.

•	The Ministry of ICT should incorporate the northern region of Uganda in subsequent phases of NBI, and connect it concurrently with other areas.

c)	National Information Technology Authority-Uganda (NITA-U)

The committee observed that:

•	The NITA-U Bill, 2008 had been assented to on 15 July 2009, and a Statutory Instrument has put NITA-U into operation as of 15 August 2009. A Board has also been approved by Cabinet.  

•	The Certificate of Financial Implications had indicated Shs 1.7 billion for the first year of NITA-U for the FY 2009/2010. However, the budget provided for Shs 170 million.  

•	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not provide additional resources for NITA-U in FY 2009/10 because by the time of concluding the Budget estimates in June 2009, the NITA Bill was not yet effective. However, following H.E. the President’s assent to the Bill on 15 July 2009, the committee was informed that Ministry of Finance was seeking a meeting with the officials of Ministry of ICT to work out the financial requirements for effective operationalisation of the Authority.

The committee recommends that:

1. 	Government should fully operationalise NITA-U.

2. 	The Project Implementation Unit be absorbed into NITA-U. By this we mean that the vehicles and equipment which were currently under the Project Implementation Unit and the office space should be absorbed into NITA-U

3. 	All current budget lines and activities of PIU and NBI/EGI must be transferred to NITA-U with immediate effect.

4. 	NITA-U be given its own vote status.

5. 	The Authority carries out a study on the impact of the existing community information centres, telecentres and computers distributed to schools by UCC, other models used by donors, and the viability of public-private partnerships in these centres to improve on the impact of ICT.

6. 	NITA-U must create an adequate data centre to handle the NBI/EGI requirements.

7. NITA-U should purchase bulk internet for Government.

8. NITA-U should integrate with existing PBXs to a united communication platform to reduce on communication costs.

9. NITA-U should regulate, harmonise and integrate all individual data banks/projects in all ministries and government agencies in order to facilitate governance, e-governance and reduction of ICT costs, as there is too much duplicity in every ministry in terms of ICT.

10	The Ministry of ICT should meet with the Ministry of Finance to work out the financial requirements for effective operationalisation of the Authority, expeditiously.

Appreciation

The committee recognises and appreciates the valuable input and prompt responses of the Ministry of Information, Communications and Technology (ICT), heads of the autonomous institutions like Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology (UICT), Broadcasting Council (BC) and Uganda Post Limited (UPL).

Conclusion

Budgetary Proposal

The Committee on Information and Communication Technology (ICT) recommends that Parliament do approve the following amounts for Vote 020, Ministry of Information, Communications and Technology (ICT) for the Financial Year 2009/2010. I have a corrigendum here, and for the recurrent, which is Shs 2.265 billion, the development expenditure is Shs 7.260 billion and the component for taxes is Shs 8.4 billion. The total comes to Shs 17.925 billion. Thank you, Mr Speaker and I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chair of the Committee. 

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I am raising on a procedural matter. These figures they are reading for us, even before we debate them, they have many mistakes. For example, if you look at what the chairman has read for us, development expenditure is Shs 7.26 billion; taxes are Shs 8.4 billion. Already, the taxes are more than the money budgeted. That means that taxes are more than 100 percent. Now, as far as we know, taxes are never beyond that. So, this will bring us problems. 

MR NABETA: Mr Speaker, the problem with the tax components is that most of the telecom equipment has been on zero tax - exempted. However, we had to turn all the equipment leased in phases II and III which is US$61 million of equipment to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and they have to go item by item to see what items should be exempted and which ones should not. Fibre cables are zero rated, but there are some electronics like some wirings which, although they are going to be working on the national backbone, are general machines. Therefore, they have to attract certain taxes. 

So the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is going through that list. We asked them this morning, and they say within a week, they would know the amount of tax to be attracted. So, we did not have any reason to change the 8.4 because we are waiting for the final analysis in terms of how much equipment is at zero tax rate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, does it mean there is an off-balance sheet item which is missing in what we are going to appropriate? If they are saying that there are some figures somewhere, maybe $65 million, where are they? 

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleagues. Mr Speaker, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development totally agrees with the figures as presented on page 20 of the report. 

MR OPANGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the Opposition response to the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology for Financial Year 2009/10. 

The Ministry of ICT is one of the key ministries that could champion the modernisation of the roles of Government ministries in information dissemination –(Interjections)– I was indicating that this is one of the key miniseries that we have in place that could create the modernisation of dissemination of information communication and technological development to match the modern world. 

There is need to streamline the specific roles of the Ministry of ICT in order to achieve their vision and mission. For example, UCC seems to be having more power than the ministry. This needs to be more harmonised so that we have all the roles effectively carried out by the ministry.

In the Financial Year 2008/09, the Ministry of ICT planned to carry out the following activities: Setup and operationalise six district information centres at the cost of 230 million in the districts of Mityana, Iganga, Busia, Kamwenge, Rukungiri and Lira and funds were allocated to have this activity fully completed. 

Unfortunately, all these centres are non-functional, and they are not connected to internet facility, and some equipment, as we talk now has been stolen. Surprisingly, even the area members of Parliament are not aware of availability of these facilities at their district headquarters.

Mr Speaker, the issue of recruiting the heads of departments, that is the directors and commissioners at the ministry as recommended in the committee – this is possibly a problem where the targeted output in the ministry is not made. We urge the Ministry of Public Service to relax the qualifications and the expertise of the people who can occupy these offices, so that we have tangible things done by the ministry.

I want to make key observations on the issue of the National Data Transmission Backbone and E-government Infrastructure Project, Phase I and preparations for Phase II. In the last Financial Year, 1.9 billion, excluding taxes was allocated for this facility. The committee inspected this and observed the following:

The project that is Kampala – Jinja, Kampala – Entebbe, and Kampala – Bombo: Our observation is that the following were the mistakes done by the technical team. The guidelines as indicated, provided in the laying out and setting up of the project, was not followed, and hence goes for wasteful expenditure. Billions of money have been lost because they did not follow the guidelines from the National Road Authority. 

As we talk now, phase I is not fully operational yet billions of money have been put into this phase. There was over estimation of the project cost as compared to our neighbouring country Rwanda having the same project and same coverage in mileage; hence a lot of funds were lost. Rwanda will spend approximately US$16,522 per kilometre despite the terrain as compared to Uganda where it will cost 30,800 per kilometre. 

Observations

During the implementation of phase I, a number of damages to optic fibre cables were experienced, along Jinja, Mbarara and Kasenge, totalling to US$ 15,480 and attributed to the negligence of Ministry of Works and Transport as a result of culvert installation. 

Mr Speaker, I urge this Parliament to order the Ministry of Works and Transport to pay for the repair in order to have the works completed. Some sections of the project were damaged by the Uganda National Road Agency during the rehabilitation works along Kampala – Jinja Road. The cost for repairing these sections at Namatabe, Bulyantete, Kitega and Bulamogi is estimated at US$ 122,771. 

The section of the cable works destroyed at Namanve due to civil works of Uganda Investment Authority is expected to cost US$ 38,341. The second damage at Namanve was due to works of National Water and Sewerage Corporation. It is expected to cost US$ 17,320.  National Water and Sewerage Corporation settled this bill in full, in April 2009, but to date, no repairs have been made. What has happened to the US$ 17,320 paid in full, in settlement of the damaged works? Mr Speaker, this is now August, and the US$ 17,320 was paid in April this year, and no repairs have been carried out on this road. The damaged sections at Namawojjolo, Kayanja and Nalufenya were apportioned to Huawei Technologies, and the cost of repairing these two sections is estimated at a cost US$ 68,623. All these damages were as a result of not following the guidelines of laying down the fibre cables as indicated and, therefore, this is wasteful expenditure. Look at the money that Government spent in laying the optic fibre and the damages which have been caused. All this is a result of not following the guidelines which were set. 

Recommendations

The ministry should take serious steps to have the officers of PIU and individual supervisors of the projects suspended, to give way to a special investigative audience as recommended by the community.

The Chairperson of the ICT did not tell this House that the letter has already been written and sent to the Auditor-General’s Office to have this investigative audit carried out. I would actually be comfortable, if my Chairperson had laid the letter that was sent to the Auditor-General on the Table here, such that all members of this House and the people of this country know that there is need to be accountable and transparent in implementing government programmes. 

In conclusion, there is need to stay the release of funds for completion of the National Data Transmission Backbone and e-government infrastructure project, until the Auditor-General accomplishes the investigative audit and officers that caused the wasteful expenditure are brought to book. 

There is need to have international agreements on cyber laws domesticated, such that we become compliant as a result of being domesticated in this country. The amount of Shs 84 billion meant for taxes should be stayed, and where possible, relocate it to other activities in the ministry. This is as a result of most of the IT equipment being tax exempt. In the financial year 2008/2009, over Shs 1 billion was released for taxes, in which Shs 233 million was paid to URA, including items which are tax exempt. The Ministry of Finance should give an explanation as to why these items are taxed, yet they are in the category of exemption.

Finally, there is need to allocate money for electronic voting in this House. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

3.35
MR NATHAN NABETA (NRM, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Mr Speaker, I just wanted to inform my colleague that the letter that the committee wrote to the Auditor-General was sent and it is part of the report, which is now an official document of Parliament. So, the letter is here and for proof that it was delivered as demanded by the committee, I can lay on Table. 

The issue of the taxes that we are talking about is non resource. So, even though the ministry might over budget like it did for the last financial year, by providing Shs 2.1 billion, the ministry only used Shs 238 million. So, the non-resource is that it is not at risk. So, if the Ministry of Finance has clarified on the equipment in the Shs 8.4 billion tax component, they will be able to tell us the actual amount of money that will be attributed to the tax component for phase II and it is a non-resource. It should not be looked at as if it is money that is being given to the sector. 

3.37
MR BARTILLE TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. First and foremost, I want to thank the committee together with the ministry for the report, and I want to state that the issue of ICT is so important for this nation, because everything now revolves around ICT. Of course, the fact that we need to fund this sector for our development is not questionable. We need to find funds so that we can be able to put up all the programmes stated. 

I am happy about the e-school project and the e-government projects, but then I was trying to see whether the report of the committee also considered the fact that broadcasting still has a problem. I do not know whether the committee came to know that even as we develop the ICT, we should actually focus on areas which are really hindered by their physical features. There are areas like Bukwo District where I come from, which have a problem even accessing radio and TV signals. Up to now, my constituency actually relies on Kenyan TV and radio signals because they are near, but this is not good for our country, because we miss getting all the information about what is happening in this country. So, as the minister responds, I would like him to give me a clear plan, because it is not stated here in the report, and I am sure I am not the only one; there must be some other parts of this country that are suffering in the same way.

I also want to propose that even as the ministry gives out computers to the many schools - many schools almost in every part of the country are now receiving this support through computers, and computer labs are being opened - there is a problem of electricity. Not all these places have access to electricity. So, they should actually be thinking about getting us equipment which is solar-powered, so that some of these areas can begin to use their ICT equipment as they wait for the electricity to be supplied. 

I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, but as I conclude, I would like to ask you to allow me on behalf of the visitors that we have today – the students from Bukwo district – (Interjection) - their concern is that recently, about two weeks ago, they lost one of their friends to typhoid fever, which attacked my district for the last two months from July, and we are really perturbed that the Ministry of Health and Government have not responded appropriately. When there is an epidemic, this House has always come out and voted for funds to help. Unfortunately as I speak, the people of Bukwa have not got that support and that is not very good. We appeal to the ministry to make some effort and provide drugs for this area.

For the information of the Leader of Government Business, this area where these students come from has had a very long drought. Actually, almost everything they planted this year dried up. These are some of the things that I wanted to mention on behalf of these students and visitors. I thank you very much.

3.42
MR LASTUS SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for the opportunity to make this contribution. I would like to thank the Committee on ICT for this report.

I have two points of concern, and the first is with regard to culture. I am wondering how far we are trying to forge a culture of inter-ministerial collaboration in some of our activities, as a way of using our finances more efficiently. I am seeing ministries working in isolation, and I need to be guided. I am saying this because on page 12 of this report, where the committee noted under UCC schools, which received computers, some of these schools had no laboratories. 

I remember not long ago, the Ministry of Education brought out a project funded by Government of Uganda and World Bank; where there were provisions for extra rooms, especially in USE schools, science laboratories, toilets and even repairs to old classrooms. I am just wondering whether this problem of computer labs could not be handled under this sort of provision, so that the ICT ministry wouldn’t bring this as a constraint to the use of computers in schools. I just need to be guided here, as I think inter-ministerial cooperation will alleviate some of these problems.

My only other problem is on page 15, regarding damages to the fibre optic cable, which has just been laid in Namanve and Bwaise. I am wondering how this cable was damaged. This was not mentioned. I am also wondering whether there is any mapping of the passage of this very important cable so that other users of the same location, for example, water amenities, roads and so on, don’t end up damaging these very expensive cables. I need to be guided on this. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.44
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also add my voice to that of my colleagues and thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. In his report, the chairperson talks of the challenges of the sector and taxation on telecom services. 

This is entirely the fault of the ministry. You can’t ask the minister now to tell you how much UCC collects from these service providers. They are getting a good amount of money. As hon. Opange put it, you don’t have control over UCC. From the money that UCC collects, you would be able to see how to reduce on the taxes, but the problem is that UCC is so independent, and they have too much money. 

Actually, UCC was supposed to cater for 154 sub-counties in the country, that is hard-to-reach areas, where the network providers were not willing to provide service. They said to government, we cannot go to this sub county in Karamoja and, therefore, you should come in. Here Parliament approved a loan to help these sub-counties get on the network; not the mobiles, but fixed phones, where peasants could put some coins and communicate to the outside world or within the country. But that work was not done and nobody has cared to supervise.

Secondly, about Northern Uganda, we approved a loan to UTL to have an optic fibre to the Northern region, and it is surprising that up to now, they are using wireless. Hon. Minister, I think it is a wake-up call, that you should find out about this. After all, we were with you here when we were approving the loan so that we could have fibre optic in the North, because it has many more advantages than disadvantages.

In the report, you also talked of the UNRA under Ministry of Works and ICT. These are two government ministries, and they should be coordinating. You should not come here to lament about what happened on the road, because the Ministry of Works together with your ministry, are supposed to make provision for the wires and water pipes as you tarmac a road to avoid last minute breaking of the road. So, I think from today, let the Ministry of ICT liaise with Ministry of Works, especially UNRA, so that you can work in tandem. 

When you are constructing any road, like now they are on the Soroti-Lira road, there should be a provision in the road reserve for water pipes and telecom systems, so that we don’t have interruptions on the road –(Interruption)

MR NABETA: Mr Speaker, I wanted to give information to my colleague Hon. Nathan Byanyima, because I think he is the correct person to help us in Parliament. We have interacted with UNRA on this issue of putting conduits, which should be able to facilitate future cable laying. Their issue is that they do not have the money in their budget. They are willing to do it but they don’t have enough money in their budget. Since you are coming up with the Infrastructure report to approve their budget, I would urge you, my colleague to make sure that there is enough money to start putting conduits, especially on the new roads like Soroti-Lira road. If we could have conduits, we would not have these cable cuts that we are having all the time.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, hon. Nabeta; but I am saying, it does not require any extra money. When you are repairing a road, it is a matter of being in time or aware that as you construct any new road, there must be that provision. It is just creating a conduit. So, what I am saying is just to do it now - because we have a number of roads being undertaken now, so we can have those services catered for.

Secondly, there was this communication system meant to help security organs during CHOGM. It is a Bill that you have mentioned here in the report from Uganda Telecom. The minister should know that today, telecom owes Government of Uganda a lot of money, but it is just lack of communication. We got money here for Uganda Telecom for services that they never delivered to us. Let us offset this because they haven’t paid any money. 

It is because some of the people who are in Uganda Telecom are part of us. Isn’t it? They never declared their interests and, therefore, we continue with double payment. But I think it is a wake-up call to most of you, and the minister, so that we can have that money swapped with Government. Why should we pay that amount of money for security agencies?  I see that in this report, there is lack of coordination between the ICT ministry and the relevant ministries. Otherwise, there are enough funds in UCC as hon. Opange said; we cannot have a shortage of money in the ICT ministry. I thank you. 

3.50
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you for this opportunity. I also want to thank the Committee for the report. I have observations in three areas. One, I am extremely concerned that this Parliament is apparently being taken for granted. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development makes a commitment in a budget speech that communications equipment will be exempted from taxation only for the equipment to be taxed by URA. I think it is that very tax regime that has greatly impacted on the high call tariffs in the sector. The 8.6 million mobile subscribers are now paying for the taxes that were originally supposed to be exempted.

I think the Ministry of Finance must keep its house in order, otherwise it is not enough to make a cosmetic statement in a budget speech that communications equipment will be exempted from tax, only for the service providers to continue paying these taxes.

My second point is that the committee observes the need for high calibre staff for the communications sector, and that certain requirements by Public Service are a hindrance to recruitment of such staff. The committee prays that Public Service should relax its requirements. I think it would have been proper if the committee went a mile further to state what some of those stringent requirements are, otherwise we may run into a danger of having a relaxed requirement and compromising on quality. So, I am a bit relaxed on that one, unless the committee comes out boldly to specify the Public Service Commission requirements that are a hindrance to recruitment.

Finally, there is an issue to do with the non-establishment of the Communications Tribunal. The UCC Act was passed way back in 2007, and to date, the tribunal is not in place. One of the arguments is that the ICT ministry has not cost the tribunal. Is that not a demonstration of laziness? Are we going to call it laziness or are they just ignoring the commands of the Act? How do we keep the communications sector in order if there is no tribunal to try such - I mean certain actions may be done with impunity. I insist that the Communications Tribunal ought to be in place by yesterday in order to protect our consumers.

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.54
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee for presenting the report, and members of the committee for compiling it. I would like to re-emphasis what hon. Epetait has said in connection with high calibre staff in the ICT ministry. 

We are in the 21st Century and if we cannot attract high calibre staff in our ICT Ministry, then we are in problems. I suggest that the Minister of ICT should move first to liaise with the Ministry of Public Service to remove the hurdles to recruitment of high calibre staff in his ministry.

The second point I would like to comment on, is that I am happy to note that the Research and Development Policy has been formulated, and I think it would be necessary for the ministry to have these available to members of Parliament so that we can know what the content is.

I am also happy to note that Internet connectivity has been established in about 80 government-aided secondary schools.  This is a good development, and I hope all government-aided secondary schools will be covered in the shortest possible time, so that all schools are at an even level.

I am also happy to note that installation of data access points has been done in 43 district hospitals. This is very important, because the points will assist doctors or medical personnel in these hospitals to access current information. I would like to urge the ministry to move fast to cover all district hospitals, because this is the lifeline of treatment in this modern world.  

There is a system of teleconferencing in the developing world, where you talk to an expert somewhere else who advises you on how to move forward on an operation. I think the ministry of ICT should take steps to put in place facilities for this in our hospitals, so that things are made easier and lives are saved.

Last but not least, I would like to urge the government to facilitate the Ministry of ICT to work tirelessly to make ICT facilities available throughout the country, because this is how development will be accelerated in all parts of the country, and equity achieved. Thank you very much.

3.58
MR JOHN DRAZU ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you. I have two brief comments. The Post Office -(Interjection)- it saddens me, Mr Speaker, to see a once viable organisation getting almost bankrupt. The argument that technological developments have eaten into the Post Office business and, therefore, it cannot be viable, does not hold much water. In very developed countries where the telecommunication industry is used widely, mail business is still thriving. The question is, why is it collapsing here? It is because of bad management? The mangers - (Interjections)- you are the chairman; I thought you would- (Interjections)- I am better informed. 

Managers who know very little about the workings of the Post Office are posted to that organisation. That business is not handled in an orthodox manner. Somebody who has been selling sugar, Pepsi or beer for that matter cannot automatically become a good manager in the Post Office. People who have good academic papers and come waving them saying, “I have got this,” do not necessarily make good managers in Post Office. You must grow with that organisation to be able to know how it works. That is why there has been a very high turn-over of top management in that organisation. People are picked from the streets by virtue of just having a piece of paper without the basic knowledge of the intricacies of how the system works.

Also, this organisation earns money through what we call terminal dues. This is earned in foreign exchange because of the imbalance which we, as country, have with the rest of the world in mail exchange. When this money becomes available, Government has an eye on it. Government takes it on instead of injecting it back into the business to improve service. I think Government puts it in the Consolidated Fund to do other things. That is one reason why this organisation is collapsing.

I want the new minister, who is also my OB - let him listen carefully -(Laughter)- to reorganise this organisation. There is no country in this world which does not have a postal service. We shall be the first country to be without a post office. It is part of a world wide family. A letter you post here must be able to reach any part of the world even if it is a small island like Migingo. (Laughter)

My second observation is on the National Backbone Infrastructure. This project is called “national” but you will find that initially, a full region like West Nile was left out of the picture. When I was sitting on the Committee on National Economy, I brought this to the attention of the then minister, and as a matter of accommodation, on second thought, he included the West Nile region but without funding; just to make us feel good. (Laughter) This is not good enough. 

I am also requesting my other OB who is in charge of borrowing money for these things, and who comes from the other side, to make sure that money is available to cover the West Nile region in this project, because those of us from there shall refuse to pay these loans if we are not beneficiaries. (Laughter) I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.04
MR SIMON TOOLIT (FDC, Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on page 4 where the committee is saying that telephone tariffs have dropped by 30 percent. I think this statement is not correct because as all of us are aware, the telephone tariff has actually increased among all these operators. We all operate these mobile phones. I think the chairman of the committee should delete that statement. 

Then secondly, the minister is complaining about inadequacy of funding, but when you analyse the Budget you will find that last financial year, we approved 5.892 but the Ministry of Finance released more money; but they even failed to spend that money. There was a balance of 29 million, and now they are bringing the issue of lack of funds to implement their planned projects. This, to me, is not correct.

Thirdly, there is this issue of taxes on telecommunication equipment. Mr Speaker, you remember last year the same figure was brought to the Floor of Parliament, that is, 8.4 billion. We put the Minister of Finance to task, and he went and brought us the list of all the items which are taxable under the projects, and the money came to 438, which we approved on the Floor of this Parliament.

On that same note, the Minister of Finance went ahead and released 2.1 billion for taxes when Parliament approved only 438,000,000. Then the Ministry of ICT even failed to use that money and used only 238 million. Now, where is that balance of 1.8 billion which was released?

So, this is where our problem is. We have been calculating it here. We approve the money on the Floor of Parliament – 438 - and Ministry of Finance went ahead and increased and released the funds to the Ministry of ICT - 2.1 billion. But even the Ministry of ICT failed to use that money. Now, where is that balance? Let the Minister of Finance, together with the chairman of the committee, give us the list of these items for which they have given the provision of 8.4 billion, so that we can go ahead and approve the budget as per the report.

And lastly, we have been talking about the number of subscribers increasing day and night, but the taxes being levied on this airtime, the sim cards and all these facilities, are very high, and it is actually what is deterring our people from enjoying the vast number of services. 

So, I think the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology should take it up with our service providers, so that we can know how much this person is paying. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.08
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, there is one point which doesn’t come out in this report. That is about mast rental fees to private people. The service providers use people’s land; they enter into contracts to set up masts on it, and to pay fees. But I understand Government has encouraged the service providers to combine and use the same masts, which would be a good idea. Unfortunately, the land owners are never consulted. It appears they sublet to themselves for a fee and no fee is paid to the land owners. And, legally, they are entitled to a fee because of that. 

They have written to quite a number of these service providers to handle this, but somehow the service providers either think they are covered by Government; they don’t respond. This is something which should be handled otherwise the landlords might become uncomfortable and handle the matter in a manner which might be unpleasant to them. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.10
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I request the House to join me in welcoming back Maj. Gen. Francis Okello the overall commander who has been in Somalia. (Applause) We welcome you back and thank you for the work that you have doing; you have made us proud. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee of ICT for this report. However, on the constraints for Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, I am surprised that the first thing is inadequate funding to meet the planned outputs. Some time ago, Ministry of Public Service introduced result-oriented management and all ministries were supposed to undertake that. In this era, we are stressing output based budgeting. Why should there be inadequate funding?

I am further surprised that there is a slow pace of recruitment in the ministry of ICT. In Makerere University, we have a fully-fledged faculty of ICT; and a fully-fledged faculty of Mass Communication, where recruitment would take place from. Why isn’t the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology looking at these faculties so that they get the staff they need? Every year, Makerere University releases students of ICT and Mass Communication; that is good ground for Ministry of Information and Communication Technology to get their staff! 

Another thing is about UCC distributing computers to rural areas. They should know that there is no power in those areas. When they provide the solar panels, they should have provided protection for these solar panels so that they avoid the problems that they have reported to us here. What is the point in providing a solar panel and not provide the security for them? Why should we waste money? I think the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology should instruct UCC to provide the solar panels and provide security for the panels. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: First of all, I want to thank you for having drawn my attention to the return of our colleague from Somalia. On behalf of Parliament, I want to welcome you and thank you for what you have been able to carryout on behalf of our country! (Applause)

4.15
MS FLORENCE NAYIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. My comments are three. The first one is that, I want to request the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology to consider among the staff they are going to recruit, staff with information on computer programmes for people with disabilities like the blind and the deaf. This is very important. But we also have people with physical disabilities, with no arms, but who can use the computer with their feet or other parts of their bodies. 

My second point is on school computer labs. I would like to find out from the chairman of the committee, whether in their visit, they found a computer lab which is compliant with the people with disabilities; the deaf and the blind. I would be glad to know.

The third point is that, district business information centres should also be compliant. At least two computers should have programmes for peoples with disabilities. Otherwise, if we are saying that these district business information centres are going to help people access employment – if people with disabilities cannot have an opportunity to access these business centres, it means they will always remain unemployed. Many of them are now educated. 

So, I want to find out from the chairman whether this was not a concern, when they visited the district information centres. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.17
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee of Information Communication Technology for the report. My first comment goes to this very instrument I am using. It is not disability compliant. A blind person cannot press this thing, and somebody else has to press it for me. Why don’t you make it such that I can press it myself? I remember the last type was good; I could easily press and talk, but with this one, I have to ask somebody. Please, can we start with this one of Parliament so that I can also touch and talk without asking somebody to support me? 

Mr Speaker, I would like to comment on the slow recruitment of staff in UBC and the effect it has had on my constituency. You are all aware that the Kakwa programme has disappeared from the scene of UBC, in particular from the radio. This is because they have not recruited somebody who is able to speak fluent Kakwa. I think this is a lame excuse because Bwana Baba and I provided four names so that they could select from well-qualified persons, but they disqualified all of them. At the moment, the people of Koboko are not happy with Government because Kakwa is not spoken over this UBC Radio section.

How can you leave out a population of 169,000 and not have their language spoken over Radio Uganda? I demand that we recruit somebody who can speak Kakwa so that we can be informed and educated of what is happening, because these programmes can also help in educating the people. I am very serious, and for over one and half years, the Kakwa language has not been completely heard over the radio. It is a big shame and people are wondering what is happening. 

So, I would like to urge the minister to ensure that this language is introduced as quickly as possible. What happened during restructuring is that you laid off all the staff that were able to speak Kakwa - but it doesn’t matter; there are many others who can talk over the radio. 

Mr Speaker, my second point concerns sign language for the deaf. Persons who are deaf were very happy with the interpretation done over the TV, because that is the only way they can access the news. Mr Minister has just mentioned that they are supposed to match the Communications Act with another Act; I do not understand – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baba Diri, what I don’t know is whether radios are under this ministry or under another ministry. 

MRS BABA DIRI: Well, I thought ICT is communication and we use these gadgets. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Anyway, the point is taken by government.

MRS BABA DIRI: Lastly, I would like to comment on the ICT centres introduced in schools and in districts and I would like to confirm what hon. Sekabira has said. The programme which we need to introduce to the computers is called JAWS for Windows so that a blind person is able to access the computer and can work like any other person. So, this is the accessory which we need to introduce so that blind people can also use the computer. 

Mr Speaker, maintaining these solar systems is very delicate and expensive. When it is gloomy, especially during the rainy season, you find that there isn’t enough power and these computers go down. We also require money for maintenance of things like bulbs and recharging the batteries. So, there is need to budget for some money to maintain these ICT centres; it is not fair to put them there to become white elephants. Thank you. 

4.23
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am so grateful for this opportunity. The committee mentions so many serious issues; on page 11, they mention that the NGOs never had the tender documents and the work was not done. That is evidence already that the money we gave to these people has been misappropriated, and yet the committee goes down and does not recommend anything on that. This is already a wasteful expenditure! In fact, it is theft and these people who were involved in this act should have been held responsible by now.

Mr Speaker, the code of Uganda is in Southern Sudan. Who is benefiting from this code? I think we must be serious. There must be some individual or individuals who are benefiting from this code on our behalf, and unless we get up to deal with this decision, I think we are making a mistake. This should now be handed over to the Police for quick investigations, to find out who is really eating out of this code from Southern Sudan, and we believe Hon. Aggrey Awori should take personal responsibility for not getting the person involved in this code. Maybe you are the one who is now benefiting from the code. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the panels went missing –(Interruption)

MR OCHIENG: Thank you, for giving way. We use radio waves and these waves move in circles. Now, almost all the areas that are at the borderline, regardless of which side of the country you are at, will always get that interference. I can inform you –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to help you. The code means that when I am in Southern Sudan, I will use 256 by connecting on my line –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, hon. Nandala-Mafabi has raised a very important issue. Recently, there was a statement in one of the papers that the code that is being used in Southern Sudan is for the benefit of the Government of Southern Sudan. That is not true. The truth of the matter is that the code is being used by a private company called Gemtel, which has nothing whatsoever to do with the Government of Southern Sudan. That means, therefore, that there is some connection between certain individuals here in Uganda and that company in Southern Sudan, and the minister should take the responsibility of finding out what that connection is. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Wacha, and you gave very useful information not like somebody trying to waste time while giving non-useful information.

Hon. Aggrey Awori, this is one item that you should take seriously. 

On page 15, the committee is talking about the National Backbone Infrastructure, and they have even mentioned MTN. MTN is not far from Uganda and they are saying US$ 10,000 per kilometre. Rwanda, which is further from here is at US$ 16,000 and for us in Government, it is US$ 30,000. In fact, the persons involved should be arraigned either in Luzira or on the firing squad by now. 

People are dying of hunger, and you take money in form of contracts. We are suffering and you come here, and it is a laughing matter! We are pleading with the Auditor-General to get value-for-money auditors so that we can know what hon. Aggrey has done; because when hon. Awori used to sit here, every minute he would say, “Those should be arrested; those should be killed.” What has he done? (Laughter) A certificate of completion to be signed when an item has not been finished! This is very dangerous.

In the Sixth Parliament, we gave US$ 8 million to Northern Uganda for telecom. In the Seventh Parliament we put US$ 7 million in Northern Uganda and now there is nothing. Who is keeping this money? Aggrey Awori, you used to say the same here. Who is keeping this money?

This is very dangerous and that is why people are saying we are eating. Has he joined them because they say we must eat in the name of the North? People in the North are suffering! US$ 15 million from 1996 to date. If we had put it in the bank, we would have earned more interest on this money.

Recently, they privatised UTL and we remained with 51 percent for the people of Uganda to buy. Privately, they have sold and now we are at 30 percent, yet the law said those were shares for Ugandans. Again Aggrey Awori, what are you doing on this issue? Are you now part of the squad?

We talk about Uganda Communications Commission. These people and the Uganda Broadcasting Council are now the worst. The licenses they are giving, we don’t know how. If you applied for a licence with UBC, they would say, “Go to person x, he already has a license”. They give licenses to people who are not investing in the sector so that those people can trade in those licenses. People have walked to telecommunications to get licenses for telephones, but I don’t know what they are doing. 

Regarding radio, people have walked for radios. I am told there is a chairman there who is a small king. For me because they said I am on the Opposition, I could not get one; but there are those who are not from the Opposition and they have walked and walked. In fact, to get your application received, you must put a huge stone. Having put the stone - this is very dangerous! Why don’t we have systems operating well, because we want to improve communication? Aggrey Awori, you better look at UCC and how licenses are being given, because this is a liberalised economy. How is UBC doing? (Interruption)

MS NAYIGA: Mr Speaker, I have patiently listened to hon. Nandala-Mafabi but he has continuously referred to a minister as “Aggrey Awori” as if he is his son. Is it in order for an honourable member to refer to another honourable member in this Parliament just like he is referring to his own son? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What I can say is that it has been over done. Don’t personalise these institutions. Call him Hon. Aggrey Awori; but it is the ministry.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you and I want to apologise. You know we used to be here with Hon. Aggrey Awori, and we used to cross-check so -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up, your time is over.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we are talking about taxes. We gave them Shs 2.1 billion, which they never consumed, but used only Shs 230 million. Now they are asking for seven, but they will not consume it. We should not budget for the sake of budgeting, but we should be realistic in our budgeting. Let us not over blow our budget for the sake of it. 

Since we want to improve communication, a mobile phone is also a communication tool. For us to be able to improve communication up to rural areas, taxes on mobile phones should be removed as in Kenya, Tanzania and I am sure Sudan has done, as well as Rwanda. I hope Hon. Aggrey Awori is aware that those countries have no taxes on mobile phones and because of this, communication has improved in these countries. You are talking of 8.6 million telephones, but these are owned by about three million people. Most MPs have more than three phones. So, if you multiply the members of Parliament alone, you could have a million phones, yet there are about 300 MPs.

Finally, poor planning is the cause of us destroying our roads. I think National Planning Authority should be the responsible organisation. Where a road is passing, we expect in future that there will be a pipeline of water and telecommunication. As such, we should plan this country without destroying what we have. 

The reason why we are destroying roads is because of poor planning. I think it is very important that this Government becomes serious regarding planning. If you don’t plan, it is going to be costly for us in the future when we are trying to develop the country, as is being done now. I would also request Hon. Aggrey Awori who said planning - I hope you remember that word - planning, planning! You must walk the talk; not this business of smiling and not walking the talk. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.35
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Consensus seems to be building that we need to review and evaluate the mandate and work of the Uganda Communications Commission. It is very clear that the mandate of the ICT Ministry partly involves overall coordination of all the sectors under it. And, information being received, not only here but also in the public domain, is to the effect that the UCC is not doing its work transparently. 

We should not only just lament. While I am in agreement with the recommendation of the committee on page 17, that a special audit be conducted by the Auditor-General for the first phase of the National Backbone Infrastructure (NBI), similarly, it should be a recommendation of this Parliament that a special audit be conducted on the work of the Uganda Communications Commission. 

Lastly, the issue of appropriateness and compliance of technology is key. The ICT industry is one of the fastest growing in the world, and even in Uganda. Countries allover the world are fighting to ensure that what they acquire in terms of ICT is appropriate and suitable; not just for the people and not just for the present, but also for the future. 

I remember very vividly, just in this vey Parliament, when the Minister of ICT recommended to members of Parliament to purchase computers, laptops - you remember - and we were told how these laptops would do wonders, how you would sit at your home and you view proceedings of Parliament, and we indeed all rushed to buy these computers, which ended up being of obsolete technology. They were all fake. 

When this Parliament was passing the NBI loan, I remember very vividly, I stood up and enquired how appropriate and suitable this technology we were going to acquire was, and this issue was bashed. But I am very sad to observe and read the last paragraph on page 16 that the G652 cable installed will not be able to handle national traffic in the near future. There are not enough provisions for future upgrading of higher data rates, multiple channels and even longer distances. This is very sad. Uganda should not be a dumping ground for obsolete technology, and we must recommend, very strongly, that before the second phase of the NBI is implemented, the type and stability of technology that is going to be installed must be seriously looked into. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: There has been lacking a gender factor. So, I start with a lady. (Applause) Honourable members, please use five minutes because I want to cover four members and then we end.

4.40
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the committee for the precise and honest report they have presented to the House. 

Two, I want to concur with my colleagues, especially on the figure for taxation. It will be ridiculous for this House to accept to approve or to appropriate the Shs 8.4 billion when the development expenditure against which these taxes, I presume are supposed to pay is less. A hundred and beyond of taxes calls for a justification and explanation to that effect

THE SPEAKER: I thought an explanation was given.

MS AKOL: No, the minister said he is comfortable, but we need to know. We cannot have development expenditure of Shs 7.2 billion and taxes of Shs. 8.4 billion against that development expenditure. That is not explainable –(Interruption)

MR OMACH: Thank you very much colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, phase II of this project is US$61 million. And the taxes that are being proposed are non-resource. Last financial year, the ministry asked for Shs 8 billion. This financial year, they are asking for Shs 8.4 billion. And, last financial year, before the BBudget was appropriated under the Vote-on-Account, we had already released a third of that, and that is how the amount of about Shs 2.1 billion came about, but the project did not take all this. 

Having said this, before any of these taxes are released, URA has to go through these figures to ensure that what is coming on is tax-exempt or not tax-exempt. So, the figure of Shs 8.4 billion is not only pegged to the total amount of the loan - the amount that is going to be appropriated to the Ministry of ICT. That is why the Shs 8.4 billion comes about taking into consideration the total cost of phase II of the project, which is US$61 million. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, when we appropriate the Budget, on 30th June of the next year, that budget appropriation expires. Now, the minister is talking about an expired appropriation. If he wants to do something, he must bring this money here and we vote it again. Otherwise, what you are talking about is out. And, we shall not pass this money because what are we voting it for and against what? 

THE SPEAKER: Now, why don’t you leave him to explain then you come in? 

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, the Vote-on-Account for the Budget that we are already appropriating is already on-going; otherwise Government would not be able to run. The Vote-on-Account is already on-going, and that is the law that this Parliament has passed. So, last financial year, we passed the Vote-on-Account and the Ministry of ICT had requested for taxes worth Shs 8 billion. Now, when you subsequently pass the vote, the appropriated amount that was approved was about Shs 400 million only.  

So, the actual amount of these taxes that was spent was only Shs 228 million. The rest of it is not taken anywhere because it is non-resource revenue. There is, therefore, no way of saying, as my colleague from Gulu was asking, that where has this money gone, because it is non-resource. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what I am trying to explain to the Minister –

THE SPEAKER: If you are not happy with the Vote, there is a procedure on how to deal with it.

MS AKOL: Thank you. Secondly, I have read and understood the issues and recommendations that are being made by the committee, regarding the National Backbone Infrastructure and I really want to request that before we go into phase II, which I know is already in the pipeline, we make sure that all the recommendations of the committee are taken into account and that this House receives a report that should show that whatever was requested for in accordance with this report, is to our satisfaction. Because when we read of a project that is costed highly compared to our neighbours’; when we read of equipment that is already performing below standard; I think that is not acceptable and it is our duty as Parliament and the Legislative Arm of Government that appropriates this money, to ensure that it is put into good use, and that we are satisfied with Phase I before we can go to Phase II.

Thirdly and finally, there is the issue of the intelligence equipment that should be acquired by the Uganda Communications Commission to enable gauge the amount of tax or levy, because according to the Act, they are supposed to levy one percent on all the telecommunication operators in this country, but right now they only depend on the information given to them by the telephone operators. They are not able to individually calculate the amount of levy they should charge and the equipment needed here is that intelligence network equipment. 

Even Uganda Revenue Authority cannot compute the actual taxes they should charge these communications companies without that equipment. So, that is very important equipment that can help Uganda Communications Commission levy the right charge on the right volume of traffic that these telecommunications companies handle, and for URA to charge the right tax on the right volume of traffic or money that is collected by these companies. 

Right now, we are talking about the implications of the credit crunch and this is one avenue where we can really get a lot of revenue, and I am sure the Uganda Communications Commission has the money to purchase this equipment, because within less than four months, they have been able to build a very powerful house on your way to Bugolobi. So, it is not about money, unless there is a loophole that is being exploited by not purchasing this equipment, and it is intentional. Otherwise, I know that they can purchase it and it should be purchased because it will help us get more revenue into the national budget. I thank you. 

4.50
MAJ. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Mr Speaker and members, I have read through this report and I want to believe that maybe some of the mistakes being brought out by the committee were made before Hon. Aggrey Awori was made a minister of the sector, because they are extremely worrying.

There is a contradiction; the committee says that a company was given a certificate of completion in February last year, but did it actually complete the work? Because a certificate of completion can be given when the company never finished work. So, I hope the minister will make some remarks at the end and tell us whether they gave the company a certificate of completion when they actually did not finish work. 

I think we need to really consider making some amendments in the Constitution in future, to state that certain decisions of this House should be enforceable, because we pass money, loans and so on, but the deployment of the resources is not to the satisfaction of members, and the cases are many. 

We passed US$100 million for NUSAF in Northern Uganda but when you cross Karuma, you do not see where the US$100 million was put. Nebbi, where my dear brother and friend Jachan Omach comes from, you see only signposts, and when you follow them you hit a dead end. I think there is a serious problem regarding optimal resource utilisation in this country, because money is about how you use it, and that is a cardinal principle in financial management; and that should be in our foresight. 

Look at this report on page 15 - the NBI, generators are missing! Hon. Aggrey Awori (Laughter) signals are distorted; non-linear effects. 

I want to invite your attention to the observations raised by this committee. I am not a member of the committee, and you look at the observations raised by members and their recommendations. Some people have talked about the differences in the rates, Uganda, Rwanda, MTN and so on; why is it US$ 30,000? Hon. Aggrey Awori, we want these things to be clarified. The mistakes -

THE SPEAKER: No, but honourable members, when you have those doubts, what you have to do is to use technical eyes to detect the defects and report. I think what you are expressing here is that you need the technical eye of the Auditor-General to do this and report to you. We may not be able to find the answer now.

MAJ. GUMA: We may not be able to find the answers but the minister has his support staff. They are here and they must be knowing the nitty-gritty and the information must be on their finger tips. If there is what they call over-invoicing, as a member of a Parliament, I would want to be brought on board to understand and to appreciate this high rate.

THE SPEAKER: I agree with you, but I said in this session here, you may not - and when you say he has his technical people; if the technical people are the ones involved, how will they assist you? (Laughter)

MAJ. GUMA: I oblige, Mr Speaker, but the point is that, optimal resource utilisation in anything, at a personal level, a family level or a national level, is a cardinal point. I would want to invite our colleagues and all the big men and women in Government, including you, Mr Speaker, to look at this issue. It is a serious issue. It is an extremely serious consideration that we must factor in, whether it is resources that are domestically generated or they are resources that are externally injected into our economy. It is possible that unless we do focus as legislators, we can borrow and borrow and borrow, and yet see no equivalent on the ground. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We have taken long on this, and I see three people now who are interested. I am closing with them. I am reducing the time in which you are going to make a contribution so that I cover the three who have stood on this side.

4.56
MR PETER OCHIENG (NRM, Bukooli South, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the committee suggests that we can use the communication lines which are currently used by Uganda Electricity Transmission Company from Tororo to Mbarara, to supplement or to substitute what the national back-bone has, there is a problem with that. I, therefore, want to request the committee to undertake a number of studies because these communication lines are specifically to shut down and to inform the control tower here for electricity, just in case there is anything. And if we join the two together, it might not serve the purpose, and the consequences might be much more than what we are trying to save in terms of economics. 

I also want to talk about the interference at the border. Quite often, you wake up in the morning, like some of us who stay around the border line, and all that you get as coverage is a Kenyan network; and by so doing, if you have a Ugandan telephone, you will only call on a roaming tariff. This is impacting dearly on many of my constituents. We have tried to talk about this so that it can be worked on but it is taking long. We really request that the communication commission helps us with this to enable us use the national tariffs like it is supposed to be for any other Ugandans.

The last issue is to do with the Ministry of ICT. We possibly hurriedly enabled and allowed the ICT ministry to do what they have done. They made an agreement, enabled the UNRA to put in this and that, and UNRA told them that whenever they try to dig or lay the cables, they should go at least one metre deep on ordinary soil textures. The report is saying that what they did was only a third of what they were expected to do which is 0.3 of a metre. 

Really, with that, you do not expect anything much; even the vibrations of a car tyre alone will damage the optical cable we are talking about. When you talk about an optical cable, we are not talking about ordinary cables. These are sensor cables that enable - it must be, first of all, out of interference as much as possible, and this is the reason why we are finding a lot of difficulties. I think those who handled this programme from day one must be brought to order. It cannot be like this. 

A whole ministry putting - because when you talk about 2,000 kilometres of the network and at US$30,000, you are talking about US$66 million. If you finish the 2,000 - and I am not sure it is just the 2,000 that you require, you need much more of this.

If we follow what has been happening, and we do not give the support that is necessary for the committee report now, even as we talk about the budget for this whole ministry, we will just be doing a disservice to this country, and I think this cannot be accepted - at least to me. 

But putting that aside, when we talk about UCC and the other ministries - even when people talk about MTN, MTN is one of the extravagant private sector companies in this country. Even the rate of US$ 10,000 is still very high. You can do this with the help of other partners at a much cheaper price than that. I think US$10,000 or US$12,000 like we are hearing from Rwanda is still very high. We can have this achieved at a better rate —(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: No. I am going to end with hon. Boona, hon. Sebunya and hon. Bucyanayandi.

5.01
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for their report but I wish to make these important observations on what they reported this afternoon. 

I will start with the use of computers and telephones, and their disposal. Recently, in our Budget, the Minister of Finance proposed that this country stops importing second-hand computers. But as far as I know, there are many second-hand computers inside the country which were imported before the ban, and other computers we have been using that are already obsolete. My concern is about what the ministry is planning to do about the disposal of computers that the country no longer uses, and no longer needs, and the telephones everyone is using. 

One of our members this afternoon mentioned that he estimates there are a million telephones in this House. If you multiply this by the people in the country, that means that we, in the future, are going to have a problem of where to dispose of these used and useless computers and telephones. 

Right now, the country is suffering with polythene papers, because we did not plan for their disposal, and we are now panicking about what to do with our soils because of the pollution they cause. So, the ministry needs to plan. Although we are very anxious to receive, buy and acquire, we should also plan for where we will dump what we do not need any more. These materials are very hazardous to the people who use them.

On page 18, the chairperson talked about telecommunication masts. He mentioned that it is very important to reduce on the number of masts to address environmental concerns. Of course, in this paper, he could not have been able to give us the details to do with the environmental concerns related to these masts, but there are a lot of rumours about the effects of these masts to the environment. 

A research was recently carried out and we were made to believe that where these masts are, the mangoes, the guavas, and all other fruits in the vicinity do not flower or fruit. That means there is a problem concerning the environment. Now, if the mangoes are not bearing fruits, what is happening to the human beings who are living under these telecommunication masts; are they going to be productive?

So, I would like the minister to report to this House in future and allay the fears of the population that these masts are very hazardous to the environment. We do not have the facts, but people are afraid of them. There are very many masts where we stay in the residential areas, in schools and hospitals. So we would like the minister to come up with a paper and assure us that we are safe living with these telecommunication masts that are stopping trees from bearing fruits. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.05
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a simple one on page 16. The committee noted the UECTL fibre cable running from Masaka – Mbale – Kampala – and made a recommendation that the line should be handed over to UNTA or UCC for easy transmission. 

But in one of the committees, where we are intending to pass a loan to UECTL for transmission and interconnectivity to other countries, I asked UECTL officials about this fibre cable they are using and they said it is for their internal communication. 

Now, my question is, has the ministry contacted UECTL to know whether using this line for other –(Interruption) 

MR NABETA: Thank you for giving way. The lines going over the electric power lines now have 24 core fibres which run through and they use it mostly for scudder monitoring of the system. 

But if you, let us say, took two cores from that, that is enough for them to monitor the scudder, and you can use the other to transport data, and it will not interfere with their monitoring. And, since they were already acquiring a UCC licence and trying to compete with the national backbone, we thought that they would benefit from the US$126 million we are borrowing to do a national backbone project that provides better redundancy for us. In case the cable is cut, traffic can be routed on the pylons above, and that can be done without any problems. 

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you for the information. But I can inform you now that they have vehemently refused any other person to use their lines because they feared sabotage and inconveniences that might come. 

So, I am wondering whether the ministry has sat down to plan with UECTL such that this ground line of their NBI can safely be planned to pass through the air and not the ground. The one passing in the ground is already not functional, yet if they worked with UECTL, we would have a safer line passing above. So, we appeal to the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology to properly plan with UECTL. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.09
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. An issue was raised on this Floor by hon. Nandala-Mafabi regarding J.M. Tel., and I thought I had information, but unfortunately he did not raise it in time for me to give him the information. Now I have the opportunity. 

I want to inform the House that this issue came to our committee as COSASE. At that time, we invited the minister, hon. Nasasira, and the Executive Director of UCC to give us some explanation regarding this company. After cross-examining them, we were satisfied that company J.M. Tel. was officially operating because they had been given clearance by Government after due consultation between the Government of Southern Sudan and Uganda. 

We were also satisfied that there was a Memorandum of Understanding between J.M. Tel and Uganda Telecom. We were also satisfied that the company was paying due taxes. We wrote a report and it was presented to this House. So, I want to inform my colleagues that –(Interruption)– 

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from honourable Bucyanayandi. Yes the people may have come to your committee to give you information and literature regarding this agreement. After the committee, did Parliament pronounce itself or did it debate the report? And if so, when was this? Because, as a committee of ICT, we are not privy to any information regarding the usage or even the agreement of our code.

MR BUCHANAYANDI: The committee, chaired by hon. John Odit, presented a report to the House and our recommendation was passed and accepted. [Mr William Okecho rose_]

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As a former Chairman, I will give you privilege to say a few words. (Laughter) 

5.12
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I want to ask two questions. One is that, there is information that UCC is distributing computers to schools. Which are these schools? I would like to know, because I have never seen UCC computers in any of the schools in our area. 

Two, the minister for ICT stood here one time and promised MPs computers for their constituencies - 10 of them per constituency - I think it was in NEC where it was promised. I want to know whether that still stands.  

5.13
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for this opportunity to answer some of the concerns expressed by members of the committee through their chairperson, and honourable colleagues that have again raised the same concerns orally. 

I also take this opportunity to thank my honourable colleague, the Chairperson of the Committee of ICT and his members, for their forensic examination of my committee, especially regarding the NBI. 

On a lighter note, I take this opportunity to thank my colleague hon. Nandala-Mafabi for reminding me of what I used to do sometime back. (Laughter) He tried to fit in my shoes, but by the time I left the Opposition, I was wearing boots. So, I don’t know if you can now fit in them.  

Going straight to the issues raised by the committee, as I said, I would like to thank him for the concerns because they raised issues which are also of concern to me as a newly sworn in minister. There are indeed serious concerns, and I do not want to repeat them. But I can say in brief that we have already started putting a majority of the items under remedial measures. 

On the issue of district information business centres, indeed, the committee went on a fact-finding mission all over the country, and specifically in three centres. I would like to assure this august House that we have since rectified those mistakes in those three centres which the committee visited and noted concerns, and the centres are functional and one can prove it tomorrow morning. 

Mr Speaker, the only item which we are yet to complete regarding these centres is the question of Internet connectivity and this is for a very good technical reason. We are in the process of completing the National Backbone Infrastructure which will enable us to be connected to the International Submarine Cable that will reduce the cost of the Internet. Using the satellite system to connect the DBIs in brief to the Internet when the costs are still high will not be fair to our people. It would defeat the whole idea of installing such facilities in the rural areas. 

The purpose of this facility is to enable our people who seemingly are disadvantaged to use technical communication facilities at the moment. That is why we are putting research centres, and if we repeat using the same old costs, we will have defeated the original purpose. Bear with us, honourable colleagues that as soon as we have this connectivity, these GBIs will be functional and affordable. The question is when will this be possible? 

Mr Speaker, I will go straight to the issue of the NBI, which again the committee extensively reported on. The first phase which cost US$ 30 million indeed run into serious difficulties. This programme was operationalised at a time when this country was under pressure to host CHOGM, and it was part of the programme. 

The Commonwealth Secretariat demanded, among other things, this kind of communication facility, and we had to do it in a rush, and certain aspects of preconstruction were not taken into consideration. Fortunately, we have since detected them and we are in the process of carrying out remedial measures. 

As my honourable colleagues here justifiably pointed out, there was no coordination between UNRA and our ministry. Indeed if there was, it was minimal. 

Mr Speaker, this facility is supposed to go around the country. To get just to do a cable around the country without sensitising the community again is a shortcoming on the part of my ministry. We have since then, among the remedial measures we are taking to sensitize the community, talked to the LCI chairmen, the Police and leading persons in the community, that we are going to have this cable in the neighbourhood and, therefore, special care must be taken. 

Two, our colleagues at the UNRA gave us specifications on how to do the excavation. Indeed we tried. This particular project had been given to a Chinese company called Huawei. They sub-contracted some of the work to local firms, and as I said, the pressure was such that we had to have this facility in place lest the Commonwealth Secretariat inspectors said we don’t have sufficient communication systems in the country, and probably the CHOGM could have been shifted to another country. 

Mr Speaker, when the programme was put into operation, again the same problem arose - excavation of the road networks - and that is where again the UNRA by either sub-contracting or taking on companies to do construction work totally disregarded the network which we had agreed on with them, that this is where the cable will pass. 

A lot of damage was done and to prove it, as hon. colleagues have pointed out, the UNRA has agreed to compensate my ministry for the cost of destruction. We already have their acceptance to pay and compensate for the damage. 

Indeed, people have said phase I, which is metropolitan Kampala extending to Jinja, and again I will mention why it goes to Jinja, extending it to Bombo  -and I can mention why it goes to Bombo - and then it goes to Entebbe for obvious reasons because that is where the seat of government is; State House.

We had to extend it to Jinja for the purpose of preparing what we call the recovery centre. In the event of difficulties in Kampala, we must have another place outside Kampala where we can go for the data, which may have been stored, and that is why we went as far as Jinja. We had to go to Bombo for obvious reasons. At the time, it was the heart of our land forces. We had to go to Entebbe as I said for the purpose of connecting it with the Government. That is the first phase. 

The second phase would cover a substantial part of our country, especially the East and North. As I speak, we should have actually started yesterday on the second phase, but I insisted as the political head of the ministry that before we embark on the second phase, the public must be satisfied that sufficient remedial measures have been taken to make phase I operational and efficient. These are the realities of life and I own up. It is not easy. 

My honourable colleague there says, Awori this, Awori that. I should do the same. I should look for any crack in Government arguments and explore them. Indeed, we had problems but we have rectified them. 

The committee has recommended certain sanctions against my staff that carried out the project, and exposed the project more or less to ridicule, or that it should not be operationalised and look like a waste. These sanctions are subject, again as the committee recommended, to the Auditor-General’s report. 

As you rightly observed, Mr Speaker in the Chair, it would not be proper to have that kind of sanction against anybody without technical audit. Financial audit can be ably handled by the Auditor-General, but the technical part of it - We don’t want the Auditor-General to delay the report by looking around and outsourcing that kind of work. So, again, internally, we have set up a technical audit. We are having an expert –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to complete, please?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker for saving me from my honourable colleague. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, we have set up a system with access to technical experts who are going to do the following. 

One, to satisfy the ministry that indeed remedial measures have been carried out according to original specifications, and that the network is working properly. That will be completed this week, and I am sure probably by the time we leave, it will have come out. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedure problem. The Constitution of Uganda says it is the Auditor- General who will conduct - Maybe let me help you. It is Article 163(3)(b), “… conduct financial and value for money audits in respect of any projects involving public funds.” The Auditor-General is a person who reports to Parliament on behalf of Ugandans and the committee has recommended rightly that the Auditor-General should do the value-for-money audit. Now, are we going to rely on the minister’s internal audit experts?

THE SPEAKER: They can do it without prejudice to the Auditor-General’s powers and functions.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I accept your guidance in the matter wholeheartedly, and I would like to go by what the committee recommends.

If I may continue regarding the rest of the concerns of the committee, they also brought out an element, which has yet to be explained properly to the public. It is a bit technical, and that is why it has eluded public notice. One, it has been brought out in the open and fairly, so that the cost of doing a similar project in Rwanda is much less than what it costs in Uganda. These two comparisons are very fallacious. It is just like comparing a pickup with a trailer, and you say, why is it that the pickup cost you US$ 20 and the trailer is costing you US$ 100?

This is the difference. I got information from the responsible person in Rwanda, who said the difference between their system and ours in cost is as follows. One, Rwanda’s is a short distance. In technical terms it is called SDM (Synchronomous Dictative Digital Hierarchy). That means short distance transmission of signals. When it comes to ours -

THE SPEAKER: You are really complicating this. (Laughter)

MR AWORI: When it comes to ours, it is a long distance one. Again the abbreviation is WDM. In other words, Wavelength Dense in Multiplexing. That is long distance. Now how do you compare the short distance and the long distance?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we are lay people; so, can you use language that we can understand?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I didn’t want to leave any doubt in anybody’s mind for anybody to carry out news that Kampala people are eating somebody’s money. Nothing could be further from the truth and the comparison does not arise.

Let me come to the concerns of the august House as fast as possible. When it comes to my honourable colleague, the shadow minister, who mentioned the element of electronic voting, as you are aware, I am in communications and I am consulting you as the head of this august House. 

I was also in touch with the prime minister as the Leader of Government Business, and I would like to assure my honourable colleagues with your permission and that of the prime minister that indeed, I had technical people come and examine this Chamber to confirm whether the electronic voting system could be applicable, and could work and make our work easier and more efficient. Indeed, I have got the report and we will be able to do it within 90 days, as soon as I receive the permission of the Speaker and the Leader of Government Business. 

Briefly, this is how it will operate. When it comes to voting, Mr Speaker, with your permission, all members of Parliament who are ex-officio will not be entitled to this system. Each one of you or us who are members who are elected, will pick a modular, it looks like a TV remote control; you pick it at the entrance. 

It has got three functions: Yes for green, yellow for abstention and red for no. (Interjection) There is no blue (Laughter) Mr Speaker, for the sake of confirming that it is you who is voting. We will have what we call biometrics - you finger tips. You can press it, if it is you, it will accept; if it is somebody else - I know they are days of multiparty politics, you might give your equipment to somebody to go and vote for you - it will not accept.

We will also have screens, one in that corner on that side, a second one in that corner, and a third one on this side. So that all members of Parliament would know what is going on. There will be no more of the question like, those in favour say, aye or no, you just press the button according to your choice of voting and it will be registered. Some people say, no, this thing might be some way of rigging, but there is no rigging electronically. 

There will be no interference with the system; to go to the databank, four people only have the access to it: The Prime Minister, Leader of Government Business, Leader of Opposition and probably another MP of the choice of the sSpeaker, and all of them must be there to access the databank to confirm that nobody has interfered with the results of the voting.

The other function will be - the system now is that the moment you come to report to Parliament, you have to write your name, address, time and so forth. But with this system the moment you touch the button, it registers your presence; you don’t have to write anywhere else. 

The other functions that will come with it will be that any of you - I know you have been worried, especially after Pulkol report - if you want to prove to your people back home that you attended the session, you can access the E-Hansard- by the way the Hansard also will be instant. When we finish here our deliberations, you can go to the databank and it will give you what happened. It has the capacity for voice recognition. Once you press it, it will recognise that it is hon. Awori. Then later, you can get a diskette at your cost to show your contribution in the august House. 

So, you can prove to your constituents that indeed, you talked about that particular item. If they asked hon. Wadri when they talked about electricity, you kept quiet. You can come out with a diskette and say, see here, I am shouting at hon. Awori why he has not provided electricity in my village. That should be able to convince the voters.

Mr Speaker that’s all I can say for the moment given the few minutes I have to answer some of the questions. Again, the issue that I introduced outside this House but now it is part of this House, is a question of honourable colleagues participating in the development projects at home; that is the use and distribution of computers in schools.

We have already worked out a list of the schools which have been installed with equipment and those of you who feel that the school is not of your choice, you come to me; you tell me the school of your choice and we shall install 10 computers. (Interjection) Mr Speaker, I hope you will protect me from the honourable colleague again. 

These computers we want you also to own not personally, but be part of the programme to sensitise the community where you represent, and to make them believe you are part of development. When you go to open that computer centre or lab, I would advise you, my honourable colleague, go with a small placard, “this lab was opened by hon. Awori” (Laughter) that way you have identified yourself with the development in the area. We have to involve all of us in the development of this country. I can leave out the contribution of honourable colleagues.

MR SPEAKER: I must say that this is a very interesting maiden speech by the hon. Minister (Laughter) 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your compliments - (Laughter)- it would be ridiculous for an honourable colleague representing the area to open a computer lab, but in your own constituency office you have no system of communication data or otherwise. That is why in our budget we have included one desktop computer for every constituency office (Applause) It is not only for you but once we have completed -(Interjection)- Mr Speaker I have to follow the PPDA Rules so they may not come until the end of September which is about six weeks away. 

Another function of this computer is that, in your constituency office, and if the NBI has covered your area, you can access the databank, the Internet and even for that matter, when we have completed our electronic voting system and the databank, you can access the Hansard from your constituency office back home, including TV and so forth. 

As you rightly put it, this is my maiden speech on this side of the House (Laughter). 

MR SPEAKER: You are persuading us to pass your vote?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, we have a problem with the staffing issue, indeed we are short of staff, and we are making every effort to fill that gap. As I speak now, we have taken on two new persons whose papers are being processed by the Public Service Commission, and I hope they will be with us in the next few weeks. 

However, we cannot forget the young people we are training in various tertiary institutions in IT and ICT. As I speak now, we have taken on 48 interns who have got qualifications in ICT and IT. We hope these people are the future backbone of NITA.

My honourable colleague sitting at the back gave wrong information to this august House regarding the fibre glass currently owned by UETCL. On further recommendation of the committee, this cable was established by UEB more than 20 years ago, for the purpose of monitoring the flow and transmission of their energy all over the place - what they call the SCADA system – to detect where there is a power failure or power surge. 

Now, this fibre optic is what they call a 24-Core. At the moment, they have been using only Four-Core. In other words, it is like having a bus of 24 seats, but you only use four seats.

Without disclosing Cabinet secrets, it is a directive of the President that all transmission infrastructure shall be under the ICT ministry. That is why we have approached the Ministry of Energy. We actually had two meetings. One meeting was of the technical officers to see how we can use and own that facility. Another meeting was between ministers - I, my minister of state and the two ministers from Ministry of Energy - and the meeting was presided over by the Second Deputy Prime Minister. Indeed, it was recommended that in accordance with the directive of the President, the facility should be owned and managed by the ICT ministry. We are in the process of doing that.

For anybody to tell this august House that connectivity could be a problem and could be a danger, then how come the Ministry of Energy has now agreed that we can take the 20 Cores and they will maintain the Four Cores for the continued use of the monitoring of power flow? So, for anybody to say that, it is not compatible. I think he has not consulted either the files or anybody serious in the Ministry of Energy. 

Mr Speaker, let me add one more point. By using that facility from Malaba to Mbarara, we are going to save this country US$ 15 million, which we can use for refunding the Chinese loan. Secondly, it has the capacity of generating up to US$ 7 million a year. This is money coming to us, which can be used once again to service the loan.

We are rushing to connect Jinja and Busia or Malaba in order to take advantage of the international submarine cables. The cables have come but they have reached only the border. Actually, by the 18th of September, some of us who live around the border area can walk across and get a very cheap Internet connection. But for me as the Minister of ICT, it will be really despicable. So, we have to hurry up and have this connectivity in order for all Ugandans who have got access to the NBI to also have cheap Internet.

Last but not least, there was this question of postal services. Postal services, or the Posta as we call it, indeed have had serious financial and management problems. As an example, for the last four years, they have changed top management four times. I am glad to report that the current managing director has been in office for about three years, which shows there is stability. Until we intervened, the postal services were on the verge of being auctioned because of debts. NSSF was chasing them through their lawyer for Shs 6 billion. Again through our intervention, they had to layoff. We had to get into an arrangement. Right now, Posta is servicing all its commitments, including paying their staff on time. This is an achievement on their part.

Why is it that Posta is almost sinking and not generating as much money as they used to? Three reasons: technical advancement or developments. Email is in place and it has literally taken over the usual letter writing. Internet, telefax, all these have come up and taken away the territory from Posta. Then we have the liberalised communications system where any company, reliable as it may be, can now take on the business of parcel delivery. Again, they have taken away a very lucrative sector of Posta. So, Posta has now been left with almost nothing but dilapidated buildings.

If I had the time, I could go on about the capabilities that the ICT ministry could offer. However, I can boast that ICT, invisible as it may be, is almost like blood - it flows in the body but you cannot see it. The only time you see it is say when you cut somebody and he or she is bleeding. But for us, we intend to have connectivity presence in every ministry and public life.

I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think you have made your case. Are there any corrections or figures?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (General Duties) (Mr Fred Omach): Yes, Mr Speaker. There was the issue of the Shs 8.4 billion which members were intending to reduce. 

First of all, I would like to say that this project is in three phases: Phase I, which was in Financial Year 2007/2008, we had US$ 30 million on equipment. We spent Shs 7.24 billion on taxes. On vehicles, we spent Shs0.22 billion, and a total of Shs7.46 billion was spent on taxes. 

In the last Financial Year, we spent Shs 0.170 billion on equipment, and Shs 0.068 billion on vehicles, giving a total of Shs 0.238 billion.

This financial year, when we are going to have phase II, which is going to take a total of US$ 60 million, we expect the taxes on specialised machinery and equipment to take up to Shs 8.084 billion; motor vehicles, Shs 0.175 billion; furniture and fittings, Shs 0.97 billion and office and ICT equipment, Shs 0.44 billion, giving a total of Shs 8.4 billion for taxes. For all the figures that have been given on page 20 of the report, I pray that they be passed without any amendment. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 020 - Ministry of ICT
 
THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,665,000,000 under Vote 020, Ministry of ICT, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 15,666,000,000 under Vote 020, Ministry of ICT, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Now, the book is talking of a total of Shs 17,924.79 billion yet what we are supplying is Shs 17.925 -(Interjections)- You cannot correct it and that is why the book should have already corrected it. That is why yesterday we even read Shs 410.

THE CHAIRMAN: Minister, can you explain?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, that gives a difference of 207,000.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you remember yesterday we were even appropriating one shilling. I remember yesterday we even read 411 at the end. Now, this one is talking about Shs 210,000. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok. So, what is the position?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, the recurrent expenditure would therefore read, Shs 2,000,264,793.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is actually negligible. Taking into account the very good maiden speech made by the minister, I think we will leave it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We can take the negligible thing, but we are about to go for taxes now. Under the law, the Public Finance and Accountability Act and the Constitution, every appropriation lapses at the end of the every financial year. Now, the minister was talking about the last financial year which has elapsed -(Interjections)- If it is new, then we should have the money in the Budget as we saw in projects yesterday for approval. Otherwise, you cannot approve taxes without approving the money for the project which relates to these taxes. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, this phase II of the National Transmission Backbone loan was approved by this Parliament last year. So, we are now at the implementation stage and that is why we are having these taxes. That is why also my OB from Arua was saying that I should provide money so that this thing also goes to Arua.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what I should advise hon. Nandala-Mafabi, Chairman Public Accounts Committee, is to take note of this and let us follow it to ensure that money is properly utilised. I think we should move.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the budget proposal for Vote 020, Ministry of ICT.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE SUPPLY

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of Supply on the Ministry of ICT.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Again, honourable members, I thank you for your time, since morning, and I think we have been able to achieve something. And I must say that I was impressed by Hon. Aggrey Awori’s contribution here, especially on improving our voting system and giving us computers in our constituencies. Thank you very much. 

Now we have completed today’s two ministries. We had earmarked Infrastructure, but I understand they still have some problems; but we have committee on Social Services which is a very important committee, and it is ready. I appeal to you to go and read through so that tomorrow we can deal with the social services report and votes falling under that committee. And I think we agreed to start at 10.00 a.m.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising on a point of clarification from Hon. Aggrey Awori’s presentation, especially with regard to the electronic voting system in Parliament. He said that he will swing into action once permission is granted by the Speaker and the Prime Minister. We are impressed by the innovation and I thought we should put it now on record that the permission ought to be granted so that he swings into action immediately. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: It is okay, I received communication from him and I had a discussion with him. It was mainly about configuration of this seating arrangement, because in most cases, where that system is used, somebody should have a permanent seat. But now he has got this innovation of using a remote control which keeps your record and so forth. If that is workable, then definitely I will put it in writing saying, “Okay, go ahead”, and then we shall have a training when these machines are installed on how to use the gadgets. We will also look at the Rules of Procedure because we have to change them to take into account the new system. Thank you very much. 

With this, we come to the end of the – there was a programme from Gen. Elly Tumwine, but I don’t think – because of what we had said in the morning that we concentrate on the work of the Budget, definitely we would not be in that place at the same time. But thank you very much. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 27 August 2009 at 10.00 a.m.) 
