Monday 21st August, 2000

Parliament met at 11:05 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

ASCERTAINMENT OF QUORUM.

63 Members were ascertained as being present

The House could not proceed due to lack of Quorum

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

ASCERTAINMENT OF QUORUM

95 Members were ascertained as being present.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to draw your attention to the circular dated 21st August 2000, issued by the Clerk to Parliament. The circular was issued to clarify and provide procedure which is to be followed in transacting our business, following the recent judgement by the Constitutional Court. 

Two issues are highlighted here: 
    1. The House will not commence or continue transacting business unless there is a minimum of 93 Members in the Chamber. 
    2. Any decision by the House on any question will be taken by show of hands, which will be followed by physical counting, before the result is declared. I would like to add that when the issue of quorum arises, those who will be in the House will have their names recorded.  Thank you.

MR. OTHIENO AKIKA: I would like guidance on a procedural matter, Mr. Speaker. About two weeks ago, a petition signed by not less than 163 Members of this House was forwarded to your office. Members are interested in having matters pertaining to their motor vehicle scheme debated before any other business is transacted. The justification for that was that the matter has taken a little long and we are running out of time. I am aware that subsequently, about two or three meetings were held. One was held with you, but the matter was not conclusive.  The second one was an attempt by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, who is also the Leader of Government business, but we never came out with anything conclusive, there was no agreement on the way forward to this.  

Subsequently, Mr. Speaker, last Friday you did summon me and about two or three others to find out whether the petition was still on. I did assure you that the petition was still on, although neither any of my other colleagues, with whom I came to your office, nor I was the chief petitioner, but this was a petition by the Members of this House. Now that the Members are duly constituted in this House, I thought it would an appropriate forum to take up a decision on that matter. I beg to be guided as to when we can continue with business, in light of the petition that has already been forwarded to your office. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is true that following that petition, a number of meetings were held, I think two of them with me. The most recent was last Friday, when I also wanted to be guided by you as to whether, in light of certain developments, which you are aware of, you would want to proceed with your motion for which you had petitioned the Speaker. By the time that meeting ended, it appeared clear that you were not aware as to the content of the minutes of the your last meeting with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the issues, which you had agreed on, and how they should be tackled. I am entirely in your hands. I had hoped that after studying the minutes of your meeting with the Prime Minister you would be of the view that something has happened and therefore you would wait, but that would be up to you. But if you feel that you are not satisfied with what has been done so far, I see no problem in proceeding to give you space to table your motion.

MR. AKIKA: Mr. Speaker, I beg to report to you that nothing concrete on the positive direction has been decided since we met. We were told that certain political decisions would be taken, and we are waiting for the Minister for Finance. The reason why this matter is being raised and why there is a tendency to put some conditions to it, is because the matter has taken too long. There does not seem to be anybody to help the Members, even the Commissioners have failed to help us. We want the report here so that we debate it and we see the way forward collectively. When a matter concerns some section of Government, we always emphasise teamwork and talk, but when a matter concerns Parliament, the legislative arm of Government, nobody wants to talk to us. Is it possible for us to talk today, before we consider the finances of this country?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have already said that, if you feel that way, I will give you space to table your motion. If you are ready.

MAJ. GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU: Mr. Speaker, there is a request I would like to put to hon. Akika. I would like to propose that, in view of the last meeting that was held, and in view of the discussion that followed amongst the few people who put their signatures on that document, further discussion should be held, if you do not mind, even this evening. If the petition is going to come on the Floor of this House, at least it should come after that meeting. You may possibly be aware that amongst the people who put their signatures on that document, some positions would need to be reconciled before we have a debate on this on the Floor of the House. Otherwise, it would cause unnecessary differences. And as a work method, I do not think that would be good. If you and the few movers of this petition do not mind, you may consider that request.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have a lot of business to transact, and as far as I know, the Executive arm of Government and the Legislature held talks and something is on the table, and negotiations are going on. The problem is that, this matter has been highlighted badly or wrongly in the eyes of the public. If we bring it up in a way that is not clear and straightforward, the public will continue to interpret it wrongly. May I suggest that, since the Prime Minister is here, he gives us some kind of Executive view, so that we do not delay?  Something is either going on or it is not going on. He should tell us so that we continue with the reports from the Sessional Committees.  

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. Today, all hon. Members are in possession of a circular from the Clerk of Parliament, PC5/3/4 of 18th August 2000. It talks about reductions of Members’ emoluments in respect of the motor-vehicle loan scheme.  The last sentence, on page one of that letter, says that the issues of outstanding balances on the loans will be fully recovered before the expiry of the term of Parliament. They will be addressed after the investigations into the suspected anomalies have been completed and a report on the matter has been submitted to Parliament. Will it not be useful to have a full debate when that report is submitted to Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Well, you are quite right, it would have been perhaps more useful if the report of the investigations, the report of the Auditor General, was available to enable Members of Parliament to debate this particular issue from an informed position. It is better than starting on something today, and then in a month's time, you have a report and you have to debate again. So, I will give an opportunity to the Prime Minister to respond to what the hon. Mutyaba has said, and to enlighten the House as to what is going on. He will tell us if anything is happening and how much has already happened, so that you can be in a position to decide on whether to continue to allow the hon. Akika Othieno to move his motion or wait until more information is received from the Executive. 

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was our intention that the Minister for Finance deals with this matter, but since you have called upon me, I will not hesitate to make the following points:  

One, there were complaints concerning the acquisition of vehicles. For example, some hon. Members said that they got second hand vehicles whereas they were supposed to be new vehicles. There was also the question of the CIF values used. That was another complaint. There was a question of tonnage. Some people were saying that they were supposed to have bought vehicles of 10 tonnes only to find that the tonnage was wrong. So, we agreed that there should be a special audit by the Auditor General, and I did ask the Auditor General to carry out the special audit. After consulting him, he said he requires one month in which to carry out the audit. And so, to the best of my recollection, by 11th September, he will have completed the audit. And if in the audit all the problems are ascertained, then we shall have a proper framework for curing the problems. You may, for example, find that by now some people have over paid. The matter will be cured after getting a concrete framework. 

The second point was that it was possible to handle the issue of the withholding tax. I think it is four percent. If people fill the income tax forms, and these have been availed to you, and if you show that you have paid your income tax, then the 4 percent withholding tax will be refunded. So, that issue is also at hand.  

Then there was the issue that the Ministry of Finance itself was also carrying out an investigation. There were also allegations that some people from the Ministry of Finance might have actually ordered vehicles. This issue is being ascertained by the Auditor General, because the Ministry of Finance cannot audit itself. But it is also carrying out investigations and results from those investigations will be availed to the appropriate bodies. They were given a time frame of three weeks. That matter is also at hand. 

Today you have received yet another circular from the Clerk to Parliament. Many Members of Parliament were irked when there were triple deductions from their salary as opposed to a monthly deduction. Again, as you know, there are procedures for handling that matter. I wrote to the Minister of Finance and requested that the ST should also re-address that matter, so that instead of having triple deductions, we should revert to a monthly deduction.  Again, that matter is at hand. That is clear in the circular. So, it would appear to us that there is progress. There are clear time frames for what has been done, and therefore, we think that there is no cause for alarm.  I thank you.

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said earlier on, I am not necessarily the chief petitioner, but the petition is property of these hon. Members of the House. I have also listened to my other colleagues, who gave their contributions and views in respect to this particular subject. I am already somehow comfortable, but not very comfortable. 

We can hold the petition until a certain definite date. I am talking about a definite date because of past experience, where we have used a fire fighting approach when a matter arises, and after things have cooled a little, the date that we agree to handle the matter is again forgotten and other matters are raised. As you well know, we do not have time now. May I propose, if my colleagues do accept, that we hold our petition until Thursday next week, hoping that on Thursday next week at 2.00 o’clock, the Minister of Finance and the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, will come with the information that we require. If it is acceptable to Members, then I will be in position to halt that petition temporarily. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Prime Minister said that the audit is going to take one month, and the Auditor General says he will be in a position to produce a report on 11th September. Now, if the original idea is that, only after receiving the Auditor General’s report you will have enough material before you to consider and debate this issue, then I think the timeframe is already set for you.

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: In view of that, Mr. Speaker, I wish we could agree that four days after 11th September, if the matter is not reported back to us, we shall present our motion to this House. That will be by 15th - (Laughter).  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr. Speaker, I have always believed in realistic timeframes, because sometimes they have blamed us for not delivering because we agreed to unrealistic timeframes. Now, on 11th of September, the Auditor General will give us a report. We need to internalise it and also take curative measures. For example, some people may have over paid. We need to sort that out. We need to sort out all the problems. There may be wrongdoers. We do not need to come here and say they will be dealt with. We just need to say that so and so has been taken, maybe to the Public Service Commission, under Articles 165 and 166, or so and so has been taken to CID. All those have to be sorted out. We will also need a Cabinet meeting, because when we get such a report, we need to internalise it, the Ministry of Finance must Table a clear paper with possible areas of intervention. Even when we are asking for a political decision, we do not merely ambush the system. You need to know the way forward. 

It would therefore, appear to me that a realistic method of doing it would be, after receiving the report, you give us two weeks. So, 14 plus 11 is 25. You will have come back with a clean answer to the questions.  This is a clear framework. Let me also add that we also have international partners. So, sometimes when you are working out a formula to cure some of the problems afflicting us, it might require some conversations so that we come out with a durable framework.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: He is suggesting two weeks after receiving the report.

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Two weeks after the 11th is too far because all those items that the hon. Prime Minister is enumerating are not for us. We shall give the Executive one week, so that we are back here on Tuesday, 19th September at 2 O’clock. If that is acceptable, dear colleagues, then we can hold our fire until that time, and the question can be put. 

THE SPEAKER: Is that agreed? One week after receiving the report of the Auditor General?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2000/2001.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES  (Mr. Kajara Aston): Mr. Speaker, the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandate Committees to examine Government recurrent and capital expenditures and to make recommendations on them for general debate in the House.  

The Sessional Committee on Natural Resources, in fulfilling its mandate, discussed policy statements with the budgetary allocation submitted to it by the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.  

The Committee held a series of consultative meetings with Ministers and officials of the Ministries aforesaid and their related autonomous institutions, together with their support staff. The Committee reviewed other documents supplied by the Ministries in order to supplement the information given in the policy statement.  

The Committee also held its own internal consultations and reviewed facts at hand in order to reach consensus. Observations and recommendations were made by the Committee after reaching a consensus and are contained in this report. 

The Committee is very grateful to all those who assisted it in making this report. 

Vote 029 on page one of the report, number 2.0, outlays the structure of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 

2.1 outlines the mandate of the Ministry, which is to promote, develop and safeguard and manage the rational and sustainable utilisation of energy and mineral resources for social and economic development.  

In the energy sector, the Committee was informed that Government's overall policy objectives are to improve the quality and quantity of energy supply through appropriate sector reforms, and establishment of an enabling legislation. Also, the promotion of efficient utilisation of energy resources as well as execution of rural electrification programmes. The policy is to promote participation of the private sector in the development of both conventional and renewable energy resources and to maximize opportunities for export of power once the internal demand has been adequately met.  

In the implementation of the power sector reform, the Committee was informed that the Electricity Bill was tabled and enacted into law on 31st October 1999.  In effect, the law removed UEB monopoly in the electricity industry. It also established the Electricity Regulatory Authority to license and regulate participants in the electricity industry.  The Regulatory Authority was established and members of the Authority are now in place. 

The Committee observed that the Ministry is targeting specialised market with big investments while allocating concessions and concessionaires.  These concessions are advertised in journals, on the Internet, and in other international media. The Committee recommends that adverts be included in the local media to promote openness and competition as per the Electricity Act, and also to give local investors, who would be interested, a chance to compete for these investments. Presentation should be made to local investors on the unbundling of the Uganda Electricity Board.  

On independent power producers, we were informed that negotiations between AES Nile power and the Ministry, for the development of the 250 megawatts power at Bujagali, were concluded. The company was granted a license for the generation and sell of electricity from the power plant. The company is now pursuing matters of land compensation and financial closure. Actual construction is expected to begin in April 2001, and commercial production is expected to start in the year 2004.   

It was noted that section 40 of the Electricity Act permits issuance of more than one license, after fulfilling the obligations and the previous license. So, first produce the power, and then get a license to sell. It was noted, however, that AES was offered a generation and sale license. The Committee was informed that the Attorney General scrutinised the agreement and license before issue, and gave a go ahead for the licenses to be issued. 

The Committee further noted that monitoring of the implementation of the agreement is by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development while commercial transactions are to be monitored by the Electricity Regulatory Authority. The Committee, therefore, appeals to the Government to perform all its obligations to ensure that AES accomplishes financial closure by December 2000 as scheduled.  The Committee further recommends that strict monitoring of the terms of AES agreements be done to ensure that work starts as per schedule or else another competent company be licensed to generate power if AES fails to achieve the financial closure by that date. The survey, valuation, and payment of compensation of land acquired by AES should also be done in a timely manner.  

Regarding the Norpak Power Project, the Committee was informed that it was not possible to conclude negotiations with Norpak for the development of Karuma Hydro Electric Project. External financiers of independent power producers’ projects insisted that they would only extend debt financing to one project at a time. 

The base case scenario for both domestic and export demand showed that Bujagali and Karuma could not be commissioned at the same time as this would create a surplus of l68 megawatts. However, if the projected regional demand could be translated into export sales by 2004, both projects could be commissioned by that time.  

We were further informed that negotiations with Norpak Power Limited for the development of Karuma project were underway. The Committee noted that Bujagali and Karuma may create a surplus of 168 MW if commissioned in 2004. But we recommend that Government hasten export deals with Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda to ensure that sufficient demand for power is generated, especially if Karuma starts production.

Kakira Co-generation Plant: 
The Committee was informed that Kakira Sugar Works gave Government a feasibility study report for a co-generation plant of 30 MW in October 1998. The Government’s technical team reviewed the feasibility study report for the plant and found out that the tariff was between US cents 8-9/KWh which was too high. The team also found out that the capacity based power purchase modality, which is different from the modality for power purchase agreements with other small generators, was unfavourable to Government.  

We were further informed that several meetings between Kakira management and Government have been held to resolve the outstanding issues on the power price, structuring of the phases of the implementation of the project, and the Government guarantee. No consensus has been reached but negotiations are ongoing. 

We were further informed that meetings between Kakira Power Company, the Ministry, and the World Bank have taken place with AFFREI (African Fast Rural Electrification Initiative) to discuss the project financing, structuring and the power price. Under this management, AFFREI would extend a Global Environmental Facility (GEF) grant to Kakira Power Company to partly finance the project, which would have the effect of reducing the tariff. 

It was observed that power from Kakira would provide an alternative form of energy and clear the environment of bagasse, which is hazardous to the environment. That is so because the bulk of power in Uganda is hydro, and Kakira would be an alternative in the event of failure of hydropower generation. The Committee, therefore, recommends and urges the Ministry to hasten negotiations with Kakira Sugar Works with a view of reaching a consensus so as to enable the company start the process of power generation.  

On Paidha Mini-Hydro Power Station, the Committee was informed that the project is part of the broad West Nile Rural Electrification Programme, which involves construction of the power plant, transmission lines from Paidha to Nebbi, Arua, Koboko and from Nebbi to Pakwach.  The power plant is to be constructed on Build, Own and Operate (BOO) basis by the private sector, while the transmission network will be built by Government and leased out to the developer.  

A request for expression of interest to develop the project has already been issued. Evaluation of bids, negotiations with the winning bidder and mobilisation will be achieved by June 2001, and construction will start by July 2001 for a period of one and a half years.  The project has been delayed due to lack of funds, but we are informed that part of it is to be implemented under the Rural Electrification Programme.  

The Committee observed that year after year, promises are made about the project but not much is achieved. The Committee strongly recommends that work on the Paidha Mini-Hydro Power Station be accelerated, since it would enhance economic and social development of the West Nile region. 

On the Owen Falls Extension Project, the Committee was informed that the installation of unit 11 was completed and it was commissioned on 19th May 2000 and renamed Kiira Power Station (KPS). Unit 12 at the station is expected to be commissioned this month. Repair works and strengthening of the Owen Falls Dam has commenced.  

The Committee observed that there is still a lot of power failure, even after Unit 11 was completed. It, therefore, recommends that all technical problems with the machines should be handled as soon as possible in order to achieve the maximum output 40 MW that were envisaged.  

On Rural Electrification, the Committee was informed that a Draft holistic Energy Policy and the Draft Rural Electrification strategy and implementation plan has been prepared. The ten-year document will be submitted to Cabinet for approval during the first quarter of this financial year. 

We were further informed that the project concept document for the Energy for Rural Transformation (ERT) was compiled and approved by the World Bank management and the GEF Council.  

During the financial year, the Ministry continued with the implementation of rural electrification programmes, which included the Uganda Photovoltaic Pilot for Rural Electrification (UPPRE), and grid extension.  

Uganda Electricity Board carried out the refurbishment of five major sub-stations, namely, Lugogo, Mutundwe, Kampala North, Nalubale (Owen Falls) and Tororo. Rural electrification lines were constructed in Mukono, Hoima, Jinja, Kamuli, Masaka, and Kyotera. And other similar projects are to be embarked on in Apac, Lira, Masindi and Kabarole districts were tendered.  

We were informed that, in the current financial year, the Ministry has targeted to carry out the following activities in the energy sector: implementation of the photovoltaic pilot project for rural electrification, power sector reform, and also to carry out rural electrification and construction of Paidha Mini-Hydro Project. In particular, the Committee was informed that the following rural electrification programmes will be constructed and the Ministry is to carry out planning and procurement of project funds to execute the following 33 kV lines: 
    • Apac-Masindi 
    • Rugombe-Kyenjojo 
    • Mbirizi-Ssembabule-Bukomansimbi 
    • Corner Kilak-Kalongo-Kotido 
    • Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto 
    • Nebbi-Arua-Koboko and Nebbi-Pakwach 
    • Soroti-Lira via Katakwi and Soroti-Ngariam 
    • Bubulo-Lwakhaka 
    • Kakumiro-Kibaale 
    • Hoima-Nyantonzi-Kinyara and 
    • Several other local networks countrywide.  

On grid extension, the Ministry informed us that the following 33 kV sub-transmission lines were constructed under JICA: 
    • Jinja-Budondo-Mbulamuti 
    • Jinja-Kayunga-Bbaale 
    • Hoima-Munteme-Wabigalo-Migera.  

Works at Kayunga were finalised and the sub-station was commissioned in April 2000. The booster station in Hoima was commissioned in December 1999. New sub-stations were installed in Njeru, Wabigalo and Hoima during the first quarter of the year 2000.  

The Committee noted that the criteria of considering the economic capacity to pay for power while connecting power to the rural areas is not fair. The Committee noted that power is a necessity for social and economic development.  Poor areas will remain without power, yet availability of power could improve their economic well being. The Committee recommends that finances be sourced to reduce costs in power provision.  

It was observed that promises have been made to construct lines every year but not much has been accomplished towards rural electrification. The Ministry assured the Committee that commitment has been confirmed for the lines outlined above and other rural schemes. The Committee would like to see work plans for these lines and implementations should start as soon as possible. It is further recommended that the Ministry embark on rural electrification for the whole country as soon as it is possible   

On the Uganda Photovoltaic Pilot Project for Rural Electrification, the Committee was informed that, during the Financial Year, the Project finalised agreements with financial institutions to lend funds for solar PV dissemination and embarked on a national public awareness campaign. Three companies have received loans from Century Rural Development Bank. Solar PV vending outlets have been opened in the pilot areas, three in Mbarara and three in Mbale. So far, 78 systems have been installed in the areas (purchased on cash basis) as a result of the public awareness, which had been launched by the Ministry.  

The Committee was not satisfied with the implementation of the photovoltaic project on the ground. Management problems have been raised. The Committee has asked the Ministry to explain areas of mismanagement of this project. But, because of the time constraint when considering the policy statement, the Committee intends to pursue the project in detail to ensure that it works well and any obstacles are removed. 

The Committee recommends that taxes be waived on alternative sources of energy like solar. And money should be availed for related activities. 

The Committee supports the intentions of the Ministry to have a network of electricity supply throughout the country that is integrated. And we support the use of solar panels to integrate the poor peasants, noting that this is a way forward in the rural electrification programme.  

Uganda Electricity Board: 
The committee was informed that UEB has been undertaking internal reforms, which addressed, among other things, the establishment of a new management team, reduction in system losses, improved revenue collection and establishment of the new customer billing system.

The above reforms have enabled UEB to pay Government a total of Shs. 5.4 billion in debt service, and no subsidy was received from Government, unlike in 1998 where Shs. 13 billion was received from Government as subsidy towards UEB operations. The Committee, however, expressed concern about the tendering for contracts and the resignation and recruitment of staff at UEB. It was recommended that open and straightforward policies be used in the reform process.  

On the divestiture of UEB, the Committee was informed that preparation for the divestiture of UEB distribution and generation assets was embarked on and the exercise was expected to end in May 2001. UEB is to be unbundled into separated generation, transmission and distribution businesses. Operation of the generation and distribution business will be privatised via long term concessions. The transmission company will remain in the public sector.   

We were further informed that existing assets will remain under public ownership while a private firm is granted the right to operate them for a fixed period, at the end of that period the asset will revert back to Government.  The Regulatory Authority will licence and set tariffs and service standards in the sector, in a manner that protects consumer interests while permitting the private operator to make a return on its investment.  

It was observed that the Regulatory Authority has a major role to play in the sector. The Committee recommends that fair play be exercised in awarding concessions, and that the Electricity Act should be strictly complied with if we are to achieve the above objectives.  

On asset valuation, the Committee was interested in establishing methods of asset valuation to be applied to the Uganda Electricity Board. The Ministry clarified that, first, an engineering based depreciated cost valuation will be used to re-value UEB’s existing assets and prepare the opening balance sheets for its successor companies. Thereafter, a business-going valuation will be used as the basis for decisions on investment requirements and tariff structure.

The Committee observed that Government lost a lot of money in the previous privatisation process. Government properties have been sold at non-market prices. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a careful and profitable system be used in the sale of the assets of UEB. Furthermore, the proceeds should be well utilised, presumably in promotion of rural electrification. 

On payment of workers’ terminal benefits, we were interested in establishing the arrangements for paying off UEB workers. We were informed that the IDA Privatisation and Utility Sector Reform Credit, worth $ 14 million, is awaiting Parliamentary approval for settlement of public enterprise and employee terminal benefits. Part of the proceeds of the privatisation and Utility Sector Reform Credit will be applied to UEB workers’ terminal benefits in addition to other sources such as proceeds from the divestiture of the non-core assets of UEB.  

It was observed that UEB, and the country as a whole, are in big debt. UEB loan portfolio by the end of 1999 stood at Shs. 43.7 billion. The Committee was informed that most of this money has gone into the rehabilitation of Nalubale Power Station and the new Kiira Power Station. Hon. Members, this is were SEITCO was involved. I think that is part of the big debt.  We were also informed that the loans have investments with tangible results on the grounds, bearing in mind that the energy sector has not had significant investment or growth since 1954. 

Petroleum Supplies and Distribution: 
On the Oil Pipeline Extension Project from Kenya, the Committee was informed that a feasibility study for extension of the Kenya oil product pipeline from Eldoret to Kampala has been completed. Uganda and Kenya are looking for funds to put together a project promotional document to be used to invite and negotiate concessions with interested developers.  

The Committee called upon the Ministry to hasten work on the pipeline, since it will reduce the Kenya corridor transportation costs and eliminate pilferage, including smuggling. The Ministry has been urged to look closely at the cost of the pipeline extension to ensure that the cost is worth the benefit Ugandans will derive after completion. 

On the monitoring of petroleum products, the Committee noted that the Ministry was involved in monitoring downstream petroleum industry operations. It included imports, distribution prices, quality, safety, and environment protection. The Ministry carried out a review of performance under the liberalisation policy, which led to a review of the legal and regulatory framework. 

We are informed that that a new Petroleum (Supplies and Distribution) Bill has been prepared to strengthen the monitoring of the sub-sector. The new Act will impose strict reporting obligations on the companies, which will enable Government to monitor the industry more efficiently. 

The Committee was informed that 17 oil companies have been licensed and 14 have commenced business. This has been done to encourage competition in the market and eventually lower oil prices. A system of marking fuel with a chemical (bio coding) has been put in place as a way of reducing fuel smuggling in the country. 

The Committee was concerned that oil prices are too high and are raising every other day. Oil companies are making a profit margin, and according to statistics provided by the Ministry, by January 1999, oil companies in Uganda were making a profit margin of U. Shs. 233 per litre. At the same time, in Kenya the price was worth U.Shs 119 per litre, in Rwanda it was worth U.Shs 55 per litre, and in Tanzania it was worth U.Shs 80 per litre. The Committee noted that the profit margins were disproportionately high compared to neighbouring countries.

We also noted that the taxation levels were incomparable with our neighbouring countries. They unmanageable and have played a role in the high price of petroleum products. We urge Government to endeavour to establish a wide tax base in order to reduce tax on fuel.

The Committee observed that smuggling had reduced considerably, and that petrol stations, especially in the eastern region, which had closed down due to smuggling, have now re-opened. This should have had a bearing on the price of petrol. However, this has not been the case due to exploitation by the oil companies. 

The Committee noted that the licensing of oil companies does not have a big effect on the price, since small companies are being bought out by big ones. For example Shell has acquired Agip, while Kobil/Kenol has acquired Galana Uganda Limited.  

It was observed that the existing regulatory and institutional framework is too weak in that sector. The Ministry has no legal powers to intervene and order price reduction. The Committee recommends that new legislative and institutional reforms be implemented, and that a fair trade and anti-trust law should be formulated. The proposed new petroleum supply law, which has provisions for the open and competitive petroleum market, should be hastened. It is further recommended that the Ministry should, in the new law, look into the aspect of regulation of prices, which has a big bearing on the performance of the national economy.

In the petroleum sector, the Committee was informed that activities were limited by several external and local factors, like low oil prices worldwide, insecurity in the prospective areas and inadequate funding. Consequently, the Ministry carried out limited geological and geophysical surveys in the Pakwach region. Promotion of unlicensed areas was also carried out. Heritage Oil and Gas, the licence holder for the Semiliki Basin, continued with preparations for the drilling programme. In the current Financial Year, work in petroleum exploration will focus on drilling of an exploration well by Heritage Oil and Gas and monitoring and regulating the work to be carried out by Heritage Oil and Gas. It will also focus on completion of geological and geophysical surveys of the Pakwach Basin, commencement of surveys in the Rhino Camp Basin, and promotion of the unlicensed exploration acreage. 

It was observed that Uganda would reduce reliance on imported oil, and in the long run, earn foreign exchange if oil exploration is hastened. This would boost the national economy and help in poverty eradication.  

The Committee recommends that Government mobilise financial resources to carry out exploration with minimum delay. Incentives for specialised staff should also be addressed to reduce labour turnover in the Ministry.

The Committee further recommends that Government should work towards eradication of insecurity in the exploration areas, especially the Semiliki Basin.

In the mineral sector, the Committee learnt that the draft Mineral Policy was formulated and the Mining Act was reviewed. Preparations have been made to hold a stakeholders' consultative forum. The forum will be held in August this year, and thereafter, both the draft Policy and Mining Bill, 2000 will be finalised. A request to the World Bank to fund the mineral investment promotional drive package was renewed and received with a favourable response from the bank. We were told that a total of 121 mineral rights were issued and 34 exclusive prospecting licences were issued, among others.  

We were further told that preparations for vermiculite and phosphate mining at Namekhara and then at Busumbu in Mbale District by Canmin Ltd of Canada, made good progress. Negotiations were started with the Rhodin Chemie consortium for an agreement to mine and process phosphate at Sukuru in Tororo District, after Cabinet had approved the developer's proposal.

On the whole, the Committee was informed that mineral production and export increased significantly. Minerals produced were worth Shs. 24.28 billion in 1999 as compared to Shs. 12.52 billion in 1998. The mineral exports increased from Shs. 59.9 billion in 1998 to Shs. 77.05 billion in 1999. We were further informed that Busitema Mining Company plans to establish an underground gold mine by the end of the year 2000 after sinking a shaft of 175 ft in Tiira

We were also informed that a new earthquake monitoring station was constructed in Kyahi in Mbarara District. The station has enhanced the country's capacity in detection of earthquakes.

On Kilembe Mines, we were informed that the company continues to keep the mine under care and maintenance. New income generating activities like the foundry, the lime works, the pole treatment plant and estate management were maintained.  We were further informed that the strategy is now to develop the mine as a cobalt producer. Those underground areas, which are uneconomic, will be closed after an environmental impact assessment has been carried out.

On Kasese Cobalt Project, we were told that good progress has been made and completion of the cobalt processing plant at Kasese was complete. It started production in July 1999, and a 10.5 MW hydropower plant to support the project on River Mubuku was also completed. By the end of the Financial Year, the Cobalt Company had produced 328.02 tons of cobalt metal and exported 213.15 tons, although both the cobalt plant and hydropower plant experienced some mechanical breakdown. We were informed that at the national level, the project will be injecting $20 million per year into the economy, and over 300 jobs have already been created by the new industry.

The major constraint reported in the mining industry was lack of funding and shortage of qualified professional staff in some key areas like mining engineering. As a result, monitoring, supervision and inspection of field activities was grossly affected. Lack of modern equipment, especially in laboratories, is another major constraint.  However, efforts have been made to solicit funding from IDA to alleviate the situation.

During the current financial year, the Ministry intends to put in place a reviewed Mining Act and a new Mineral Policy, in addition to providing extension services to small scale miners. They also intend to monitor mineral exploration and mining activities, negotiate a financing package for carrying out extensive mineral exploration promotion, renovate the departmental infrastructures, and carry out capacity building.  

The Committee observed that limited field inspection was carried out due to inadequate funding and shortage of manpower in the inspectorate division. Only 44 field inspections, amounting to 56 days, were effected by the inspectorate staff!

The Committee recommends that monitoring be intensified, to halt the plunder of the country’s resources. Branch Energy withdrew from the country claiming they did not find existence of economically viable deposits.  

The Committee observed that the sector still lacks a legal framework. It recommends that the draft Mineral Policy and Mining Bill be finalised and presented to Parliament with minimum delay.

In regard to Kasese Cobalt Company, the Committee observed that the post of Assistant General Manager, who would be in charge of Personnel and Finance, should be held by Ugandans under the agreement with the KCCL, since Government owns 20 per cent shares in the company.
The Committee recommends that Government be more vigilant in monitoring the Company, to protect the Government interests, and the above post should be filled by Ugandans as soon as possible.

The Committee further observes that a lot of mineral deposits worth a lot of money lie unexploited.  It is therefore recommends that Government intensifies its mineral investment promotional drive to lure investors into the sector.

Regarding the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, for the financial provisions for the year 2000 and 2001 Budget, I seek your approval for the Ministry’s Budget for the year 2000/2001 as follows:
Recurrent Estimates - Shs.2,459,142,000 
Development Estimates - Shs. 38,186,894,000, of which Shs. 19,219,778,000 is for actual work and Shs. 18,967,116,000 is for taxes. 
And we also seek donor contribution of US $14,064,000.

I now move to the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, which is Vote 012.

The structure of the Ministry is outlined in 1, and its mandate is outlined in 1.1 on page 18. It was noted that the mission of the Ministry has been reduced to a mere slogan. The country’s natural resources are being misused and mismanaged. Forests are being depleted heavily, water resources are being polluted, wetlands are being defiled, and soils are exposed to erosion due to mismanagement without sound, well considered policies on the ground, to say the least.

The Committee recommends that the country’s natural resources be put to proper use and be efficiently managed. Trees and all forms of forest cover are of great importance in the maintenance of the soils and silting of water sources, and it plays a big role on the climate.  It was noted that Uganda is a country heavily endowed with natural resources, which should be well managed and put to good use for the benefit of the Ugandan population.

The Committee recommends that Uganda’s soils, which have been degraded and eroded, be restored by combined efforts of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, and the Ministry concerned with Natural Resources.

In the water sector, the activities are implemented by two central institutions, the Directorate of Water Development (DWD) and National Water and Sewerage Corporation.  It was noted that the DWD is a Government’s technical arm in the sector. Its mandate is to manage and develop the water sources in Uganda in an integrated and sustainable manner, in order to provide water of adequate quality and quantity for all social and economic needs for the present and future generations. 

The sector objective and target, in regard to domestic water supply, is to achieve sustainable water supply and sanitation facilities, based on management responsibility and ownership by the users. This should be within easy reach of 95 per cent of the rural population, by the year 2015, with an 80 to 90 per cent effective use and functionality of facilities, and 100 per cent of the urban population by the year 2010. 

It was noted that in the financial year 1999/2000, water coverage increased from 47 per cent to 49 per cent in rural areas, with approximately 180,000 gaining access to new water sources. 

It was further noted that urban water coverage increased from 65 per cent to 68 per cent during the last financial year. Th Directorate received Shs. 0.755 billion of the recurrent budget and Shs. 13.067 billion of the counterpart development budgets, which represented 88 and 86 per cent respectively of the approved funds. 

Donor resources approved for the Directorate amounted to $56.6 million of which 75 per cent was received and utilised. The bulk of the donor funds were in form of grants, managed through projects at District or regional levels.

The Committee observed that the sector objectives and targets of the Directorate were set, way back in 1992, and were aimed at achieving 100 per cent water coverage by the year 2000. It was estimated that the urban sub- sector required approximately $50 million per annum from 1995 to 2000 in order to achieve its target of 100 per cent coverage. The Committee noted that targets have now been changed to 100 per cent coverage by the year 2010, and basing on the previous performance, it is not certain that the set targets will be achieved.

The Committee recommends that attainable targets be set by the Directorate to prevent it from being a mere rhetoric, raising the expectations of the population in vain.

On the status of funds from the Ministry, it was noted that a total of Shs. 5,195,014,666 were bank balances as of 30th June 2000. Out of this, Shs. 2,472,306,361 was meant for sanitation in primary schools. It came to the attention of the Committee that about Shs. 1.6 billion was not accounted for by 33 districts countrywide, on the sanitation in primary schools’ project. Approximately 1 billion shillings was committed to water for production on the ongoing construction of dams in Karamoja. The Ministry further explained that the balances at the close of the financial year was money already committed to projects, with contracts signed, and are on going country wide.

The Committee noted that failure by districts to provide accountability is a sign of weakness in the Government system. There is lack of capacity at district levels and the centre is not doing enough to supervise and offer technical support and backup to the districts. 

It was further observed that projects are normally under-funded by the Ministry if they show inability to utilise their budgetary provisions, thus penalising the population for failures that are not theirs. The Committee recommends that DWD charts out means of utilising all money allocated by the end of the Financial Year, to enable the Ministry accomplish all programmes that are budgeted for.  

On the water coverage, the Committee was informed that a total of 687,000 people gained access to safe water under the rural water programmes. There was an estimated three percent increase in coverage. The Ministry utilised more funding to provide services in urban and rural growth centres. 

The Committee noted that there were some imbalances in the distribution of water funding at national level.  Whereas it is imperative that Government should equitably avail safe water to the whole country, some areas are provided with more while others are facing a serious shortage of water for livestock, production and consumption. Until recently, Karamoja was such a region. 

The Ministry assured the Committee that it is doing all it can to ensure equity in water distribution, and pledged to systematically phase out existing imbalances and inequalities. The Committee was furnished with criteria for allocation of funds to districts, among which are:
-Population of the district, 
-Policy of ‘some for all and not more for some’
-Targeting of unserved communities and prioritising them
-Preference districts with low service coverage and drought prone areas; and 
    • Water technology mix/options for particular districts, which depend on water resources endowment, including quantity, quality and ease of extraction.
In addition, regional representation was taken into account.

The Committee was given documentary evidence to show the distribution of private projects and funding district by district, both from donor funds and allocations of district water development and other grants.

The Committee noted the steps taken by Government and recommends that it addresses imbalances in water provision. It should also scientifically spread out investment in the water sector, taking into account the population, deficiencies in the districts, sizes of the districts, and also taking stock of the available water resources and the needs of the population. These criteria should be disseminated and streamlined to be understood by every stakeholder. It was further recommended that DWD employ an integrated approach for all donor funds and funds from Government grants, to arrive at realistic quarters to allocate to districts.

On the problem of boreholes, it was observed that although boreholes are a major source of water in rural areas, they provide inadequate services to the people.  In many parts of the country, a large percentage of the boreholes are non-functional. These bore holes only provide water during the rainy season and are dry during the dry season. These boreholes are of poor quality and very expensive to repair.

The Ministry was of the view that poor performance of boreholes is as a result of non-maintenance by user communities. The Ministry informed the Committee that Government opted to standardise pumps to minimise operation and maintenance costs, including availability and easy access of spare parts.

The Committee recommends that the Ministry builds local capacity to ensure that boreholes are maintained at local level. We further recommended that districts reinstate and create borehole maintenance units with the assistance of the Ministry. It was further recommended that alternative and cheaper safe water sources be encouraged. This includes spring protection, shallow wells, gravity flow schemes and rainwater harvesting, and where possible, piped water systems should be developed to address industrial and agro-processing, in line with the plan for agricultural modernisation (PAM).

On silting and drying of water bodies, it was observed that Rivers Kagera, Kyoga, Malaba and other water sources such as valley dams and tanks all over the country are silting and could cause a catastrophe in the future. The rivers actually seem to be drying off and the water level of Lake Victoria has gone down, and is likely to affect power generation projects and other economic activities along the lake and the River Nile. 

The Committee was informed that these rivers are not drying, but are carrying a lot of sediment load, which is deposited as silt. The Committee was assured that this is a normal phenomenon for all rivers, which have traversed long distances through agricultural and hilly landscapes, and that the effects of El Nino and La Nino are at play, resulting into such reductions.   

The Committee recommends that trans-boundary collaboration be intensified to control the problem, since the Ministry lacks the necessary funds to implement scientifically proven mitigation measures. The Committee further recommends that catchment areas of Lake Victoria and the River Nile basin be managed in a scientific and environmentally friendly manner to avert a future catastrophe and pollution of the environment.  

On the funds for water for production and livestock, the Committee raised the issue of funds, which were allocated to sub-counties to avail water for livestock. That is the five million per sub-county. We were informed that funds totalling Shs.258 million were transferred from Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. The money is to cater for Mabira and Kodhukulu dams, among others, and other small tanks per sub-county. 

We were further informed that there was a cheque of Shs .251 million, which was released by the Ministry of Finance on June 28th 2000.  This was for sub-counties, but due to technical errors on the cheque, it has not been cashed as yet. This is meant to cover water provision in 49 selected sub-counties.  

The Committee was concerned that money for sub-counties has been in transit for the last two years. The Ministry should have been able to follow up this money from the Ministry of Agriculture. The Committee recommends that the Ministry immediately disburses this money, and since the dams require a lot of money, attention should go to sub-counties as earlier promised. 

On the dams countrywide, the Committee observed that other than Karamoja, there were limited plans to spread water dams throughout the country. We were informed that a supplementary budget, amounting to Shs 2.8 billion, is planned for eight reservoirs at a cost of Shs. 350 million each, to mitigate drought in the cattle corridor.  The Committee was informed that 15 reservoirs previously started by the Ministry of Agriculture would be completed, though there is no funding in the current budget.   

The Committee observed that constructing only eight reservoirs and calling them ‘countrywide’ was not enough, in view of the water needs upcountry. The Committee recommends that smaller dams, which cost less, should be provided to increase the national coverage of these dams.  

On water for production, it was noted that very little is said about it in the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment Policy Statement. Surprisingly, from the Ministry of Agriculture policy statement, it appears that they are also involved in managing water for production and livestock. In fact, the Ministry of Agriculture officials informed the Committee that water for production is still under Ministry of Agriculture and only a small component was transferred to the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment.

The Committee observed that there is an inter-ministerial conflict in the handling of water for livestock and/or production. Both Ministries claim the project. Livestock have suffered due to this confusion and very little has been done to improve the situation. The transfer of the project from Ministry of Agriculture to Ministry of Water was recommended by Parliament due to the inefficiency that was in Ministry of Agriculture, but the situation has not improved.

The Committee recommends that a clear and concise program for handling water for production be evolved and both the Ministry of Agriculture and that of Water meet and discuss the issue and come out with a lasting solution. It was further recommended that the policy on water for production be made quickly.

Proposed Programmes for the year 2000/2001: 
On the District Water and Sanitation Development Grant, the Committee was informed that, new conditional district water development grants would be introduced. The funds will be released directly to the districts. Shs. 21 billion is earmarked for water and sanitation provisions in the rural areas and small towns/rural growth centres with a population of less than 5000 people.

The Committee observed that, although provision of technical guidance and technical back-stopping to local governments is a key function of the Ministry, there is inadequate manpower and funding at the local governments levels to plan, implement and manage water and sanitation activities. The Committee recommends that capacity be built at the districts. Secondly, that the centre be more vigilant in supervision and monitoring of district activities, if the budgeted Shs. 21 billion is to be put to good use by the districts.

On the Small Towns Projects, we were informed that eight piped water systems for the towns of Luwero, Lugazi, Busia, Malaba, Lyantonde, Kyotera, Rukungiri and Ntungamo would be completed and commissioned. In this project, management of the water will be by private operators.  Private companies will be offered leases or concessions for billing, extension and distribution of water.

We were further informed that commercialising of water services is part of the sector reform policy. There has been a lot of political interference and technical incapability associated with water associations for towns, which were completed by DWD as mentioned above. Consequent to mismanagement, the water systems are not maintained causing donors who funded the projects and the Government to worry. The Arua plant had been closed but now has been revamped by the private sector. This is as an example.

The Committee was informed that the water sector reform study will map out a clear strategy and a way forward on the management and maintenance of the existing and future water schemes.

It was observed that water delivery is a specialised task with a social mission. It should not be turned into a profit-making venture at the expense of the population. It was noted that, involving the private sector should be systematic, phasing them into the system with intensive training in maintenance and management of the water systems.

The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Water should exercise openness, transparency and fair play in awarding of tenders and concessions. There should be an open tender system and bidding for these facilities to attract competition and performance and guard against influence peddling.

The Committee notes that a water sector reform study is under-way. In view of the uncertainties and concerns raised, the Committee strongly recommends that the awards on concessions and leases for management and maintenance of the new water schemes, completed and due to be completed by the Department of Water and given to private operators, should wait for the outcome of the reform study. The study will pave way for an organised and transparent management, its maintenance, together with the attendant regulation on pricing of water to make it affordable.

On National Water and Sewerage Corporation, the company is a Government institution that aims at providing water supply and sewerage services at affordable prices so as to enhance public health, while contributing to national development.

The National Water and Sewerage Corporation operates in 12 towns, and they are mentioned in the report. The Committee was informed that service coverage for water supply in the National Water and Sewerage Corporation areas of operation has increased by 4 per cent in the new Financial Year.

The Achievements of National Water Sewerage Corporation as outlined in 3.1, include: 
    • Extension of water supply mains by 45 kms 
    • 110 water kiosks erected, especially in peri-urban areas. 
    • Reduction of staff from 1800 to 1267. 
    • Reduction of water losses by 7 per cent from 49 to 42 per cent.  
    • Attainment of 4800 new connections 
    • Attainment of revenue levels, amounting to Shs.22.1 billion as at March 2000, and this is projected to Shs.28 billion as at the end of June 2000.  
    • Metered all subscribers in Jinja, Masaka, Lira, Gulu, Kasese, Tororo, Fortportal and Namasuba areas; and  
    • Implemented a successful reconnection policy that reduced suppressed accounts from 17,873 to 15,747.

The Committee noted that although there was an improvement in the water supply, the sewerage sector is stagnant and poses a grave risk to the health of the population. Statistics provided by the corporation revealed that, while Kampala has 50 per cent service of water, it has only 8 per cent for sewerage. Jinja has 68 per cent coverage of water services and 28 per cent on sewerage. Kasese has 56 per cent of its population served with water and 0 per cent for sewerage. Fortportal has 65 per cent of its people served with water and 1 per cent on sewerage.  Gulu has 48 per cent water coverage and only 3 per cent sewerage coverage. Tororo has 60 per cent water coverage and 7 per cent for sewerage. Lira has 47 per cent for water and 2 per cent for sewerage. This is just representative of the districts that are covered by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation.   

The Committee noted that the country is trailing behind in the sewerage sector. The country is faced with such epidemics as cholera, diarrhoea, dysentery and other water borne diseases due to massive exposure of excreta and lack of sanitation and sewerage facilities.          

The Committee was informed that the problem is being addressed in the urban water and sector reform study. Furthermore, a Japanese grant is being sought to address the sewerage problem. The Committee recommends that all efforts should be made to upgrade sewerage systems across the country, and funds should be sourced to implement reform studies, instead of engaging in endless studies, which are never implemented.

National Water and Sewerage Corporation’s arrears, as at the end of June 2000 were Shs.29.2 billion. And all Government Ministries owe the Corporation Shs.8.2 billion. Departed Asians Property owes the company Shs.3 billion, and others owe the company Shs.18 billion.

The Committee observed that Government and the Departed Asians Board arrears account for 38 per cent of the Corporation's arrears. The Committee was informed that Government is committed to pay through debt swaps.   However, the Committee recommends that Government should set a good example to other debtors by paying the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. Besides, Government lends to National Water and Sewerage Corporation at commercial rates. They should therefore pay and clear their debts.

On VAT on water bills, the Committee was informed that Government has continued charging VAT on every invoice raised, whether or not the money was collected. As they give you an invoice, VAT is collected. It is recommended that VAT should be charged on actual payments, if any, to National Water and Sewerage Corporation and not on invoices raised, as this further burdens the Corporation. 

The Committee observed that most countries do not levy VAT on water. Kenya and Zambia are some of the examples.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government waives VAT on water. This will enable the Corporation to expand its operations and cover large areas thus availing safe water to the population. The Ministry of Finance is requested to take note.  

I will now move to the Land sector. The Committee was informed that Government’s major objective in the sector is sustainable development and livelihood security through effective land use, land tenure and land management.  That the objective is to be attained through the implementation of the Land Act (1998), the development of the national land policy, the district land policies and sector reforms.

The Committee observed that there is need for a national land use policy if any meaningful achievements in the sector are to be achieved.

On the implementation of the Land Act, we were informed that this is a lengthy process that requires heavy funding. The institutional and legal arrangements require creation of a decentralised system of administration consistent with the overall decentralisation policy of Government. Due to lack of funds, to date, a few district land offices are adequately staffed and members to district land boards have been appointed but are yet to be trained and facilitated.

The Ministry, however, accomplished the following despite the above mentioned problems:
    • District Land Boards have been set up
    • Sensitisation carried out
    • Training workshops conducted
    • Amendments to the Land Act are before Cabinet
    • Funds disseminated to 15 NGOs and 20 local governments
    • Land Regulations (2000) have been developed and are before Parliament
    • Draft rules of procedures for Tribunals to be passed to the Chief Justice; and
    • The Land Act implementation study is before Cabinet.

It was noted that the long awaited Land Act amendments have been before Cabinet for the last three months. The Committee observed that failure to implement the Land Act has greatly affected dispute management in several regions of the country. It is therefore, absurd to note that the Land Act amendments have been before Cabinet for three months! The Committee recommends that Government hasten work on these amendments. Currently, the two years offered to magistrates and local councils to handle land cases expired as of 2nd July, leaving a vacuum in land adjudication matters countrywide.

The Committee observed that the proposal by the Ministry to set up zonal tribunals, rather than a tribunal per district as an economic measure to ensure work within the existing budget is unconstitutional. The Committee strongly recommends that Government sources funding immediately to establish land tribunals as provided for in the Land Act.

Regarding the land fund, the Committee was informed that the land fund is to be operated by the land fund unit, which is not yet in place. Funds are awaited to make the land fund unit operational. The Committee observed that the land fund is paramount in the implementation of the Land Act. The Committee, therefore, recommends that money be sought to make the fund operational.

Point 4.3: Geodesy, Surveys and Mapping: 
That is on page 31. On this we observed that some districts do not have qualified surveyors. The Committee recommends that the Ministry provides technical advice, support and supervision as required by the Local Government Act. 

The Committee further noted that there are too many geographical maps published without clear sources. These maps are on the market. We were informed that the Ministry faces a lot of problems in the map production process. One of the major problems is the use of an old printing machine, which often breaks down. 

It was observed that the School of Survey Training and Mapping in Entebbe and the Meteorological School have been closed, yet they provided technical training for the sector. The schools were transferred to the Ministry of Education during the restructuring exercise and have since been abandoned, although they were supposed to be housed in Kyambogo Polytechnic. The Committee recommends that training in surveys, mapping and meteorology be re-instated to enable Government build capacity both in the department and in the districts.

On border surveys, the Committee was informed that the Uganda/Kenya border was surveyed by a Uganda/Kenya survey team. Demarcation of the Uganda/Tanzania border began, but has been stopped because the border is not properly defined on the ground. The Committee was informed that the present border is more than 300 meters inside Uganda, for a length of 150 kms and a total of 60 sq. kms. This problem has to be resolved by both countries before the Ministry can continue with identification of boundary marks.

The Committee noted that there is need to demarcate and survey the international borders of Uganda/Tanzania/Sudan/Rwanda and DRC in order to enable the nationals know their boundaries. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance funds the survey of international boundaries as a matter of urgency.

On inter-district borders, the Committee observed that for a long time, there have been some disagreements on the above issue. District councils should liase with the Department of Lands and the Ministry of Local Government to mark district borders, to avoid escalation of violence, especially between Mbale and Kapchorwa, Kabarole and Bundibugyo, Mbarara and Rakai, Nebbi and Gulu and so on. It also recommends that signposts should be placed at district boundaries along major roads.

On ranch restructuring, the Committee was informed that the basic restructuring of the ranches was done by the Ranches Restructuring Board, which handed in its report in 1997. Cabinet considered the report and approved it, and in January 2000, a ranches committee was appointed by the Vice President to complete the pending work.

The Committee recommends that the restructuring exercise be completed as quickly as possible and Government should quicken the issue of new titles to the ranchers and beneficiaries and overseeing the harmonious settlement of the farmers allocated in the scheme.

On the national land use plan, the Committee was informed that the physical planning functions were decentralised to the local authorities by the Local Government Act, 1997. The Ministry was however, left with initiating, formulating and reviewing national land policies, providing technical advice, and support and technical back stopping to local governments. It was also supposed to monitor and evaluate physical planning activities carried out by the local government. The Committee noted that plans in urban areas are not being adhered to, and it recommends that proper planning be a priority for the up-coming urban centres, to avoid a creation of slums and unplanned growth of towns.

It is further recommended that effective monitoring of planning activities country-wide are essential for maintenance of planning standards and ensuring conformity to the plans.

On the Condominium Law, it was noted that the law is basically a land law legislation, as it is related to property ownership. The Committee observed that the law would be better implemented under the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. The Committee recommends that the procedure of implementation of the law be reviewed.

In the environment sector, it is noted that environment cuts across all sectors of the economy and can cause negative trends in economic development if not properly managed. The need for proper management of the environment cannot be over emphasised.

The mission of Government in this sector is sustainable management of natural resources for poverty eradication and social economic development.

To achieve the above mission, there are four institutions under the Ministry that carry out activities in the environment sector, namely, the Forest Department, Meteorology Department, Wetland Division and NEMA.

In the Forestry Sector, the mission is to promote and ensure the rational and sustainable utilisation, development and effective management of forest resources of Uganda for environmental social economic development. The Committee observed that the department has got a long way to go to accomplish its mission. The Committee noted that, as revealed by the Select Committee on Forestry, the Department is involved in degazetting of forests, illegal pitsawing, misuse of funds, among others, besides the en-mass destruction and depletion of forests by the use of poor farming practices. The Committee recommends that the Ministry seriously looks into the matters raised by the Select Committee.  

On the formation of a Forest Authority, the Committee was informed that it was a Cabinet decision to divest the Department with a view of improving delivery of services, increasing efficiency and collecting revenue to finance its operations. The Committee noted that there is a proliferation of authorities by Government –(Interruption).

DR. BYARUHANGA PHILLIP: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The Committee did such a wonderful job in the sectors to which it was mandated, and the report was so well written, and it is so big, and it has already been circulated to all Members of the House. Given those facts, would it not be in order for the chairman to highlight only those points that he sees are very critical, so that we can move as fast as possible to expedite the process.  Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you are absolutely right.  But we shall take that into account next time, because he is about to finish.

MR. KAJARA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was wondering on what page the hon. Minister was. I am on 5.2 on page 34, and the report is about 39 pages.  

We raised concern on the future of the current Forestry Department after the Authority is formed. The Committee noted that, since Parliament already recommended formulation of the Forest Authority through the Select Committee, it should be accomplished.

On deforestation, the Committee noted that forests are being harvested without being replanted. The Ministry informed us that in 1993, all nursery workers and forest guards were retrenched and there is little funding for Forest Department activities in general.

The Committee observed that, apart from contributing to GDP directly, some contributions by the sector cannot be monetised. This includes contribution to weather, fuel, soils, et cetera. The Committee therefore, recommends that the department be better funded to accomplish its missions. The Ministry of Finance should provide money for human resource and logistics for effective and efficient service delivery of the department. It is further recommended that appropriation in aid should be reinvested into the sector to reduce donor dependency.

The Committee further recommends that forests under the private sector, wild Life Authority and Government reserves should be managed according to the Forest Act, in a cohesive manner, so as to avoid conflict and uncoordinated acts.

The National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) co-ordinates and monitors activities in the environment sector and integrates environmental concerns into the socio-economic activities at all levels in the country.

The Committee observed that NEMA has to closely link up with districts to efficiently co-ordinate, monitor and supervise activities in the environment sector. This has been aided by the presence of district environment officer. It is, however, sad to note that Kampala District, which is the centre of environmental abuse, has not recruited an environment officer. Further more, Government has not provided funds for recruitment of sub-county environment officers. The Committee recommends that action be taken against Kampala City Council for failure to recruit an environment officer in time. That Government should seek funds for sub-county environment officers, in order to increase levels of environmental awareness nation-wide, right from the grass roots.

On NEMA funding, we were informed that NEMA was not able to get a vote in this financial year, but managed to secure a programme under the Ministry. NEMA has only been given Shs.50 million under the programme as a recurrent budget and Shs. 500 million as development budget. They had asked for Shs.500 million for the recurrent budget and three billion shillings for the development budget.

The Committee was informed that the project under which NEMA has been funded over the last four years is ending at the close of June 2001. There are no funds for activities from January 2001.

The Committee observed that NEMA has been depending on donor funding for its sustenance. It recommends that Government provide NEMA with a Vote. Unless Government steps in and provides funding, the sustainability of NEMA will be highly questionable.

On soil degradation, for the past three years, the Committee has recommended that action be taken to control the use of polythene (buveera). The Ministry has continuously informed the Committee that there is a daft Cabinet paper on polythene, proposing various measures.  The Committee recommends that Government takes immediate steps to halt massive destruction of the environment by polythene (buveera). Immediate steps should be taken to stop the importation of polythene for packaging while production should be phased out completely.  

On wetlands, efforts by the Ministry in the sub-sector are concentrated on raising awareness and knowledge of and support for wetland conservation at all levels. In addition, the wetland programme has strengthened institutional and administrative structures, including institutional resource development.  

The Committee was, however, informed that the following problems have hindered the performance of the sub-sector:

    1. Lack of surveys and markings of wetlands.
    2. Inadequate institutional capacity and staffing.
    3. Weak enforcement of laws and policies.
    4. Lack of understanding of issues concerning wetland roles and functions.
    5. Lack of viable sustained alternatives to wetlands due to limited research and knowledge.  

It was noted, with satisfaction, that Government has upgraded the wetlands' programme to a status of being priority for poverty eradication and will draw its funding from the Poverty Action Fund (PAF). The Committee recommends that funds provided by Government be put to good use. Methods for conservation and sustainable use of wetlands that have been developed should be disseminated to end-users and implemented.

On meteorology, during the Financial Year, the department undertook activities to monitor the atmospheric environment, issue information, warnings and advisories regarding the events in the atmosphere, climate and weather to the public.  It also improved and upgraded the National Data Bank that supports climatic prediction and research in the key sectors of the economy. It upgraded, rehabilitated and equipped the meteorological service. And it also carried out professional and postgraduate training.

The Committee observed that the Ministry has been involved in preparing seasonal forecasts, which have been presented to Cabinet, to Parliament, and disseminated to the public through print and electronic media and through line Ministries. The Committee was informed that the weather forecasts were up to 70 percent accurate. The Committee recommends that Government improves funding to the department in order to improve weather monitoring, which has a bearing on the economy, on agriculture, water resources, transport, communication and tourism among others. 

In conclusion, hon. Members, I seek your approval of the Ministry's budget for the Financial Year 2000/2001 as follows: 
Recurrent estimates – Shs. 4,821,599,000
Appropriation in Aid – Shs. 1,182,000,000
Government of Uganda contribution – Shs. 33,034,082,000
Donor contribution - $71,987,700 equivalent to Shs. 116,620,074,000
Totalling to Shs. 149,654,156,000 
I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you.

(The full report of the Committee is to be found in Volume I, Sessional Committee Reports on the 2000/2001 Budgetary Proposals)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have received the report, which, as you know, has been well written and well presented. It is now up to you to debate it, and do not forget that there are no more "Ayes" on this. You must remember that.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I beg to be clarified. On page 8 of the report, item 2.7 on rural electrification, it is stated that there are plans to execute 33 kV lines for the several places mentioned. The final point says, "several local networks countrywide". Just for the purpose of emphasis and clarification, may I know from the chairman of the Committee whether Kaberamaido is included in this? For the last 22 years that particular area has not had electricity. It is a place with large infrastructure development. There are schools, there is a hospital, there are several other health centres, and there are ginneries. May I know if it has been included and categorised as 'several other local networks countrywide'?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to know whether or not you could allow specific time, so that this important paper is discussed. I guess as many people as possible could contribute. There has been a tendency in the past, when we begin debating, the first individuals have had a lot of time and later on those who could contribute to such a debate end up not even having the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: I thought this was my normal job, to make sure that as many Members of Parliament contribute to the subject. If I see that we are running out of time, I will know what to do. However, since he has raised the issue, let me advice you. We will give opportunity to those Members who are not on this Committee. Those who are on the Committee can be available to make clarifications and maybe give further information arising from the report.  I would rather that we allow those Members who are not Members of this Committee to spearhead the contributions.

Secondly, do not take what is too much for your plate.  Pick a few items and concentrate on that, because you can not speak on all those things. Otherwise, if all of us spoke on all of the issues, we would maybe end in December. So, I advise you to select issues that you consider very vital to you, your constituency or your Ministry and dwell on them. Do not take on everything because there are other people who also wish to contribute.

DR. NYEKO PEN’MOGI (Kilak county, Gulu): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will talk briefly on three or four topics. 

On rural electrification, I keep wondering. It looks like the Minister of Energy is not aware that we have rural areas in Gulu District, because Gulu is not mentioned anywhere. I ask the Minister, if possible, to at least include Gulu town as a rural area because there is no proper supply of electricity in Gulu town itself. Over weekends, if there is electricity in town, some people slaughter white chicken because it is very strange to have electricity in town on Saturdays and Sundays. This is a fact, because people start wondering what this is on a Saturday! People do not expect electricity. It is simply out! During examinations, Primary Leaving, O’ Level and A’ Level, there is absolutely no electricity.  There are major towns like Anaka and Atiak, which could get supply through Pabbo-Atiak up to Adjumani. These are not considered! So, I really request the Minister to at least put one or two towns in Gulu, under this several local networks countrywide, so that it is also reflected that there is a rural area in Gulu District.

On water supply, I see small towns’ projects here but again, there is nothing reflected in the north generally.  There had been water supply in western Uganda, gravity supply and very many other different aspects of water supply. There is also a water supply project in the eastern region but there is nothing in the north, absolutely nothing. There are major towns like Pabbo, with over 30,000/40,000 people camped in one place, but there is not even an effort from the Ministry to supply water in such areas. So, it becomes very difficult when, year after year, you see projects coming and budgets coming to Parliament but areas where they really need water are not even covered. Water is instead taken to areas that are already saturated with water projects. I think this is very unfair. 

On the environment, I think we shall talk and talk and we shall never solve the problem of environment. Somewhere, the report mentions lack of staff. It is true the department may lack staff, but even here in Kampala, you find people filling wetlands. Day in day out, they are filling the wetlands and putting up houses. What sort of staff are we talking about? If we are not serious about the environment, we should stop talking about environment, because we waste a lot of time for nothing.  It should not be a question of lack of staff, or lack of funds or as indicated somewhere, lack of understanding of issues concerning wetlands, roles and factors, weak enforcement of laws and other policies. You are talking of weak enforcement of laws, who should enforce these laws for us? Why make these laws if we can not enforce them? I think we need to be very serious.  

My major concern has been the neglect of Gulu District. I see this very clearly in projects like electrification. If the Minister was really serious, very many areas have already benefited from rural electrification whereas, in our area, even major towns themselves have nothing. It would be very easy to tap electricity from Apac through Pakwach up to West Nile, without even going through this Paidha Power Station. But we are being told to wait for Paidha and wait for the River Nyagak project. We have been waiting for River Nyagak year in year out, while it would have been easier and cheaper to come up with an alternative transmission line and reach those areas. Later on, when you build the Karuma generation station, you would just connect it and Pakwach/West Nile would be on the main bridge straight away. 
I thank the Committee for the good work.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Time allocation is five minutes. The bell will go at one minute to time.

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to support this motion and to thank the chairman and the Committee for a job well done. Since I do not have much time, I will concentrate on three points.  

On page 6, item 2.4, the Committee highlighted the progress that has been made on Paidha main hydropower extension. I note, with a lot of regret and concern, that again, the people of West Nile have been given a raw deal. A raw deal because Government had promised us that they were going to build this power station as a social investment for the people of the area.  But, looking at the report of the Committee, the last sentence on paragraph one reads, “the power plant is to be constructed on Build, Own and Operate (BOO) basis by the private sector while the transmission network will be built by Government and leased out to the developer.”  

My concern is again amplified by the budget provision. If you look at the recurrent budget estimates of the revenue and recurrent expenditure 2000/2001 on the last page, a provision has been made for p. 4, which is Nyagak/Paidha hydro power project, of 14.67 billion shillings. In the last financial year, a similar provision of 14.7 billion shillings was also made. It seems these provisions are just made to hoodwink those who read these books so that they say something is in the books. I would like the Minister, later on, to give justification for this.  

Why do you provide for the power line extension when you have not even built the power generation unit? It would be better to tell the people of West Nile that they are going to put the power line and they are connecting West Nile with the main grid. If that is the plan, then we shall appreciate. But if you are relying on Nyagak Power Station, which must be built by a private investor, whose interests to invest in the area may not be there, because of the poor or minimum return on the investment, then indeed the people of West Nile are being taken for a ride on these promises.  

My other point is from what the Committee raised regarding the indebtedness of UEB and also the privatisation of UEB.  On page 11, under the loan portfolio, we are being told that the current loan portfolio is 403.7 billion shillings. In my view, this is an under estimate. Since the sixth Parliament came into being, this House has approved many loan portfolios for UEB, which are beyond 4 billion Uganda shillings. If you look at the debt stock of UEB prior to what this Parliament alone has approved, the loan portfolio should be in trillions of shillings. The Minister and the Committee should justify this state of the loan portfolio.

Since I have exhausted my time, my last point is with regard to the provision of water in small towns. Small towns in the north, particularly Nebbi town, have not benefited from the water provision. They have not benefited under NURP neither have they benefited under the small town water programme. Recently, the Minister responsible for this sector went to Nebbi.  Unfortunately, he even went without telling the Members of Parliament of the area.  He went alone. I do not know what he found out. Maybe he will report to the House.  But I prefer that, when senior colleagues go to districts, they inform the junior colleagues so that they know what they are going for and they are able to assist. It is important that we work as a team. 

I would like to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I support the recommendations of the Committee.

MAJ. KAZOORA JOHN (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some of us who represent people who own cows are really perturbed by the kind of situation that is pertaining and the lack of planning by Government. On page 23 of the report, we are told that the Ministry of Finance released a cheque of 251 million shillings on 28th June 2000, but due to technical errors on the cheque, it has not yet been cashed. This is meant to cover water provision in 49 selected sub-counties. How long does it take to correct a cheque so that 49 selected sub-counties must wait for two months or more, we may not know? We cannot allow this kind of situation to go on like that yet there are Ministers concerned. I wonder if hon. Kajara’s Committee really got a satisfactory explanation and whether it accepted it!  

We passed a money release two years ago and it is reflected here in the Committee’s report. I talked about this last time and even the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister came to the Committee on Assurances and said that this money was going to be released. People’s cows died last year, they are now dying, and every time we come here, we are told that this money is there. What is this money doing?  I am now giving a serious warning, in my capacity as the chairman of the Committee on Government Assurances, this kind of situation will not be allowed to continue. We do not want people running up and down when things get hot and yet there is money and farmers are not being served.  

Last year, hon. Amanya visited one of my sub-counties and a farmer asked him, ‘hon. Minister, tell us, what do you want us to do?’ ‘You say give us votes, we give votes, pay taxes, we pay taxes, improve on your animals, we improve on them, only for them to be killed by lack of serious planning on the part of Government. What do you expect us to do?’ And this is the hopeless situation that is reflected in this report on the issue of water provision. I have given that warning and it is a serious warning. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS MPANGA JOYCE (Woman representative, Mubende): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like the previous speakers, I want to thank the Committee for the elaborate work done. But I would like to raise two points of concern.  

We talk about modernisation of agriculture, we talk about poverty eradication and we talk about women development. This Ministry holds the key to women development. We spend a lot of our time looking for firewood, and this takes a lot of time if you do not have it. We read in this report that forests are not cared for and that no trees are being planted. It looks as if we are joking if we think the woman should spend more time in the garden producing yet they are faced with scavenging for firewood.  I think we need better planning.  

On page 24, we read that there is money that took two years in transit. I fail to understand how money can be in transit and never reach where it is supposed to reach.  Maybe the chairman will explain this to us.  

On page 24 again, we read that the Committee was informed that 15 reservoirs previously started by MAAIF will be completed, although there is no funding in the current budget. How can you complete a dam when you have no funding in the current budget? Water is extremely important for health, for development and for livelihood and yet what we have spent money on is going to be neglected. In the reports that we heard before, we were told that there would be money to finish these dams.  

Again, in the same observations, the Committee says it observed that the eight reservoirs being constructed countrywide were not enough, in view of the water needs upcountry. I think what we lack is co-ordination. If Ministry of Planning is working properly, why do we spend money on poverty eradication and we are not looking at the Ministry that plans for it? When you look at education, you cannot improve the girls’ education until you have provided water. Collecting water takes so much of their time. So, we would like to appeal to the Ministers concerned. The women of Uganda look at development of water and forestry as part of their life. We would like Government to give it better attention than it is getting now. Thank you very much.

MS. OKORIMOE JANET (Woman representative, Kotido): Thank you very, Mr. Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the Committee for a job well done. And I just want to make a correction on page 21, where the Committee says that some areas are provided with more water projects while others are facing a serious shortage of water for livestock production and consumption. They go ahead and say ‘until recently, Karamoja was such a district’. Karamoja is not just a district, it is a region composed of two districts and we are about to ask for two more districts so that we have four districts in Karamoja. 

On water, I would like to thank the Ministry concerned for the two dams so far constructed in Kotido, that is Kailong dam and Kulodwong dam.  Recently, when we went for food security mobilisation, even Her Excellency the Vice President was able to visit Kailong, which is just half of Kulodwong, and she acknowledged that the dam actually exists.  So, we thank you for what has been done, but we are saying that the process of construction should be expedited, especially, for the remaining dams, so that we do not have our people attempting to go to the neighbouring districts during the dry season.  

On the mineral sector, on page 16, the Committee observes that Branch Energy withdrew from the country claiming they did not find existence of economically viable deposits. The report goes ahead to mention that the claim is however contestable. I am one of those who are not convinced that Branch Energy got nothing. They went with very heavy machinery and we cannot believe that they got nothing. The report says that they found out that what was existing was not economically viable. How about the little they got, where did they put it?   I just came from Kotido two days ago, and there is a communication system in Lopedo, if there was nothing, why is there a communication system and who is communicating with who about what? The Minister –(Interruption)

MR. ILUKORI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. Actually, Branch Energy is said to have withdrawn, but they have just done what the colonialists did, by giving us a flag for independence in 1962. Branch Energy is actually still in Dodoth County, their camp is still operational. That is the equipment for communication that the hon. Member on the Floor is referring to. So, I do not know what withdrawing means in this report.  

MS. OKORIMOE: I thank the hon. Member for Dodoth for his information. It is true that the place is still guarded. And we are wondering, if it is not economically viable, why guard it?  Why is it being guarded? Why do you have a communication system? To whom are you communicating? What are you communicating about, and when are you taking away your communication system?  Thank you. 

MR. KAYONDE ISRAEL (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Year in year out, we come here, we complain about water, and it seems nothing is being done about it. Those who were here sometime back, you know about the controversy about water in the Ministry of Agriculture, on whether they should adopt the policy of small dams or big dams. It has come here again. Now they have eight reservoirs, at a cost of shs.350 million each! Some of us have constructed valley dams on our ranches, and right now, there are some farmers in my constituency, because they had waited for so long for the Government to act and the Government has not come to their rescue, they have sold their animals. They have sold half of herd to get a dam!  

By simple estimation, the current private rate of a machine is one million shillings per day, excluding fuel. A D8 machine consumes one drum of fuel, that is 210 litres, roughly Shs.2l0,000. So, in a day, a machine with fuel would cost roughly Shs.1.3 million plus allowances. Our experience is that a machine working for eight hours can now make a valley tank in four days, big enough to cater for about 300 heads of cattle throughout the year. So, you are talking about roughly Shs.5 million per small valley dam, which could cater for 500 to 300 heads of cattle. 

This concept of big dams is out-dated. At the time we were talking of communal dams, but the majority of our people have now acquired land and fenced it. They are interested in small dams! And this is where the –(Interjections)- sorry, can I correct what I have said? There are some areas where communal dams are still needed, like Karamoja. In the bulk of the areas, which have acquired land, there is no communal land therefore we need small dams.  

My concern is that there must be a deliberate policy by the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Water on which dams should be constructed and who should decide. We need a clear policy on the size of the dam, because we are spending a lot of resources, Shs.2.8 billion just for eight reservoirs. If this money was allocated, it could cover a lot of areas.   

Secondly, who is responsible for providing water for livestock? When you read this report, on page 25, there is a clear conflict between the Minister of Water and the Minister of Agriculture. This is one Government, can I appeal to the Leader of Government Business, who is also the Prime Minister, to guard his sergeants and to iron this out so that people can get services! This conflict is not in the interest of our people. The report is very clear –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it seems you need to be informed. Are you prepared to take information?

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Speaker, let me take information.

THE SPEAKER: From the Minister of Agriculture first and then the Minister in the Office of the Prime Minister (General Duties).

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for prevailing over the hon. Member to give way, and I thank him for giving way. I had an opportunity to deliver a letter to the chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources, where I was seeking opportunity to brief the Committee on the plan for the modernisation of agriculture. In so doing, I found the chairman with some three Members and I think they had a long debate on different issues. They casually asked me, ‘do you still have this money on water, are you responsible for water for production?’ I said, ‘you, I am responsible for promoting rational utilisation of water and land for promoting agriculture’. They went on to ask me what was transferred to Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. I said, ‘of course, the main problem was the construction of dams and valley tanks’ and I left it at that. I did not know it would be part of the report!  

In my policy statement it is very clear. I have a department on farm development, and I think in the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, they have a department on Water Development. What I am responsible for is the development of sustainable agriculture through rational use of land, water, farm power and other appropriate technologies to increase farm incomes and other things under this department. We are still promoting soil conservation, water harvesting and promoting irrigation, so we shall continue as far as farm development is concerned. 

We can give our colleagues recommendations when we need water for livestock, but when it comes to the technical knowledge of constructing dams or valley tanks, that is the full responsibility of my senior colleague in the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. I do not have that technical capability, but I am an interested party. I would also like to see that water is available for production. I do not have a department for water for production. I have a department for farm development, which takes interest in water development on the farms.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank the hon. Member for Gomba for giving way. The process of rationalising water for production is already ongoing. Several discussions have been held between the Prime Minister on one hand and the Ministries concerned on the other. Secondly, the process of reallocating functions in the Government is not between the Ministries concerned. It involves the Office of the Prime Minister, the Office of the President through the Vice President, the Cabinet, and it also involves the Ministry of Public Service. So, actually, a recommendation like this one should not be adapted because it is not possible for them to be the ones to sort it out.  

I would like to assure the hon. Member and the House that the process of rationalising water for production - who produces the water and who utilises the water - is already being worked out. I think the hon. Minister of Agriculture has already made it clear that his main job is to utilise the water rationally, but as for who will produce it, the appropriate home for this function is already being addressed by Government. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Speaker, as a farmer and as a representative of the people, my concern is water. We want to see water, and the money is there. So, this conflict in the Ministry about who does what, is none of our business. We are looking at the Government as a whole, so put your House in order, what we want is water.  

Lastly, farmers today say they are ready to subsidise, even with Government. If you bring the machine, they are ready to put fuel. Some of us have gone to great lengths to convince the farmers to take that line, because we know the shortcomings in Government. Funds may not be enough, but farmers are willing. The dry season comes and people are willing, but the Government is not acting to bring even a machine to the farmer. So, I appeal to Government to really come to the rescue of the farmers.  Water is life and we badly need the water. I thank you.

MS. KABASHARIRA NAOME (Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will continue from where my colleagues, who talked about water, stopped.  

I would like some clarification on information on page 24 of the report. The Ministry informed Members that the supplementary budget amounting to Shs. 2.8 billion, for eight reservoirs, at a cost of Shs. 350 million to mitigate drought in the cattle corridor is planned. In addition, there is already Shs. 3.1 billion committed to Karamoja. Where was this money from? I am confused. There is Shs. 3.1 billion and then a supplementary of Shs. 2.8 billion. To which area is this going, if Karamoja is already allocated Shs. 3.1 billion? I would want clarification on that because I do not understand.  

The Committee on Agriculture, which was probing the Shs. 3.4 billion, reported that the design of the dams was wrong. I now see here that money was transferred to Ministry of Water and Lands to continue and finish up the work that was left unfinished or undone by the Ministry of Agriculture. If the design is wrong, how sure are we that this money, which will be allocated to Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment is going to benefit the farmers. If the designs are wrong, why don’t they start their own instead of finishing those dams which were designed wrongly? 

In the report, I think on page 22, the Committee mentions that boreholes are expensive for the community. I agree with the Committee, they did not give us the solution on what the community should do, because there are some areas which cannot do without the bore holes and they are extremely expensive for the community to maintain. Maybe the water development department, when sending a lot of money, which I know they sent to the districts, should give some information to the local leaders and even the MPs. 

I would like to inform Members that the water development department sends a lot of money to the districts but when you go to the district and ask some local leaders, they do not know how much money has been sent. The money goes to the department of education, water or health so the councillors do not know. The civil servants in the districts take advantage and do not send this money down. Maybe we need some more information and we need to sensitise our local leaders because they are the ones who will be monitoring how that money is used.  

In my district, they sent about Shs.4.9 million to work on boreholes, but wherever I went there, all the bore holes were down. People would ask me for about 80,000 or 50,000 Shillings to repair them and yet the district had the money from the Ministry. So, when they talk of co-ordination, I think we need more information for the leaders so that we can work together.

I would like to briefly talk about rural electrification. The Committee, I think on page 8, mentions that the Ministry’s policy goes according to whether the people in the area can afford to pay for that electricity. And the Committee says that they should not consider that, instead they should consider even the poor. I would like clarification on whether the poor will manage the tariffs. Did you consider that? If it is taken to the rural area, how will they mange the high tariffs?  Thank you.

MR. TOSKIN BARTILE (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I want to react to what is mentioned on page 4 about the Norpak Power Project. I am not satisfied and I am not happy that our external financiers are not happy about Uganda having surplus power. This country has limited resources for export, and power is one resource that Uganda can be proud of. We are surrounded by a region, which is seriously affected by drought. The Sudan, Kenya and even Tanzania are countries that need power. I thought this should now be an opportunity for Uganda to really take advantage of this situation and develop as much power as possible and export it. This is what we have been talking about all along. But when the external financiers come in and say they fear to support or they are unwilling to support the Norpak Power Project simply because Uganda would get a surplus supply of power, to me, this is really unfair and not correct at all.  

I would like to agree with the Committee that the Government of Uganda should speed up negotiations with the neighbouring countries, so that when this power is available, they can just sell it. Members here are aware that, even now, the Republic of Kenya is facing a lot of problems arising out of the shortage of power. If we had this power, definitely this country would have benefited from this –(Interruption).  

MR. MIGEREKO: I would like to thank the Member for giving way. The issue of having a surplus of 168 MWs of power after Bujagali and Karuma have been constructed is actually highly contestable, because presently, only 5 percent of the population have access to power. If it is true that only 5 percent of the population have access to power, the additional power, which is going to generated, will permit only 25 percent of the population to have access to power. Now, if you say that we are going to have a surplus, when 75 percent of the population will not have access to power, then I do not know whether we are doing our computations right.

MR. TOSKIN: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for that information. You can see the gravity of this matter. 

My next point is on rural electrification, which I want to combine with the degradation of the environment. If this country is not careful, we are going to face a very serious problem arising out of environmental degradation, which we have actually already experienced in some other parts of the country.  

I look at rural electrification as one of the stopgaps, which would enable the environment to regenerate after a long period of mismanagement of the forest department.  There has been a lot of degradation of both the forest and the tree cover in the country. It is important that the country addresses how to regenerate environment and the tree cover in the country. Already, in the forest reserves, there is a lot of conflict between the people and forest department. And there is definitely a lot of degradation. Therefore, Government must come out with a strategic plan to allow the forest to regenerate.  

Rural electrification is definitely a very important issue, both for protection of the environment and modernisation. Most of the country lacks fuel for domestic use and also power for small scale industries. It is important that we take on this programme seriously. I am happy about the programme, which the Minister seems to have set in. I only think the Minister simply forgot about extending it between Kapchorwa and Suam, which is in Kongasis County. The Minister is aware that we have approached her many times about this issue. We are surprised because just across on the Kenyan side, the people in the district of Tranzoia are enjoying power coming from the Owen Falls Dam. The other side of Uganda, which should be enjoying that power, does not have that power. With our present relationship with Kenya, it should not be difficult. We should definitely be able to bring power just across from Kenya to the people on the Ugandan side.  

Finally, I just want to say something about clean water. We are not satisfied with the performance of RUWASA.  RUWASA is one of these programmes that have been set in the eastern region to help the wanaichi to get clean water. I am surprised that, when it came to Kapchorwa, since 1997, of that three gravity water flow schemes that were supposed to have been put in place, only one Parish has so far benefited from clean water. This has been over three years. The process is very slow! I would like the Ministry concerned to please find out how we can speed up the work of RUWASA. I thank you. 

MRS. BAKOKO BAKORU (Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Committee for the work they have done, but I have a few observations that I would like to make.

I remember that in 1990, people started hearing about Paidha and Nyagak in West Nile. I do appreciate and understand that Government projects take so many years to mature, but it is very sad that even up to next year in June, Nyagak power construction would not have started.  Every year, the people of West Nile are told that they will have power. I do not know how we can talk about equitable distribution of development, when places like West Nile are forgotten in the power sector.  

Last year, when AFFREI came to West Nile, we visited schools and health units in Ombachi Secondary School and Mvara Secondary School. We discovered that these schools use between 2 million shillings and 3 million shillings every month for power related activities. If we had electricity, that money would have been saved and I believe that much more would have been done with those funds. Our own kids would also have the opportunity to study like children who have power in their schools.

We also visited health units and found out that some of our health centres have to use grass at night and light it up to enable the midwives to deliver babies. It is very sad that people do not look at some of these issues. We just look at the general picture. We do not look at the populations that are suffering because they do not have access to power. 

I hope solar energy and rural electrification are going to address the issue of the health units. Imagine your mother or your wife or your sister or even your daughter delivering at night and somebody has to light grass to help them deliver! Hon. Members, how do you think that child would come out and what would you expect? What survival rate does this baby have in the event that there is a complication? If the umbilical cord is around the baby’s neck, how will the midwives see it is around the baby’s neck? I think we have got to look at some of these minute pictures and not just look at the major picture and always keep on postponing programmes. People who want it for investment can continue, but we want it for social services. We want power in West Nile so that our children can access facilities that provide good education facilities and provide good health care.  

I would also like to comment on this issue of affordability. Time and again, people have asked whether poor people will afford electricity. Arua has possibly got the biggest number of people who have access to mobile phones. Recently, when MTN went to Arua, -(Interruption)- yes, the people of Arua have money. Do not think that we do not dig? We have money and we will be able to buy that power. We are at the border, and we have money. We shall buy that power.  

I would like to comment on the issue of water and sanitation. This is a country that keeps on getting backward diseases like cholera and dysentery. Why do we have cholera out-breaks? Why do we have dysentery?  We have them because we have poor sanitation and inadequate safe water coverage. What type of leaders are we, if our people are getting diseases like cholera?  Are we proud as Members of Parliament that our communities back home are getting cholera and dysentery? The issue of access to safe water is very crucial. 

Finally, I read in the newspapers recently about the issue of accountability for the funds of water and sanitation.  The Ministry has talked about supervision. I do not know how they are going to carry out their supervision? If the funds that go down for water and sanitation are well utilised, I believe we would also be able to increase our water and sanitation coverage.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KIBANZANGA CHRISTOPHER (Busongora South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Committee for a job well done. They have talked so well about the future of Kilembe Mines and the wonders and miracles being performed by KCCL. May I know about the future of the Katwe salt plant? The resources are there and the Ministry has got houses. They have got the plant in Katwe and they are maintaining staff of about seven people, but it seems that Ministry has forgotten all bout Katwe salt plant. I do not want to remind them about the Kasenyi Tuff Mark Factory.  If seems they do not feel well hearing about it.

My other point is about land. Kasese District is facing shortage of land. In fact, we are living in a corridor.  There is Rwenzori National Park, occupying almost the whole range of the Rwenzori Mountains. When you come down, you find Queen Elizabeth National Park and you find land owned by Government institutions like prison land, UPDF farms, the reserves and the national parks.  

I understand the task force was set up to look into the affairs of land in Kasese District. The people of Kasese, especially Busongora South, would want to see the results of the task force. In fact, some sub-counties are not accessible from the main road. In sub-counties like Karusandara, there have been conflicts over land between the people, the Prisons and the Army farm. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF WATER, LANDS AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr. Kajura Muganwa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. Members for the various points and suggestions that have been made concerning the report. I would like to make a few comments and clarifications.  

On water for the rural people, the policy is that rural water should go to the districts. That is the policy. The money is transferred directly from the Ministry of Finance to the districts. We are in a position to advise Members, if they so wish, about these amounts when we learn about them, but this money is now in the districts.  The philosophy behind this is the people in the districts know what their needs are. They know their priorities so they should be the ones to determine where power goes or where a spring should be protected et cetera.  Our role is only to help. But you can only help those who want to be helped. Some people feel that this is now their concern, some of them feel that this is interference. 

We have done some basic things to make the programme work.  We have trained mechanics. We have worked on user communities so that they can collect a small sum of money on the water that the people use, and they can use that money to pay the mechanics that would have been trained by the Ministry. We have encouraged every district to appoint a trained water engineer, the person does not have to be a graduate, he or she could be a technician, but they should have been trained. We have offered to train them. Some have appointed people of their choice, some have been unable to pay them and they have left.  So really, the work in the District is not entirely in our hands. 

We have decided to create six backup groups of engineers, who will be able to rush quickly to the district and help them resolve the problems. They will be located in critical areas like Gulu, Mbarara, et cetera. So, those who need help will be able to get it at short notice and it will not be necessary to get in touch with Kampala in order to be assisted. But I ask hon. Members to take interest in the monies that are transferred to the districts. The monies go to the districts and this is the policy.  It is the policy of decentralisation, but please take keen interest in what happens to that money. I think many of you admit that you do not know how it is spent. 

We in the Ministry do not always have control over the money. We do assist in identifying drillers, but the contracts are signed between the contractors and the districts. There are no longer contracts between the Directorate of Water Development and the drillers, it is the districts and the drillers. So, I would like you to appreciate this.  A year ago the money was going through us, but now it goes directly to the districts - (Interruption).

MR. AKENY: The Ministry has increased drilling rates for boreholes from eight million shillings to beyond 15 and 21 million shillings. Can’t you cost this differently so that it can be affordable and we get more boreholes?

MRS. NTABGOBA: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Minister. You have mentioned decentralisation, but I would like to know about the water schemes being done by NGOs. Kabiranyuma Water Gravity Scheme, which has not been mentioned any where in the report, has been on the programme for about 10 years, and up to now, there is no water. It was supposed to serve wanainchi during drought seasons. May I know how we can handle this as MPs from that district, because it was brought to the Committee, but I do not see anything about it in the report?

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT: Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Minister as to who is responsible for carrying out statistics on our water resources. Who is responsible for the statistics on the quantity or volume of water that we have in Uganda? I believe that is the basis of our planning. Statements like ‘there will be water for all by the year 2010’, I am sure, should have that connotation.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, proceed. You have very little time left.

MR. KAJURA: Thank you, Sir. The department of Natural Resources is concerned with the certification of water - its quality and all that pertains to it as a resource. They undertake the research work, but here, we are talking about implementation. I know some Members would like to think that the directorate should be playing a more active role, but this is not possible. We can only assist, advise and encourage and this is what we are doing. And we are about to reinforce it with support systems, which will be spread all over the country.   

About the programmes of the NGOs, they are incorporated within the programmes of the districts. They are with us nationally, but operationally, they are with the districts. They are supposed to clear them with the district authorities. We are interested in what they do, we follow what they are doing, but basically their programmes are within the programmes of the districts.  

On the question of the cheque, it was written out, however, it was found faulty and was rejected. It was sent back to MAAIF and there was still a problem with it because it was again rejected. I am told that this week it will be put right. I do not know whether there were any games behind it, but this is the work of accountants.  I can only explain what they tell me. So, we should be able to get the money and we shall only be very happy to pass it on to those it was intended for.   

Boreholes are problematic. First of all, they depend on the level of the water table. I agree that boreholes do break down. They break down because the trained technicians who should work on them have left the communities, which they serve, either because they were not paying them or because they were attracted elsewhere.   So, it is a question of maintenance. This is why we are urging every district to have a trained technician, who will be able to handle these matters, which are not very complicated. Unless there is somebody who knows how to handle them, they get problems. Of course, during the dry season, the water table tends to go down and therefore, it cannot be reached easily. So, we shall encourage the communities as much as possible to have these technical people who can look after the boreholes.  

On shortage of land in Kasese, this is a matter of Government policy. It has been submitted and it is being looked into. In other words, Kasese District has made a proposal, which the Government is now examining, with a view to seeing how far it can be implemented. About RUWASA being slow, yes, but they found operations in Kapchorwa quite expensive and difficult, because of the terrain. But they are now adjusting to the terrain and they should be able to do a good job.  

Gulu is under the Water and Sanitation Programme, and many boreholes are being dug there. There is also a programme for Gulu Town or Gulu Municipality to be provided with more water and sanitation. Let me say one thing about sewerage. Sewerage is a very expensive item.  While it costs about 20 thousand dollars to lay a metre long pipe for water, it costs 60 thousand dollars for one metre in the case of sewerage. So, when we have limited resources, at times we wonder whether we should provide water or sewerage. 

In some areas and in many of the small towns, people still use pit-latrines. In fact, in one or two towns, we established lagoons, but since almost everybody was using pit-latrines, the lagoons got infested and plants grew in them. So, it is not that there is no sanitation whatsoever, but in many cases, people still use pit-latrines. However, for Kampala, there is a crisis. There is a big problem in Kampala, and soon we shall give priority to the difficult areas, which are water logged. We shall start with the critical areas, which are water logged, particularly in Kampala. We shall start with those areas, which get flooded and where human excreta actually rises, although they have normal pit-latrines.  But it is an expensive venture and you cannot do it anyhow. You need to take an area and plan for it, and you need substantial funds to develop a sanitation/sewerage system.

About water for the rest of the country other than Karamoja, we have a problem here. Our donors look at the establishment of dams as an economic activity. They feel rich men are making money so they should be able to finance it. So, they have tended to shy away from providing water per se, for dams. What we are doing in Karamoja is actually from the funds of the Ministry of Finance. And so far, the funds we have for the cattle corridor are still very limited. So, this is why we have not done as much as we should have, and that is why there is still a problem –(Interruption).

MS. BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like clarification regarding the rectification of the valley dam project in the cattle corridor. I was very disappointed to find out that the Committee just glossed over the matter, whereas it is of paramount importance to the livelihood of the people living in the cattle corridor. Can we get clarification on how those dams are going to be rectified?  I thank you.

MR. KAJURA: I thank the honourable Member. Having said that the donors are not very anxious to fund dams and valley dams, because they think this is an economic activity, which should be funded by the businessmen who rear cattle, they make a distinction between water for human beings and water for animals. Well, this is the view of those who provide the money and this is how they look at the problem. But we are now succeeding more and more, in convincing them that water for animals is also shared by human beings or the other way round. And I hope to see an improvement in our ability to raise more funding for the corridor. In the time, let us hope and pray.

I would like to conclude by commenting on environmental degradation and the cutting down of trees. This is a very serious matter, and we shall come up with a proposal on how to handle it. We shall need your support, because it may require getting everybody involved in the planting of trees.  As soon as we have sorted out the question of the seedlings, we shall come to the House with a programme, which, I hope, will secure your backing so that we can start making a difference by providing more and more of a tree cover in this country. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs. Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Allow me to start off by thanking the hon. chairman and Members of the Committee on Natural Resources for a job well done.  

As usual, quite a number of Members of Parliament have expressed concern about the under supply of electricity to the rural areas. As the supervising Minister, I am equally concerned. I have said it before here that we are finalising the rural electrification plan and strategy, through which we are going to use different interventions to expedite electrification of the rural areas.

As stated in the report, we have managed to get the World Bank management board and GEF to approve a support fund.  It is a basket into which different funding is going to go, to support rural electrification by the private sector. Having said that, I want to -(Interruption) 

MR. BAKU: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for giving way. On page 6 of the Committee's report, on the Paidha Mini-Hydro Power Station, there is a paragraph that reads, “the Committee was informed that the Project is a part of the broad West Nile Rural Electrification Programme, which involves construction of the power plant, transmission lines from Paidha to Nebbi, Arua, Koboko and Nebbi to Pakwach.” 

On page 8, after talking about rural electrification, there is a stretch that has been mentioned for electrification, that is Nebbi to Arua, Arua to Koboko, Nebbi to Pakwach. Within both this rural electrification and West Nile electrification, Moyo is not there and Adjumani is not there. This is the entire region of Madi Sub-Region. May I know from the Minister whether there is a separate programme for the Madi Sub-Region, which is supposed to be part of West Nile Region.

DR. MWEBESA NTEGAMAHE: Thank you Mr. Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the Minister concerns energy saving stoves for cooking. The Minister knows about them and she knows how much fuel she can save in terms of wood and even electricity. So many people are using a lot of electricity for cooking, but if she introduces those cooking stoves, most of them would abandon using electricity for cooking and they would use those stoves.  I am surprised that these cooking stoves are not mentioned in the budget statement. I wonder whether she has a vote on them in the budget. Thank you.

MR. KITHENDE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On page 7, the report mentions that rural electrification lines were constructed in Mukono, Hoima, Jinja, Kamuli and many other places. I am part of a county with over 300,000 people. We have many institutions, two big hospitals and many secondary schools. This county is called Bukonzo, and I share it with Dr. Kiyonga. In addition to that, in Kasese District, we do have a hydro power station, that is Mubuku Hydro Power Station, and to the best of my knowledge, we do give power to support UEB power. So, I would like to know what plans the Ministry has for Bukonzo County. We do generate our own power from Mubuku Hydro power Station, and we do give it to UEB, but there is erosion in the whole electrification system. May I seek clarification? Thank you.  

MRS. BBUMBA: Mr. Speaker, before I respond to the specific issues raised, I would like to give the criteria followed when extending lines to the rural areas. First of all, we are paying attention to rehabilitation of the damaged lines. Those lines that existed before and were vandalised shall be attended to first. Of course, we have not moved as far as we would have wanted, because by now, the Soroti- Aloi line should have been completed, but we have not completed it. We have just started on it, and this was due to budgetary limitations.

The other criterion followed is connection of administrative centres and trading centres with a population in excess of 2000 people. 

The other criterion is improving the system. The technical people tell me that, in order to strengthen the system certain areas have got to be connected, especially over a long distance, to stabilise the system. The other criterion is to connect towns with viable economic activities. I think that answers the query from the hon. Member for Bukonzo. I also want to say that, it is not always those who host the generation plant who are served first, otherwise Busoga would be flooded with power.

I would like to move to some of the specific issues raised by the hon. Member of Parliament. The hon. Member for Kalaki wanted to know what UEB is doing about rehabilitating the line for Kaberamaido. The line for Katini, Kalaki, Kaberamaido, Kabururu is being rehabilitated. Poles over a stretch of 9 kilometres have already been put into a place, but as I said, we cannot move at the speed which we would have wanted to due budgetary limitations. The Kaberamaido lines are however being attended to.

The other issue was raised by the hon. Pen'Mogi Nyeko, who wanted to know whether Gulu in not part of the rural areas. Of course, like many other parts of the country, Gulu is part of rural Uganda. Our infrastructure in Gulu is not in the best condition. So, from time to time, despite the abundant power available now, power goes off. This is due to the infrastructure defects, which we are attending to. We are also installing several step-down transformers in Bobi and Paling'a, so, hon. Pen'Mogi, Gulu is not being ignored. The problem is the dilapidated system all over the country.

On the Nyagak Project, which is a concern of so many hon. Members of Parliament, and which I am also highly concerned about, I would like to say that there was a change in policy. Previously, this project was to be developed by Government but because Government has gone out of the business of generating power, it is now going to be developed by the private sector. But to give the private sector a sweetener, Government is borrowing money on concensionary terms, to put up the distribution line.  That is the 14 billion shillings, which has been provided in the Budget. I think I need to be congratulated for convincing the hon. Minister of Finance to provide that money in the Budget. That money is exclusively for distribution lines. Of course, we would have liked to cover the entire West Nile Region, including the Madi Region, but the money is not available, so we are moving in phases. The Pakwach and Moyo areas will be considered in the next phase, which is not too far away.

The other issue that was raised was on Branch Energy. I am told they carried out exploration work, and according to the report we have, they did not find reserves that were economically viable in order for them to carry out the exploration. We shall examine the case further, to find out what the communication system is still doing in that area, but the report is available and we can circulate it to the hon. Members.  

The other issue, which has been raised by Dr. Mwebesa, was on the energy stoves. This is one of the interventions, which the Minister of Energy is coming up with, to address the energy needs of this country, among many others. We have got a programme, which we have been piloting, and it has proved successful. We are now going to go in full blast and expand it to most of the rural areas. This stove uses very little firewood and gives very good results. I am told that the husbands who have tasted the food cooked on them have complemented their wives.  

Another issue was the Katwe Salt project. What is the future of the Katwe Salt Project? Government has just started the privatisation of the mineral sector. Katwe Salt project is one of those projects where we have invited the private sector to come and invest, but it has not picked up. Government knows is an important reserve, that is why we have kept our staff there to guard it and to make sure that it stays in an attractive form. I am told that over a week ago, the district administration and the LC III administration of the area were in court fighting over who should take up that project. But that project belongs to the centre, and we are looking for investors to come and take it up.  

I would like to conclude by, first of all, thanking the hon. Members for the tone of the debate on the power sector. It has been very encouraging, and to me, that is an indication that everybody has started seeing light at the end of the tunnel, though it is still very far. A holistic energy policy is coming up. This year we have managed to put the rural electrification programme among the PAF programmes. So now, rural electrification is a priority programme and it is going to receive special attention from the Minister of Finance. 

I would also like to inform the hon. Members that the mineral exploration sector and the oil exploration sector, for the first time, are going to get maximum attention because those two have also been identified as priority programmes of Government. So, for those of you who have been worried that the mineral sector is not getting maximum attention, it has started getting it.  Now we have an expert from the World Bank, he arrived on Friday and is already looking at our potential. This is the man who worked on the project, which resulted into the miracle of Tanzania.  

On oil exploration, we are moving very well. We expect the rigs for drilling the first exploratory well to be here by December. Isha Allah, next year we might have an exploratory well dug in this country. 

Once again, I would like to thank the hon. Members and the Committee for their contributions. Thank you.

MR. KAJARA ASTON: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I must thank hon. Members of the House for the complements they have raised and the genuine concerns that they have raised in the sectors of Lands, Water, Minerals and Energy. It is unfortunate that the system has not allowed the Minister to really address the issues raised in depth. I must emphasise a few things.  

The issue of water for production is of paramount importance to this country and must really be addressed.  The issue of rural electrification was enshrined in the Electricity Act. We have recommended that the rural electrification strategy be implemented so as to allay the fears of the people this country.  

Hon. Kabasharira raised the issue of affordability of power. In the Committee, we think that it is not because the population cannot consume the power, it is because the power is not available. So, we are really saying that, if the power is extended to the rural areas, it will help raise the incomes of those people through agro-processing and industry, which is suppressed at the moment because of suppressed demand.  

The issue of water cannot be rubbished. You cannot say the districts cannot utilise the money because of decentralisation. I do not think this Parliament should buy the idea, because those districts belong to this Government.  Those districts are part of this Government, and it is imperative that Government builds capacity in those districts. It is not enough to say that you send all the money to the districts. You must send the money and go and supervise it, otherwise why do you send it there. 

We have emphasised the fact that a lot of money is being put into the water sector. This year alone, 21 billion Shillings was allocated to this sector. If that money is not supervised, it will really go to the dogs. It will be wasted. We would rather put it to better use than pouring it into a place where it will not be properly utilised.  

I did not hear the Minister say anything about the amendments to the Land Act and people are crying countrywide. Maybe the time is too short, but I think it is imperative for all the Members of this House to follow up some of those issues that were raised and that we have not got time to answer in this House.  

With those few comments, I wish to thank the hon. Members for the contributions and the support they have given to the chairman and the Committee on Natural Resources, and also to the Minister, for addressing some of the issues that were raised. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have ascertained that there is still a quorum – (Laughter). I wish to congratulate you for that. I am very sincere. That being the case, I would like to put the question. When I put the question, I will ask those who in favour of the motion to stand. The motion is that the report of the Committee on Natural Resources be adopted. Those who are in favour of the adoption should stand and we shall head count- (Laughter). Those Members who are ex-officio should remain seated.

113 Members voted for the adoption of the motion

THE SPEAKER: This means the motion has been carried - (Applause).I will adjourn the House until 10.00 a.m. tomorrow.  Let me remind you that until we make quorum, business of the House will not start. So, it is up to you. I am told that we shall deal with the Ministry of Agriculture tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 22nd August, at 10.00 a.m.)

           


