	Tuesday, 23 August 2005

Parliament met at 10.50 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and hope you had a peaceful weekend, after the completion of that important exercise of Constitution amendment. This morning, in the public gallery, we have students of Mirembe Senior Secondary School of Kimera, Bukunja, Buikwe South Constituency in Mukono District. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda! (Applause)

Honourable members, I appreciate that there is confusion as to what time we were to start today’s proceedings. After the completion of the Constitution amendments, people were in different moods. Some were saying 2.00 p.m. others 3.00 p.m. and I said 10.00 a.m. However, many people have rung me saying they thought it was 2.00 p.m. The record is that it was 10.00 a.m. Maybe that is why a number of you are not here. We had to officially start the proceedings, to work out how we deal with the Budget.

I have noted that many people have started making interpretations of the Constitution amendments.  Unfortunately, some of them are making interpretations of the draft bills. The bills we dealt with are the ones they are using to do this kind of thing. My advice is that whoever wants to make any kind of interpretation, be it approval or disapproval, should wait for the official version of the amendments because a bill is a bill. What matters is what Parliament has passed; but as of now, these bills have not yet been passed.  Therefore, I advise whoever is using the bills to stop; you should wait for the version that will be gazetted very soon. Since you, old Members, have been here long enough, wherever you are, you should help people to appreciate what was done rather than going on with wrong impressions of things which have not been passed.  

10.53
MR WILLIAM SITENDA-SEBALU (Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of public concern. According to our Rules of Procedure, I should have seen you before this but I seek your indulgence.

I have been in support of my colleagues as far as the Northern Bypass is concerned. I have also always supported the Committee on Works. However, recently, during the construction of the Northern Bypass, the biggest part of Naalya Estate has been permanently divided. The road from Namugongo shrine via Kyaliwajala to Naalya Estate has completely been blocked. So, the schools on the other side of Naalya Estate like St Peter’s, Naalya and St Peter’s S.S.S and their day scholars can no longer access that road.  

The Police post and the LC 1 are also in Naalya side, so the people are living in an incommunicado. You can no longer cross from one side of Naalya to the other part of the estate. I appeal to the Minister of Works to intervene otherwise, the situation is out of control. Thieves are now free to move from one side of Kireka- Bweyogerere to Naalya Estate. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, I hope the minister concerned will work on this. Since the information has been captured, the problem will be addressed. 

10.55
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. In connection with the bills to be passed, I request that the official spokesman of Parliament comes out with a statement. Many individuals are misinterpreting what we are yet to pass. For instance, over the weekend, one of the Forum for Democratic Change officials was addressing a crowd in Kihihi. He said that Parliament reversed all that had been agreed upon between the Central and Mengo governments. This statement is not true and it is meant to misguide Ugandans, as well as to create ill feelings against the Government. 

I, therefore, request that the official spokesman of Parliament comes out with an official statement, so that the world gets to know the truth of the whole matter; otherwise, people are taking advantage of the situation to confuse the masses. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I have previously said something about this matter. Although I know I could speak for Parliament, there should be a Public Relations Officer to do this. But Parliament having done what it has done, I thought that the Executive should come out to clear this and a number of other issues. It was accepted, so this is the responsibility of the Executive. For instance, when people say you will be paid for four months, when you have not worked, that is not my concern. I know you will be working up to 12 May 2005, including dealing with the Budget process, which starts in April. However, somebody is saying that you will be paid for four months. I do not think it is Parliament to say this; we have passed the law, which is now in the hands of the Executive to implement. I think they should explain.

10.57
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I totally agree with your position. In fact, only recently someone wrote in Bukedde that traditional leaders had been asked to collect their cheques for their facilitation, which was baptised a “salary.” So, I summoned the relevant people from Bukedde, William Pike and the person who wrote that false statement. I also requested the Minister of Gender and his Permanent Secretary to show them the letters where they had called the private secretaries of the traditional leaders to collect the cheques. As a result, this matter has been corrected in today’s Bukedde.  

I was also saddened by Ow’ekitiibwa Abu Mayanja’s statement concerning this Parliament. I am handling that matter. I have asked the Minister of State for Information to work with the relevant ministers so that these matters are clarified. 

Let me add that FM radios host people who make wrong statements either deliberately or ignorantly. Most of them do not understand these issues. I have directed the Minister of State for Information to ensure that we have political clarifiers on FM radios. I also try my best to clarify. 

I totally agree with you because a number of people are trying to tarnish the image of Parliament. The other time these matters were clarified but they continue. Some of them have their own an agenda, which causes them to do this sort of thing. For example, some of them would like to take Aggrey Awori’s constituency and he is very vulnerable at the moment. (Applause) I thank you, Mr Speaker.

10.59
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise not to respond to the Rt hon. Prime Minister’s insinuations. I would like to seek guidance from my honourable colleague, the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business on three important issues: One is a matter of protocol at national and government sponsored functions. When we have a minister at a function, whether it is a district or LCIII function, an official, a public servant or a civil servant whether he is from the state house or wherever, he cannot take precedence over the minister, a Member of Parliament and Resident District Commissioner.  

I have noted that it is a common practice from state house to send private secretaries to the President as guests of honour at government sponsored functions where a minister, an RDC or a Member of Parliament might be present. I was confronted with that situation in my district last weekend, when a functionary of the state house came. When he arrived, he wanted me to go and receive him. I refused and stayed in my seat. I said, “I am not going to receive a functionary.”  

However, the LC V, for whatever reason, got up. This is an LC V we all call the president of the district. He got up from his seat, left me there and went to the car to receive a functionary! I told him, “Next time, Mr LC V Chairman, do not do that. This man is a functionary of the state; you are a political head.” [Hon. Members: “Who was it?”]. He was a private secretary for youth affairs from state house, a one Gaba Mugabe. 

I really need to know from the Prime Minister, who must come up categorically to tell this august House and the public regarding who takes precedence over whom at a function of that nature. (Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Hon. Awori, thank you very much for giving way. Could you please clarify to this House whether that functionary or personal secretary was either sent by Government or invited?  I have also seen functions where Members of Parliament do not put themselves in their proper place and invite these junior people to come and officiate as guests of honour.  

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This issue of protocol was brought on the Floor of this House some time back by hon. Margaret Zziwa, regarding a function that took place in Nsambya. There was a request to Government for the entire protocol layout to be given to this House. The responsible Minister of Foreign Affairs was to do this in the shortest time possible. I do not know what happened because I have never seen that report. Has that report ever come to this House? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you have really made the point. The issue is that we need guidance from the top to various government organs about protocol.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is lack of clarity. To answer hon. Kiraso’s concern as to whether he was invited or representing someone, he came and said, “I have come to represent state house.” That is when I looked at him and said, “I sit on the committee that governs the affairs of state house, how come state house is now sending functionaries, who are actually public officers?”  If I remember the Standing Orders correctly, public officers and civil servants cannot make statements on behalf of ministers unless so authorised. This particular functionary had no such authority.

Mr Speaker, the second issue is still on protocol. When a President has arrived at a function, no minister should come in or take his seat. I have seen ministers coming to functions when the President has arrived and the National Anthem has been played. I again request the Prime Minister to advise the Cabinet that once the President has arrived, whoever is late should go back. At state dinners, when they have already passed the soup, nobody should tell the waiters to bring them soup.  Mr Speaker, all these things are terrible for some of us who are protocol conscious.  

Mr Speaker, finally yet importantly, I was a little bit disappointed at the national funeral of our colleagues who died in the plane crash last week. You had arrived, the Prime Minister was there and everybody had been received but when it came to the laying of the wreaths, one of our colleagues went and did it. I said, “No! She cannot represent Parliament only the Speaker represents Parliament unless the Speaker has so authorised that person to do it on behalf of Parliament.”

Mr Speaker, as I said, these are small things but they make a lot of difference. That is why I seek guidance from the Rt hon. Prime Minister, who should tell the august House and the state on a matter of protocol, and how people should behave in public. 

The last one is the public decorum on the part of national leaders including Members of Parliament.  We should watch our language, for we are national figures and should not mix up small functions at a private dinner with functions where we are publicly being quoted. Calling people names is not proper, whether it is a head of state, or any other person. The Speaker has never done it but the Prime Minister has done it occasionally. I call upon the Government to take note of these concerns and probably guidance from the Rt hon. Prime Minister will help. 

11.07
MRS PROSCOVIA SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to know from you, Sir, how you intend to manage this House now that we have clearly moved away from individual merit. The statements I hear being made; over the weekend, you and other people were being thanked for doing what we all did. I am very perturbed at how in this very august House names are being called across the divide. Somebody made a statement in Kihihi, another one is saying people are diverting us, and the statements continue to be made.

I would like to know how you intend to run this House; is it under parties for the remaining time, is it under Movement as in the Constitution? I would like to know for clarity so that I am able to reconfigure myself as to which Parliament I am going to contribute in. 

Mr Speaker, it is my view that there will be trainings for us as Members of Parliament to prepare us on how to manage the rest of the time.  Otherwise, I feel very uncomfortable sitting here and being told that we, who have chosen what we have chosen, are derailing the country. We do not have the capacity of derailing the country! And I wish in keeping with decorum, we understood that we have parted ways legally and we have a right in this House, just like everybody else. Therefore, Mr Speaker, it is from that perspective that I am seeking your guidance on how you intend to run this House for the remaining part of the time. Thank you.   

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, as I have said before, I am here as a Speaker of 304 Members of Parliament. I do not have discrimination whatsoever. I treat you as equal Members of Parliament, and I know how you came here. Some are representing the 214 constituencies including myself; there are others who are representing interest groups, the workers like hon. Wandera. Others are women who represent districts.

We are in a transition and there is no doubt about that. I think the intention of the referendum we had was for the people to decide on the change from one system to another. The system operating now is a Movement. Now, a decision has been made in the fourth year of Parliament that we should prepare to transit from Movement to multiparty system. I have no way of knowing who belongs to which political home. People have been comparing this Parliament with the Sixth Parliament. The Sixth Parliament was in honeymoon; the Seventh Parliament is different. Therefore, its handling cannot be compared with that of the Sixth Parliament. When you are in a honeymoon, the marriage is easy to understand, there is no problem. However, after decades, you have to be tactful in handling that marriage.

As of now, it is true we have decided and people are preparing themselves for different political affiliations. Parties have been formed and they are organising themselves to transit to a multiparty system. I have no way of knowing who belongs where. This will only be possible when the multiparty system starts officially. As of now, I cannot, for instance - I know informally that you are the acting Chairperson of FDC but I cannot refer to you as such in this House. I know your constituency and I refer to you by that. I continue to regard you as people of a mandate to speak in Parliament and to bring motions. But outside I know parties are being organised.  

That is how I intend to conduct this Parliament. It will not prejudice anybody because I will take no side. I will steer the House in the way I feel is fair to everybody. If I make a mistake, I am a human being. However, it will not be deliberate because I will not take sides. 

You have said there is need for training. I hear many people talk about multiparty system, but at the end of the day, when you examine what they say, they do not know what a multiparty system is. I think leaders have to be prepared to understand a multiparty system. Is it about confessing it or it is about policy? In a multiparty system we need to compare policies. However, people do not know and I entirely agree that there is need for training. Maybe we should prepare some sensitisation for all of us because people will now be going to different camps. As leaders, they should know what to do in order to lead others to understand what it means.

Therefore, I entirely agree with you on a number of things that you have raised. I am just informing everybody that I will continue to treat Members equally, to give you opportunity wherever possible, without discrimination. I am praying that when the multiparty system comes it will move us forward other than dividing us. Thank you very much.

11.16
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): In the last one-month, we have woken up to news where persons have been deprived of life in this country. We cannot ignore the fact that this morning the headlines read that the Manager of the Send-A-Cow project has been murdered. A few weeks ago, we woke up to the grisly murder of Robinah Kiyingi. Even in our own constituencies we have had several attacks on people with the intention of depriving them of lives or property. It is really becoming alarming, Mr Speaker.

I remember sometime back, we had the Violent Crime Crack Unit. It may have had its own weaknesses but I believe it did a good job in most of our areas. Since we are coming to the time of elections and insecurity may be a grave issue, I request government to make a statement at an appropriate time on what is being done to ensure that security of life and property is taken into account in light of what is happening in the country.

Mr Speaker, about a month ago, I went to my constituency and found that there was an O.C. from Kyegegwa who was terrorising people in Kyakatwire.  I wrote to government and I was perturbed by the fact that we could even have policemen walking around with guns, terrorising people. I know there are other instances and it would be appropriate for government to respond because what is happening is disturbing our peace and security. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I think it is high time we wound up.

11.19
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of land, which we thought we had solved sometime back. You remember at one time, people were beaten almost to death in Soroti. However, to my surprise, two days to the Referendum Day, I was in Kasilo County, in Bugondo sub-county and I got information that there are members who had been sent from government to survey people’s land. It raised a lot of commotion; people would have been beaten if I had not been there.  

There is a group claiming to be from a consultancy firm called Reeve Consultancy. The group came to Kasilo County, Bugondo sub-county claiming they surveyed people’s land to get them titles. When this issue was first brought to Parliament the Rt Hon. Prime Minister together with the ministers in the House said, “We are going to halt the surveying of people’s land until members are informed such that they become part of the team to sensitise people.”  However, to my surprise this is happening again. So, may I get clarification from the Prime Minister as to whether that policy has changed? As you know, the issue of land is very touchy and creates many problems. Thank you.

11.20
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you know, there are 60 ministers dealing with their assigned roles and, therefore, the Minister of State in charge of Land will deal with the issue raised by hon. Okupa. That is extremely important, because I am democratic and do not intend to do what was assigned to the ministers. Therefore, I will ask him to answer after I have dealt with other issues, which have been raised by various people.

First, there was the issue of the security of life and property. I think that is really an excellent observation, which I am also concerned about. I have no hesitation in directing the Minister of Internal Affairs to make the statement. I think we should give him about two weeks within which he should report to us. Since the Ministry of Internal Affairs is not represented here, hon. Hope Mwesigye will inform them to handle this matter.

Hon. Awori raised the issue of protocol. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is directly responsible for this, together with the President’s Office. The minister will make a statement about issues concerning protocol within a week.

On the issue of laying of the wreath by hon. Zziwa, I was consulted that an honorable member wanted to do it. I think it would have been imprudent on the part of the Executive to say, ”No.” However, if the Speaker feels that it was wrong for a Member of Parliament to lay a wreath without getting permission from him that is a different matter.  As you know, under Article 98 of the Constitution, the Speaker is higher than the Prime Minister is.  Therefore, he is going to handle that matter.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague in charge of Government Affairs in the House that this is not a question for the Speaker. It is the established practice and there is no ad hocking. It is an established practice. Decorum is decorum. You cannot behave this way or that way.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: You see, when death occurs, it is a different matter. We were mourning and when a Member was deeply touched - she is a Chairperson of a very important committee - we felt that it could have been imprudent to stop her. Sometimes we are not machines; we use powers of discretion. Even the Speaker here has occasionally used powers of discretion. Therefore, from time to time, especially when we are mourning the dead, we use powers of discretion and I will never hesitate to use my powers of discretion. I am not a machine.

With regard to the issue of language, I think we have different cultural norms. That is really the starting point. Sometimes, people speak figuratively and other people misunderstand it.  The issue of national integration is at play and we are talking about the issue of trans-ethnic integration. How do you bring people of different ethnic groups to belong together? There must be a lot of tolerance; they must understand each other.  For example, there was a time I felt you were not in Parliament and I was deliberately rude in order to wake you up from being politically naughty.   Therefore, you should not incite us. Sometimes you incite the head of state; sometimes you incite the technocratic Prime Minister.

I try as much as possible to control my language. I think I have lost temper only twice but sometimes – and hon. Nasasira even asked me, “Prime Minister, what is happening?” However, I was very angry when a matter I was handling politically was brought here. I was handling it with the honourable Speaker and you were tarnishing the image of Parliament because you never understood it. There are issues we handle diplomatically with the Speaker and the President. 

Many people would like to tarnish the name of Parliament. However, when you imprudently make statements that increase the capacity of other people to tarnish Parliament, I get annoyed. So, sometimes it is important to get annoyed. And when I am annoyed, I keep quiet. My dear wife has recommended to me, “When you are very angry, please do not talk.” I try not to talk when I am very angry, but you should also avoid inciting me. Hon. Awori, you are a great friend of mine, but from time to time you are naughty. Even when His Excellency, the President, came to address us here, you were interrupting him, but he knows how to handle you. So, let us not incite each other.  

Finally, when you are aggrieved, there are courts of law to which you could go to get redress. You can also pray to the Almighty, the Creator, to make us behave well to each other. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, hon. Salaamu Musumba raised issues on clarifications for the House. I think her question was wider than being restricted to the House. She asked, “Are we now under a multiparty system or we are still running under a Movement system?” I think that was the question.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: That is a very critical question.  First, we are under a Movement system, but the elections will be held under a multiparty system.  Therefore, we are transiting from a Movement to a multiparty system. There are many laws, which we are going to present here. We are disaster-prepared; those laws are here to enable us to move properly. It is very important to move in such a way that we do not injure each other. That is the answer to her question, but we shall have elections under a multiparty system.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, could the Rt hon. Prime Minister tell us the characteristics of this transition? What are the basic characteristics? [Hon. Tim Lwanga: ”Yellow”] We need to know for example, that when you see red it means UPC, when you see green it means DP, when you see yellow, Movement and the rest of the colours and symbols.  What are the characteristics of the transition?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: One characteristic is fluidity, which makes things slippery. Therefore, it is very important to ask the relevant people, for example, the Attorney General, to avoid institutional and other forms of fluidity.

Another issue is that you must become very tolerant because there are even a few RDCs who have made mistakes. However, we have made it clear that people can go and carry out their campaigns within the law of the land. It is essential for us to clarify issues to the rank and file, and to those who are in charge of the systems at all levels.  

Of course, the external factor is also intervening in what is taking place. For example, when I met some of our financial partners, they were saying, “If you do not move to the multiparty system, we shall be displeased and it may even have economic consequences.” I told them, “Look! You can keep your money, you are not here to dictate to us, we are going to have a referendum” and I know that they are very happy with the multiparty system. Some have even given us deadlines that the laws regarding the operation of political parties should be tabled before September. We have made it clear that we have been amending the Constitution, now we have the Budget and the State of the Nation Address so they must be patient. The external factor is ubiquitous; it is widespread. I thank you.

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: Mr Speaker, I seek for clarification from the Rt hon. Prime Minister, who has answered my colleague’s concern and missed my point - the Minister of Works is now here - and it is in relation with the Northern Bypass. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Minister of Works was not here when you asked. He is going to be briefed and then make a statement. It is fair that way. I do not know whether the Minister of Lands was here.

11.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Matia Baguma Isoke): I thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague, hon. Okupa, met me yesterday on official and private issues. We discussed the delivery of water to his constituency and in particular to Bugondo Senior Secondary School. I do not know why the issue concerning surveying land in Teso escaped him. I would really have preferred that the question be brought to me and we handle it as we handled boreholes in his constituency.

On a serious note, my ministry is not aware of the kind of surveying that my colleague is talking about. I made a statement here two months ago. Systematic demarcation in Teso was halted until after training and sensitisation. I wish to report that following the directive I got here, we have held training courses for land boards in the Teso and Northern regions, including Buganda. We have been all over the place Mbarara, Masaka, Luweero, Jinja, Mukono, Mbale, Soroti, Lira and Arua. We have trained the land boards and trainers to go down and train land committees at the sub-county level.  

The subject of systematic demarcation is the cornerstone of this training because our desire is that land be demarcated for those who own and utilise it. Traditionally, it is demarcated in Busoga using the bilowa in order to avoid land disputes and to make it easy for the land committees and boards to allocate land in future.  Committees and Boards to allocate land in future.  

The purpose of acquisition of credit from the banks comes after securing leasehold. However, the main purpose is to make land secure, avoid disputes and to make it easy for developers to invest on their own land. My ministry is not doing what is happening in Teso. Now, systematic demarcation is going on in Bunyoro, in Kajara County of Ntungamo and Bukomansimbi County of Masaka. The subject is well explained to the people and they have accepted it. In Kajara, we are about to give out certificates of ownership to each holding in that county. I thank you, Sir.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL ROAD 
AUTHORITY BILL, 2005

MR LOOTE: Mr Speaker, maybe you could allow me to ask the Minister of Works a question before we go to the bills.

THE SPEAKER: No, we have overstretched this. It was meant to be communication of a few things but now we are taking an hour on this same subject. You will come in later; I will see how to handle it, please. 

11.38
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATION (Mr John Nasasira): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Uganda National Road Authority Bill, 2005” be read for a first time. I wish to lay the bill on the Table together with the accompanying certificate of financial implications signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee of Parliament handle and report promptly. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

11.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to Article 231(1), “The Inspectorate of Government shall submit to Parliament at least once in every six months, a report on the performance of its functions, making such recommendations as it considers necessary and containing such information as Parliament may require.” 

I beg to lay on the Table the report for the period January to June 2004 of the Inspectorate of Government.  

THE SPEAKER: Let the report be taken by the appropriate committee of Parliament.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF 
SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
i.	The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2004/05 and
ii.	The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2005/06.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, before the minister comes in for the motion, I would like to ask the Chairman of the Budget Committee to indicate to us what they think we should handle. We should have handled this business during June-August but we are just starting now in August when we should be finishing.  Last week, I asked the Committee on Budget to meet. Let them guide us on how we should handle this subject.  

MR AWORI: According to my Order Paper, there is item number five. Has it been amended? I am just wondering –(Interruption) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

11.43
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I apologise for the absence of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the minister of state. We shall handle this. Handling it means that the statement, which should have been read will be read after we have contacted them. They are handling some very urgent matters and that is why they are not here. You know, we have the politics of litigation affecting this country, which sometimes keeps them extremely busy.  I thank you 

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, we have complained from time to time the way the Cabinet likes to take this Parliament for granted. They have the communication system to reach your Office and advise you even on the last minute, that they will be unable to make such and such a statement. For the Rt hon. Prime Minister to come up belatedly after the reminder from the Speaker, as if we do not know where the Speaker sits, as if we do not know where the Clerk works, as if we did not know that the minister would not be here in time, is very absurd. We take a great exception to this type of contempt of Parliament. (Applause)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the Prime Minister as to whether this ministerial statement was in relation to the Domestic Relations Bill. This is one of the many businesses, which has been pending. I was looking forward to the ministerial statement, which would have enabled us to continue debating on the principles of this important bill considering that this bill should remain on the Order Paper so that Government does not forget its promise to report to this House. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, since this was a ministerial statement and the minister is not here, it would be speculative for us to debate the contents. We do not have a copy of the statement, so we should wait until the minister is ready, maybe in the afternoon or tomorrow. He will let us know. 

11.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Friday last week, the Budget Committee held a meeting with the chairpersons of sessional committees to workout a programme on how to handle the Budget this financial year. The Budget Act Section 9 requires sessional committees to report to Parliament on the Budget estimates that fall within the respective jurisdiction by the 31st day of August of each financial year. 

The Parliament pronounces itself on the Budget estimates thereby effectively passing the Budget. I would like to say that since the commencement of this Act, Parliament has been on time in passing the Budget. However, Mr speaker, given the Constitution amendment process which has taken a lot of time of this Parliament, there was no time allowed for the sessional committees to duly scrutinise the policy statements and enable committees to report on the specific data on value for money and the extent of achievements of targets of money received and spent as is required under Section 6(2) of the Budget Act.  

Given further that in accordance to Section 7 of the Budget Act, sessional committees did consider, discuss and review indicative allocation that fell under their jurisdiction and made recommendations on respective policies, recommendations of those sessional committees are contained in the Budget Committee report to His Excellency, the President, which we have circulated this morning.  

We have also circulated a report on the three-year micro-economic plan of Government, which was also sent to His Excellency, the President, before the 15th of May.  

Now given that background, I would like to report that the committee agreed to handle the Budget as follows:

This morning after the motion has been moved by the honourable minister, the Budget Committee presents its report because we are required by the Budget Act to present that report to you summarising the overall policy objectives of this financial year 2005/06 of the national budget, salient issues related to the medium term expenditure framework, crosscutting policy issues that affect budget implementation for sectors and recommendations which we made to Government and sector specific policy issues and recommendation.  

The report I have circulated is big, but I am going to do that in summary form and the general debate will then take off. In our estimation we would like to request that you give two days, today and tomorrow, for this general debate.

We would also like to request, Mr Speaker, that tomorrow, after the debate, the House be adjourned for two days to enable sessional committees interact with the sectors they supervise on Thursday and Friday so that on Monday we begin with receiving reports from sessional committees.  

We went further to have a standardized format that sessional committees are going to use to present reports on specific issues. And after the sessional committees have made these reports, then specific short questions or matters of clarification will be put to the relevant ministers who will respond to those issues, including issues that will have been raised during the general debate in these two days. By the end of the sessional committee reports, we expect that the appropriation bill will then be read and we will pronounce ourselves.  

I would like, for purposes of both Cabinet and Parliament, to inform my colleagues that we had agreed to move as follows on sessional committee reports:

That on Monday the 29th, the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, which we expect to be handling other bills, presents its first report in the afternoon.

On Tuesday, we will have two reports: One report in the morning and another report in the afternoon.

DR KIBIRIGE: Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, the statement that is being made by hon. Kiraso is extremely pertinent and important for all of us. May I find out, is she going to circulate that statement so that we all keep a record of what we must do on every other day? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: That is not a problem; it can be really addressed. You will get the copies.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, we had consulted with the honourable Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs, and I think she has got this programme. She had promised to pass on this programme to colleagues, ministers. However, since the honourable minister is in the House, if he could listen attentively and note down on which date his committee will be making its presentation, then he should be ready to respond on that day.

MRS MWESIGYE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true we consulted with hon. Beatrice Kiraso and the Speaker. I have actually circulated this information to all the ministers. So, I would request that everyone checks closely with his or her desks. Thank you.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, as the mover of the motion, I want to confirm that the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs has not only consulted with me but has sent me a copy of the proposed guidelines on how to proceed. Given the time constraint, we have no objection to the proposed procedure.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I was about to finish this.  So, I do not know why hon. Kibirige is being marginalized and discriminated against. (Laughter)  But the proposal is that we have one report on Monday afternoon and we finish it and we pronounce ourselves on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

On Tuesday 30 August, we will have the report on Works, Transport and Communications in the morning. After the report, we will ask issues of clarification and the minister will respond and we will pronounce ourselves on the Budget figures.

The same day in the afternoon, the Finance Committee will present its report. On Wednesday – we are talking about next week - Trade, Tourism and Industry in the morning and Natural Resources in the afternoon.

On Thursday, 1 September 2005, Local Government and Public Service in the morning and Social Services in the afternoon.
 
On Friday, 2 September 2005, because it will be half day, we will receive only one report of Defence and Internal Affairs. We will continue on Monday afternoon with Agriculture. 

On Tuesday, 6 September 2005, we will receive Presidential and Foreign Affairs report in the morning and pass the appropriation bill in the Afternoon.

I would like to make a request to you that Section 22 empowers you to extend any period provided under this Budget Act for a reasonable period.  

Now having said that, I would like to beg that you extend the period for passing this Budget for one week from the 31 August 2005. 

Before I finish, once again I would like to appeal to colleagues to cooperate if we are to do this work in this time frame that we have agreed on. I also wish to ask the honourable Prime Minister to preside over his team to be cooperative as we go through this exercise. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson.  Honourable members, she wants two days; but tomorrow we have a very distinguished visitor who will address Parliament. I have just received this information that tomorrow we may have a very distinguished visitor addressing us. We expect His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Tanzania, Benjamin Mkapa, to address us. [Hon. Members: “Where?”]. You have asked where, at our home. We shall make arrangements for that. So, this may somehow - but then we shall compensate on a Friday. We may have a full day because after the Budget is processed we intend to have some break of three to four days. That will compensate you your Friday if we use the whole day.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, you have raised a very important news item, which again reminds me of my most recent concern that is protocol for us to saunter when our guest is already here. I am particularly appealing to the Cabinet, which seems to be totally oblivious of the protocol of the august House that, once our guest is here let them stay out if they have not arrived on time.

11.55
MRS MUSUMBA: I am concerned about the Budget and as the programme has been proposed by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee. I am seeking clarification from you, Mr Speaker; given the practice of this House in budgeting and passing budgets, would it be against any procedure or any law if we pass the Budget on time without the usual debate? I am looking at us saving time because from my nine-year experience I know we can change nothing. Therefore, I would like to pass it even without reading it. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, as indicated last week, some parliaments do not debate all the votes. What they do, they decide on some ministries. They say, let us debate Ministry of Agriculture or Education and then the others they pass the figure. The figures have to be read so that they can be incorporated in the appropriation bill.  

They have tried to abridge the time because as I said, normally we have been dealing with June, July and August. According to the Budget Act, as I said, it is 31 August, but definitely we will not be able to complete this process that is why she is asking for an extension of a week. But having handled these budgets under the Budget Act, I think we have some experience to be able to cut out what is not necessary and only bring in what is necessary for purposes of complying with the process. 

11.58
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Mr Speaker, I must apologise to my colleague, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, because I am the Vice Chairperson but in view of what I have heard this morning and afternoon and considering the very tight programme we have, it is also possible that instead of Parliament discussing each of the reports of the sessional committees, we can have all the sessional committees if they are ready to present their reports and have questions and answers given by the minister in one day and then proceed to the next stage. 

We are really short of time, that one everybody knows. If we can find a way of saving time, and as hon. Musumba said, we are not likely to have too many changes as things stand. It is better that we try to dispose of this process as first as possible so that we can get on with other business which is very urgent.  

So, depending on the speed with which the sessional committees dispose of the business, it could be possible to have all the committees report and then we discuss and pass the Budget and then go to other bills like the appropriation bill.

12.00
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is the first time in this Seventh Parliament that we shall have a foreign head of state addressing us. As you realise, President Mkapa is on his way –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You are bringing in another subject. We are dealing with the Budget.

MR KATUNTU: We have not closed the other one, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am seeking your clarification. When you say, “In this Parliament”, is it the institution or the venue?

MR KATUNTU: This venue.

THE SPEAKER: His Eminence Pope Paul addressed the Sixth Parliament here.

MR KATUNTU: Anyway, whatever it is, Mr Speaker, my point is –(Interruption)
 
THE SPEAKER: We are on the Budget

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I thought the rules say when one Member is speaking really the others should sit down. I see everybody standing. I do not know what is going on.

THE SPEAKER: No, no, you are right but is it on the Budget or the address by –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: I am seeking clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: On what?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I do not think hon. Nakabirwa is the Speaker. She should not ask me to sit down. I was seeking clarification on the President’s address to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: You will be advised. We are making arrangements for that.

MR KATUNTU: Can’t we be ready, Mr Speaker, for this?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I am on the Budget. I fully appreciate the constraint of time we are facing. I also appreciate the work of the Budget Committee in synthesizing most of the issues to reduce the general debate. But a national Budget on the agenda of Parliament is so central because this is where the power lies that we exercise on behalf of those we represent. Consequently, to provide time for general debate regardless of the vote is so central to the democracy, equity, and location question.  

Therefore, as a compromise, I would suggest, Mr Speaker, you use your discretion to provide time for general debate and we request the Chairperson for Budget to help us point out the ministries that will be subject to more detailed scrutiny while the rest we can go by whatever the committee has recommended. It is so important, Mr Speaker. 

MS KIRASO: Let me give information to Prof. Kamuntu Ephraim. I have said I have condensed this report. Actually what I am going to do is to point out the issues that we thought were very important in each of the sectors, so that in the general debate people are free to debate or comment on those areas where they have a particular interest and then put their questions to the relevant ministers.  

I do not think it is fair for anybody to say, “No, let us restrict ourselves to Works, Transport and Communication.” somebody else might be interested in Defence and another one might be interested in Education. But I am going to highlight the issues very briefly. Actually, I wish we could start –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think what we are going to do is this. After this I am going to give Members time, just an hour or two, to go through this report, which you have given them today so that at 2.30 p.m. we exactly start the debate. Tomorrow we shall start early because I think the address is supposed to be late in the afternoon.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking a clarification from you because from a standard practice we always have the State of the Nation Address and a debate. I just wanted a clarification. What happens after the State of the Nation Address?

THE SPEAKER: Normally, yes we do, but this is more important than the general debate. The State of the Nation Address, we shall see if time allows. But in any case the State of the Nation Address reflects what is going to be in the Budget.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I only wanted to ally the fears of Members that in this condensed framework we have, the Budget Committee has gone ahead also to establish a standard procedure by which reporting must be made.  

Therefore, the sessional committees should take this seriously and adhere to the direction that has been given to them by the Budget Committee. So that they make only specific reporting which are accurate and highlight the real issues in their sectors other than wobbling around and writing too many things which will waste a lot of time.

Secondly, we also expect that in the general debate we request Members not to go round and round issues but to point out specific issues in the minimum time possible so that we save on time because we are really late.  

But then the issue of saying that certain ministries be taken up and others are not considered is not possible because it is not our practice. I know in Kenyan Parliament they do that, but our method of doing things is different and since this is the culture we have adopted, we only need to improve upon it but we comprehensively handle all ministries.

THE SPEAKER: They used to do it here, not only in Kenya. Some time ago, they used to select but it does not matter. We shall see how to proceed.  Honourable members, you have received this report and you need to use it to debate. I think I should suspend the proceedings to enable you go through this report then at 2.30 p.m. we start the debate –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Maybe would it not be prudent for me first to move the motion?

THE SPEAKER: You see the motion was apparently moved. We tend to forget this one. When the Budget is read the motion is moved. But the purpose here is to remind us what was moved, but the motion was moved. 

(The House was suspended at 12.05 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.50 p.m._)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I informed you this morning His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Tanzania, Benjamin Mkapa, will be visiting Uganda tomorrow and will address Parliament.  

According to the programme, he will be received at 14.10 hours - that is the language of the Police - that is 2.10 p.m. He will inspects the guard of honour and proceed to the VIP lounge for signing of the visitor’s book. Then at 14.40 hours to 15.40 hours, he will proceed to Parliament Chambers and address Parliament.  

After that he will be with us for about 20 minutes for any questions - we shall decide on what to do with this particular time.  But the President will come here at that time. I expect all of you to be here on time. We should be here on time because when we adjourn today we shall adjourn to 10.00a.m. so that we continue with the debate on the Budget.  But by this time all of you should be here.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me again to raise this matter of protocol. I was just wondering if tomorrow we would be in the same fashion as we did previously at the Conference Centre when one head of state was also retiring. He paid a courtesy call on Parliament and Members of Parliament had an opportunity of exchanging few remarks with him. But when you said, “We shall see when we get there”. I was just wondering, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am working out that particular detail and I will let you know in time.  

Hon. Minister of Finance, you had actually made the motion when the Budget was read but you can restate the motion.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that: Parliament resolves itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of:

i) 	The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the financial year 2004/05 and 
ii) 	The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2005/06. I beg to move.

MS KIRASO: Seconded.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, as we all know, under Article 155(1) of the Constitution, the President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament estimates of revenues and expenditure for each financial year.  

On Wednesday, 8 June 2005, the Minister of Finance on behalf of His Excellency the President did lay before this House in his budget speech estimates of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2005/06. Those estimates now are before the House for your scrutiny and hopefully approval. I beg to move that the House does consider the proposals and approve the Budget as requested. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Yes Chairperson.

3.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (MS Beatrice Kiraso Birungi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion as moved by the honourable Minister of Finance. 

As Chairperson of the Budget Committee, I wish to report to this House that Parliament received from Government the three-year macroeconomic plan and indicative budget framework for this fiscal year as per section 4(1) and 4(2) of the Budget Act 2001.  

These submissions were considered by the sessional committees which submitted their recommendations to the Budget Committee which committee in turn scrutinized the estimates and recommendations and made a report to His Excellency, the President, through you, Mr Speaker, in accordance with section 7 (3) of the Budget Act. 
 
Section 7(8) of the Budget Act provides for the Budget Committee to present the recommendations submitted under Section 7(3) to Parliament. The idea behind this is to see how consistent Parliament’s recommendations are with the budget speech.  

This report summarises the said submissions and the full texts of the documents that have been distributed to you, honourable members. In due course, the relevant sessional committees will present details of sector report arising from scrutiny of the ministerial policy statements. But they will restrict themselves to budgetary issues. I am going to highlight some policy issues that were raised at that time. Actual changes in the budgetary in the figures will be effected during the consideration of the appropriation bill.  

The committee noted government expenditure objectives as increased household incomes, tackling unemployment and maintaining macro economic stability with the main strategies being increasing funding for agriculture, value addition, improving infrastructure, rising domestic revenue and improving the efficiency of government expenditure.

On macro economic plan and budget framework, the committee noted government’s intention to build a self-sustaining export led economy, in which the benefits of growth are shared among all Ugandans. This requires a number of supportive economic conditions such as a low and stable rate of inflation, a competitive exchange rate for exporters, low and stable interest rates for the private sector steady growth in domestic savings and accelerating economic growth through increased private sector investment.

The committee noted government’s ambitious macro economic target of annual inflation at 5 per cent and 1 per cent annual reduction in fiscal deficit, 0.5 per cent annual growth in revenue limit of external borrowings to $200 million annually and maintaining foreign exchange reserves of five months of import cover plus real GDP growth rate of 7 per cent. Some of these targets have been set for a long time. 

I will point out some issues, which were found crosscutting. The committee noted that the income tax threshold of Ugshs 130,000 per month no longer provide the minimum basket of goods and services and the current price levels. We wish to retaliate our earlier position that this threshold should be adjusted at least to Ugshs 235,000. (Applause)

On graduated tax, the Budget Committee was concerned that the impending proposal – scraping graduated tax in this financial year will cause a funding gap of about Ugshs 80 billion. The advice we gave then was that government should carefully work out alternatives for filling the funding gap and we hope that at an appropriate time the honourable Minister will inform us on how this gap, especially local governments intends to be filled.

We have noted time and again that there is duplication of services among some ministries. There are cases of budgetary waste arising out of duplication of activities in some ministries and departments. Examples are activities related to value addition and AGOA being under the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry as well as the Office of the President. The Ministry of Finance too does some PMA work under its activities, which were submitted to us.

Some duplicity was also found with monitoring PAP activities, which falls under the Office of the President and the Office of the Prime Minister.  Coordination of HIV/AIDS bodies falls under the Ministry of Health and Office of the President.

Then there is purchase of classified and communication equipment for security agencies, ensuring implementation of Public Service regulations and so many others. We have found that they appear under different ministries. So, we do not know who actually is doing that activity.

The Committee on Interest Payments notes the large interest bill on local and foreign borrowing amounting to Ugshs 318 billion, which is 10 per cent of the budget. This has been a source of concern. Most of the interest is on government instrument like Treasury Bills. Deliberate programme for managing the interest costs and other measures that will flee up resources in the domestic financial system should be treated as a matter of priority.

The committee was also concerned about the stock of domestic arrears that stands at 30 per cent of the annual budget. We wish to point out that this affects enterprises, livelihoods of people and to some extent contributes to wide spread poverty. It also has implications on liquidity investment growth and the tax base.

On public administration again we would like to say that public administration of 12.8 per cent of the total budget is still too large and remains a concern of Parliament.

The committee recommended areas that could be re-examined to solve the problem. And these have been mentioned in our earlier meetings including the size and a number of political institutions and appointees, local government and urban authorities, statutory bodies and regulatory authorities. 

The other is efficient maintenance and use of public assets, including accommodation for Government offices.  Government was advised to acquire at least a building. Because when we looked at the money, which Government is spending on paying for rent for Government offices compared to what Government would pay if they put up one building, there would be some saving.  

There is a heavy burden on Government arising out of quota awards and compensation by Government, some of which results from corruption and others of course from outdated laws.

Decentralization: There have been reports of continued budget leakages due to poor tendering processes, lack of procurement capacity and outright corruption in Local Government.  Poor supervision of works and corruption have resulted in wide spread cases of shoddy work.  More precise and deliberate measures need to be taken to ensure value for money in this area.

The other cross cutting issue is counterpart funding.  This was identified as one of the absorption obstacles for foreign funds.  The committee advised the Government in future to negotiate with development partners for affordable levels of counterpart funding and to stick to commitments made by Government.  

In the same vein, therefore, Parliament is advised to ensure availability of counterpart funds as a condition for posting of this loan requests.

Presidential pledges: This one was found to be another source of budgetary distortion.  We would like to recommend that Presidential pledges be rationalized within the appropriate sector and programmed accordingly for effective delivery in the medium term expenditure framework.

The sector weighed approach has been found to have some shortcomings in allocation of resources.  In our recommendations, Government was advised to reconsider this approach to allow activities and programmes compete for budgetary resources in their own merit.  This will provide an opportunity for wealth creating sectors to have a good call on the resources.  

On the classification of sectors: some sectors and activities have been found to be misleading. We recommend that the entire classification of sectors be reviewed.  For example, the committee is wondering whether Parliament should fall under the sector of the Public Administration while it is an independent arm of the State, or whether it should be called a legislative sector in its own right, because this is a bit misleading when Parliament is lumped up with public administration. 

Supplementary Budget: Supplementary expenditure continues to be a source of budget distortions.  There is need to address the contradiction between the Constitution, the Public Finance and Accountability Act and the Budget Act regarding how best to deal with supplementary expenditure if we are to maintain good budget discipline.

Another cross cutting issue is the subscription and contributions to international organizations. The committee recommended that Government re-examine these subscriptions and contributions, actually the membership, because we found that the Government of Uganda had memberships with so many international organizations.  But when it comes to paying our subscriptions, we are either not on time or we are defaulting all the time. It becomes embarrassing when we are pushed out of the meetings because we have not paid our subscriptions in those bodies.  So we are recommending that they be scrutinized and we only belong to those we must belong to and those that we can afford to subscribe to.

I will now move to the sectors. I would like once again to say, honourable members, that the reports which I have submitted are a bit detailed.  But in each sector I have picked out specific issues to report to you and for you to debate on and make further recommendations. In the interest of time in my reporting I am not going to be reading word by word. I am going to give what we commented on every sector.  The sectors will be based on the sectoral committees.   

Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

The committee observed that the share of the sector ceiling increased by 31.6 billion, which is from 3.4 per cent of the budget in 2004/2005 to 4.1 per cent, which is commendable.  However, the committee wishes to recommend that the share, which is going to this sector, should progressively increase over the years towards the ten per cent, which is recommended by the Maputo Protocol because we think this is a very important sector.    

It was noted that Government is making efforts to enhance water for production through irrigation and water harvesting.  It is recommended that deliberate efforts be made to fully utilize the country’s water bodies.

Disease Control and Research Development

These are very important aspects of agricultural modernization. The committee feels or felt that enough attention was not being given to that sector.  It strongly recommended that disease control for animals be given higher priority than what is being given now.

An allocation of shillings one billion in 2005/2006 for vaccines should progressively increase to five billion in the medium term.  

Tourism, Trade and Industry Sector

In order to reflect the true funding situation of this ministry, we would like to recommend that wage subventions of semi autonomous bodies be put separately from the non-wage allocation of the ministry, so that they do not give a false picture of a ministry having a fat budget when actually it does not.  So we recommend that separation.  

The committee is concerned about the delay in the proposed merger of the Uganda Investment Authority, Uganda Tourist Board and the Export Promotion Board.  It is almost six years since this proposal was brought to us and we do not know why this is being delayed.

There is a committee called the Inter-institutional Trade Committee. We would like to recommend that this committee should be strengthened and a bill to formalize and legalize it should be brought to Parliament as soon as possible.  

The warehousing receipt systems

The committee recommends that the Bill on the Warehousing Receipt system be expeditiously brought to Parliament for consideration.  

Uganda Industrial Research Institute

The committee recommended that it should be adequately funded to enable it manage its operations.

Tourism Sub-sector

Under that Ministry, we have only two recommendations. We would like to recommend this department for accelerated transformation into a semi autonomous agency called “The Uganda Museums and Monuments Agency”. 

On international transport and airfields, the committee recommended that an airfield be built in Kampala to facilitate easy movement of tourists by air instead of the tedious road transport, funds allowing.  

On the Social Services Sector, the committee noted the presidential pledge to enhance salaries of primary school teachers; and in our report then, some of these things, honourable members, have changed since the time when we made the report before the budget was read and today, and I think Government has stuck to its commitment of increasing the teachers’ salaries.  But we also advise that salary increments should be standardised under the Ministry of Public Service; they should not be made ad-hoc so that there is ownership and commitment by Government.  

On the mid-cycle exams, the committee welcomed the introduction of mid-cycle exams for primary 4 pupils as a measure to address quality weaknesses of UPE; and we also welcomed the provision of Uganda shillings one billion.  Further, the committee recommends that Government meets the costs for UNEB-PLE fees of pupils in both Private and Government aided schools.

On the school feeding programme, the committee was not satisfied with the utilisation of Uganda shillings 10 billion which was spent by the Ministry of Education in the year 2004/2005.  A comprehensive study should be carried out and brought to Parliament.  It is, however, recommended that meanwhile that study is being carried out, Government should consider funding for this item for children in internally displaced people’s camps as a matter of priority.  

On school dropouts, the committee was concerned about the high rate of school dropouts, this trend especially for girls, undermines the achievements of UPE.  The committee strongly recommended a study into the causes of this phenomenon with a view of addressing it.  

On secondary education, honourable members, the committee noted the need to upgrade at least one O’level school to A’level in each county where no A’level school exists.  This will support the quota system, which is now an admission policy to public universities.  The committee recommended that children from the insurgency areas should be allowed to benefit from both the bursary scheme and from the internally displaced persons fees policy. 

The committee also was concerned about the delay in the construction of the seed schools, which were funded in the 2002/2003 Budget.  The committee wishes to know why the activity has not been undertaken to-date.  We further recommend that Government provides science equipment and teaching materials to both public and private schools.  The committee also recommended that community non-profit private schools should be identified for affirmative action.  I will not go into details; I think some of these are very clear.

On the Business Technical Vocational Education Training (BTVET), the committee recommended that Government identifies resources to begin the construction of the sixteen polytechnics as pledged.  The Government should also focus on technical institutions across the country.  The committee therefore recommends that the funding of the National Training Institute be PAF-protected to shelter them from expenditure cuts during resource shortfalls. 

On tertiary education, the committee noted that Gulu University was expanding programmes at a very fast rate, and recommended that the university should introduce new programmes on a rational basis by allowing earlier ones to take root before taking on new ones.  The committee noted the low funding for the School of Medicine and recommended that this be addressed.  Integrated courses in agriculture and environment studies that were the initial basis of Gulu University should be considered at the earliest opportunity.

The committee also rejected the proposal by the Ministry of Education to reallocate Ug shs 500 million from Mbarara University to Makerere University Business School (MUBS) and Uganda Management Institute (UMI), reason being that Mbarara University is also grossly under funded.  So the Government was advised to find alternative funding to MUBS and UMI.  

The committee was informed that Mbarara Teaching Hospital was to be transferred to the Ministry of Health, and the committee welcomes this move, but recommends that it should be transferred with its entire budgetary allocations because it is common practice to transfer institutions but then leave behind the budgets, which are due to them.  

The committee noted that Ug shs 50 million starting the Public University in the Eastern Region was inadequate and proposed an allocation of Ug shs 3.8 billion for this activity in 2005/2006 from the Ministry of Education budget. We have proposed a reallocation.

Uganda Management Institute, formerly known as the Institute of Public Administration (IPA), was used for training and re-training of civil servants. Since then, it has been turned into one of the schools of Makerere University issuing degrees and diplomas on its behalf. The committee recommends that Government finds an alternative institution to provide the in-service training for civil servants hitherto carried out by the UMI.

On sports, Mr Speaker, we would like to note that sports has been a bit marginalised and we would like to propose that a separate budget line should be established for the sports sector and the relevant funds moved to it accordingly.

On the Education Service Commission, the committee was concerned that although funds for remuneration of staff are voted every year, the Education Service Commission does not get corresponding operational funds to facilitate the recruitment exercise.  This is a bit funny, Mr Speaker, where we have got an Education Service Commission, which has not been facilitated to carry out interviews to recruit teachers and then there is money in the budget for the recruitment of teachers.  So by the end of the year that money is there, the teachers have not been recruited because the body that should be doing that has not been properly facilitated.  We thought there was a mismatch.

Ministry of Health

The committee notes that compensation to the Ebola victims is long overdue, and the committee strongly recommends that these victims of Ebola be paid as had been promised. The committee also recommends that maintenance of medical equipment should be accorded priority to avoid high costs of replacement when they break down. We have expensive medical equipment, but money for maintenance is not provided. So when they break down, Government of course incurs more funds to put them right or to buy entirely new ones.

The committee was also concerned about the continued under funding of Mulago Hospital and the inadequate staff in many health units, yet funds are appropriated every Financial Year for remuneration of new staff.  The committee noted that increased funding for the Wage Bill of the Health Sector was not matched with the attendant recruitment expenses.

Gender, Labour and Social Development

The committee notes that despite the projected increase in the ministry’s budget, this ministry still suffers from gross under funding; and the committee recommends that Article 246 of the Constitution should be operationalised to streamline the activities of cultural institutions.  Provision of benefits to traditional or cultural leaders should be considered as a priority in the sector and should be funded accordingly.

We would also like to note the under funding or actually the no funding at all of the: National Women Councils, Youth Councils and Councils for those with disabilities. 

Works, Housing and Communications

The committee wishes to note that that sector is very important and it does not attract private investment.  Well, we can have private people investing in either education or health, putting up private schools but you can never have private investment in works.  Roads for example, are key to economic and social development and yet the share of the budget that goes to this sector does not reflect its importance.  Funds are spread out very thinly by embarking on too many projects at the same time and in the end none of them is finished. 

Shoddy work continues to characterise the Works Sector. The quality of roads now has an average lifespan of less than a decade, and yet the maturity of loans, which we contract for such roads, is about 40 years.  So, most roads benefit from four cumulative loans even before the first loan has been paid. The heavy repayment burden should be viewed as a matter of concern and be addressed accordingly. 

On the Housing Sector, the committee recommended that Government play a pivotal role by evolving a comprehensive housing policy. This House would like to have an update on the implementation of the condominium law. 

On the Communication Sector, the committee noted the need to make it more efficient and effective by spreading to rural areas. There is need to improve competition by licensing more providers and introducing other products. The Communications Commission should carryout research on new communications possibilities in line with the global technological trends. 

On the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Sector, the funding of this sector does not seem to match the importance of this sector.  For example, Mr Speaker, we note the funding gap of two billion shillings, which is required by the Administrator General’s Department for new space and for rental arrears - two billion - it is not provided for.  

The Law Development Center

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation for the creation of the separate vote for LDC. But also requires that LDC provides accountability for the fees collections and the operations of the printing facilities which they have been carrying out over the years.  I hope the relevant ministers are taking note of some of these!

On the Directorate of the Public Prosecutions, there is need for this department to purchase revised laws in order to stem the incidents of losing cases.  

On the Parliamentary commission, Mr Speaker, with the provision of Ug shs 42.72 billion for activities of Parliament, there is a funding gap of Ug shs 16.8 billion to make it only 1.63 percent of the total budget.  We feel again that this being an independent arm of Government, a percentage of 1.63 of the total budget is still too low.  

I would like for comparison purposes to inform this House that Kenya and Ghana Parliaments have got shares of four and seven percent respectively of their national budgets compared to ours of 1.6 percent.  The committee notes that if the funding is not increased, the Parliamentary Commission will face severe challenges in funding the 8th Parliament.  This is given the challenges of the size of the chamber, office space, equipment and facilities for both Government and opposition leaders because we have to be mindful of where we are moving to; Parliament will be funding both Government leaders and opposition leaders in Parliament.

Public Service and Local Government

The committee agrees with the following priorities of the Ministry of Public Service: There is a budget requirement for computed pension gratuity (CPG) of 1,135 officers expected to retire during this Financial Year and that requires Ug shs 44.72 billion.  We also agree with the priority of the 329 former employees of East African Community who need four billion.  We also agree with the restructuring of local governments in a phased manner, but that money, which we have talked about, is still a gap in the budget; it has not been found.

On the creation of new districts, Mr Speaker, some of them were not earlier provided for and this will definitely impose further budgetary challenges, which the committee also noted that the restructuring of local governments would also increase the budgetary burden especially on pension arrears. It would be prudent for the House to be informed on how these new districts are going to be funded so that it is not just byoya bya’nswa to the people who have got the districts. 

On Natural Resources, the committee noted that it is grossly under funded as compared to its potential of generating wealth and development in the economy.  

The Energy Sector, energy and mineral development, the committee strongly recommended that energy and minerals constitute a separate sector-working group in order to enable them effectively play an important role in national development.  The committee noted that ESKOM is a major shareholder of UMEME, given that UMEME is a distributor while ESKOM is a generator of power. This situation is recreating a monopoly which privatisation was meant to address in the first place. The committee noted the necessity to fund the Kenya-Uganda pipeline.

Water, Land and Environment

The committee recommends that NEMA should be provided with a separate vote to ensure continuity given that in the past most of the funds to NEMA have been donor funded.  So, when donors stop giving us this money and we do not create its own vote, NEMA will cease to exist.  The committee, recommends that works in the Water Sector be exempted from VAT as was done with the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications under roads and bridges construction last Financial Year. 

Presidential and Foreign Affairs

State House: the committee is concerned that many activities carried out by State House are also a mandate of other ministries and departments. We have a belief that this is wasteful as budget resources are duplicated and service delivery is deficient. The committee recommends that State House only carries out a supervisory role of other ministries rather than getting into the real work, which is being done by the other ministries.  

On the Office of the Prime Minister and Non Governmental Organisations in Northern Uganda in particular, the committee recommends that the NGO board in the Ministry of Internal Affairs be properly facilitated and take up the monitoring of the NGO’s in the whole country. The supervision of NGO activities falls under both the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Office of the Prime Minster and we would like to request that this be harmonised so that we know where the NGOs activities are being supervised. 

On feeding of Internally Displaces Persons, the committee observed that humanitarian assistance features as under funded priority in this priority with an allocation of only Ug shs 366 million and a funding gap of Ug shs 443 million. The committee noted the need for Government to fill the gaps in the food supply by the World Food Programme because we feel this is Government’s responsibility.  

Mr Speaker, there is what we call the Karamoja question which always comes and we think it is always something wider than the way we are putting it.  The committee recommends that a comprehensive and systematic strategy be devised to tackle the Karamoja question.  For example, we think the Karamoja question is more than disarmament.  Disarmament should be undertaken but in conjunction with public investment to tap the wealth potential in that area. 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs
We have a comment on missions’ property abroad; the committee recommends that management of public assets abroad be streamlined to improve efficiency and effectiveness.  The operation of Uganda Property Holding Company should be re-examined and a proper up-to-date register for these properties should be maintained. Mr Speaker, we have since learned that there was a Cabinet subcommittee, which went to look at our assets abroad maybe we will get a report at an appropriate time so that this issue does not continue appearing in our reports. 

On the East African Community, the funds provided in the budget as annual contributions to East African Community are inadequate.  Sometimes there is a problem because the East African Community starts encroaching on the budget of the ministry.  The committee recommended that this be addressed, because if we are committed to the East African Community and all that goes with it, enough funding has got to be found. 

But in particular, on the East African Legislative Assembly, the committee would like to recommend that its funds be moved from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Parliamentary Commission; the Parliamentary Commission together with the East African Legislative Members have discussed this issue.  They would like to request this House that their budget comes under the Parliamentary Commission rather than remaining under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  It is a recommendation, which we are giving to this House.

On the Commonwealth Heads Of Government Meeting (CWHOGM) 2007, the committee recommended that adequate preparations towards that meeting should be made to avoid national embarrassment, and we would also request that a short progress report on this item be given to the House so that we are also on board and know what is going on.

On Uganda Aids Commission, community led HIV/AIDS initiative, which is called the (CHII) project, the committee was informed that the World Bank is willing to fund phase II of this project if the Government of Uganda approves it.  The phase II of the CHII project funds to fight HIV/AIDS we recommend should be approved and the mitigation of the micro-economic plans be dealt with later; the micro-economic stability.  Because this is something that we feel is very important.

Mass Mobilisation

The Movement Secretariat in particular, given the political transition from Movement to multipartism, the committee recommended that the budget for the Movement Secretariat be reviewed, because we are still in the transition.  I think the relevant minister will give us a report on how they are going to handle the budget for the secretariat and when it will finally be wound up.

Defence and Internal Affairs Sector

The committee notes that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is also grossly under funded, hence unable to carry out the following activities: recruitment of Police Constables; mobilisation of auxiliary forces; and pay off of rebel groups that entered into negotiations with the government for example, UNRF. 

On the Police in particular, the Police Force seems to have been neglected, which might account for the corruption in that force.  The national integrity survey has ranked this institution as the most corrupt.  The committee recommends that Government makes substantial investment in strengthening the force in terms of recruitment, equipping and housing.  The committee recommends that the law dealing with recruitment, management and operations of auxiliary forces should be enacted as a matter of urgency. 

Mr Speaker, this one is not in the report, but the Minister of Internal Affairs at one time promised this House that he would give us an update on how he was handling the issue of fire fighting.  I think he said he was dealing with a private company called “Fire Masters”, we would like to have an update on that, because I am sure it has got budgetary implications.

On Prisons, the committee recommends that a comprehensive programme to rehabilitate prisons be put in place over the medium term. 

For the Ministry of Defence, we note the persistent increase in funding of this sector in the empty ceilings.  The Ministry of Defence also, continues to make unrealistic budgets and remains weak in accountability.  The committee was concerned that the Ministry of Defence was continuing to deduct housing allowances from all officers and men of UPDF to fund construction projects.  The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that this is wrong and it must stop because construction of barracks is a responsibility of Government and not the serving officers.

On the disarmament in Karamoja, the committee recommends the involvement of neighbouring countries in a joint disarmament exercise.  We are aware that Kenya is already on board and we would like to see Sudan and Ethiopia being incorporated in the exercise. The committee further reiterates that Karamoja disarmament is a law and order matter, which should be transferred or handled by Police for better implementation. 

The committee recommended that Mubende Rehabilitation Center should only be used for rehabilitation of disabled combatants for eventual integration in the forces or communities and the Workman’s Compensation Act should be amended to include combatants who are injured in action.

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

The committee recommends that activities of NPART should be reviewed and the law should be revised to make NPART more effective and more relevant.   

The Ministry of Finance, the committee noted, does not take seriously the recommendations of this Parliament to strengthen the National Planning Authority. The long term planning function of the Ministry of Finance should be moved to the NPA, which should be adequately funded to carry out this function.  Actually we had recommended that the Ministry of Finance and Planning be separated to enhance the planning function so that finance concentrates on collecting money while planning concentrates on how to spend that money.

Sector projects should be divested from the Ministry of Finance and be transferred to the relevant mandated sector ministries for implementation and monitoring. We have discovered that finance holds on money, which should be going to other projects in other ministries.

Mr Speaker, this forms a summary on the policy issues, which were raised by the committee. I had proposed earlier that as the debate ensues and members are bringing in more recommendations and observations, we would ask the ministers to take down what is relevant to them so that they respond after their sectors have presented their reports.  I think it will be neater that way.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  Honourable members, you may appreciate this was the position of our committees through the Budget Committee as of May this year and it was made as a process of participation in the budgeting process for year 2005-2006. It has been presented before we start having a general debate on the ministerial budgets.  

It is in a way saying, if the Budget Committee was the one to plan for this year’s Budget, this is what should be guiding each committee and because it has been presented before the general debate, we expect the committees to have very brief reports when they eventually report because it will be merely supplementing on what has been presented by the chairperson.  

Maybe they will be talking about things that have developed since they made this particular report.  That is why this debate is going to take a very short time before we approve and get the Appropriation Bill, and therefore, when you are making your contribution to the general debate, choose the area where you have an interest; make the point and then we proceed.

3.44
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee for this report.  However, as you have advised, I would like to make a few comments on some sections of the report and I wish to address myself first of all on the question of education in this country.  

In paragraph 43, the Committee informs us that the Presidential pledge to raise the salaries of primary school teachers to Ug shs 200,000 is now going to be implemented in phases. Mr Speaker, and honourable members, the President is the fountain of honour and I take it that the President speaks wisely. Presidents do not crack jokes at public fora because whatever they say is supposed to be polished; and the President without being moved by anyone, promised teachers that their salary would be increased to Ug shs 200, 000. 

The condition of teachers in this country is in an extremely sorry state and I take it that the President spoke after he had been advised. I invite Parliament to join us in making sure that we find money to raise the salary of primary school teachers to Ug shs 200,000 this year.  Otherwise, the President will cease to be a fountain of honour if he talks and cannot enforce what he says.  

The other question that I want to address myself on is the question of the mid cycle exams in paragraph 44. The Committee informs us that among other things, these exams at primary 4 will enable or give pupils an opportunity to exercise their competence at reading, writing and numeric.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to ask one simple question. Do we need a mid cycle exam to know that today, even at primary 7 our pupils cannot read and write their own names?  The answer definitely is, no. I think we shall be putting in place a policy that will not solve the problem.  The problem why many of the pupils cannot read and write at primary level is because the training of teachers is poor; there are inadequate teaching aids, and there are very few teachers in certain schools. 

You also know that the inspectorate function in this country has collapsed.  At the time I went to primary school, you would see ladies and gentlemen entering our classrooms; they would sit at the back and observe what the teachers were doing; that is no longer in place. Now, instead of us putting money in mid cycle exams, let us address these issues. This money can be best used under the Education Standards Agency, such that we step up inspection to make sure that the teachers teach well, but if you give exams to people who have been taught poorly, the result is very obvious.

On the question of establishing an ‘A’ level school in every county, I would like to say that I welcome it, but before we do that, we must remember that whereas Government promised to put a secondary school in every sub county, this has not been yet achieved. Even where Government has grant-aided schools, most of the schools have less than three teachers on the Government payroll.  

My proposal would, therefore, be that before we think of moving to that level, let us:
(i) 	That every Government aided secondary school in the sub county has the minimum 12 teachers that Government has proposed.  
(ii) 	That these secondary schools have libraries and laboratories, then we shall move to another level, otherwise, we shall be stretching ourselves very thin and we shall not have any impact.

Finally, regarding higher education I would like to agree with the Committee that there is –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, member, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The clarification I want from my brother, hon. Wandera, is he implying that in the event that we do not have resources, instead of starting a secondary school with meager resources and limp with the little available is that we starve them until we are able to put up a standard modern secondary school?

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Bright Rwamirama, Maj. Retired, that half-baked material is more dangerous than that which has not been baked at all.  What is happening now is that, Government has started secondary schools and there are no teachers.  My view is that; let us deal with the ‘O’ level section properly such that there are enough teachers and teaching aids before starting the ‘A’ level section at some of these other schools when there are no teachers to teach in ‘O’ level; we shall end up having ‘A’ level schools without teachers and that is my concern.

On higher education, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that there is inadequate funding in our public universities.  A couple of months ago, the committee of social services on which I sit met with the top leadership of Makerere University and we were appalled to learn that Makerere Medical School operates with less than 50 percent of the required teaching staff.  Now, that speaks a lot about the end results and we, as people in leadership in Government must address ourselves very seriously on the question of funding in higher education.

Recently the Government has had to intervene in Makerere and the intention of the intervention is to make sure that parents and students are not over burdened by the proposed increment in fees by Makerere University.

Mr Speaker, what makes a university different from a secondary school is that at university, knowledge is generated and you can never find cheap research.  To do research that adds value, one needs money and the proposed increments by Makerere are based on needs that I came to learn of through the interaction we had with Makerere University and other public universities and private universities’ administrators in Entebbe.

Now, apart from the Government saying that the students should not be burdened, it must move in and put more money into public universities such that we do not have half-baked graduates. We have lecturers and professors in universities who do not only go to lecture rooms but engage in research, otherwise, we shall be killing this country.

Mr Speaker, the committee has also talked about the Uganda Management Institute (UMI) and it says, “The stability of any nation lies heavily on a strong civil service.” I agree with the committee that right now UMI has become just like any other academic institution and is largely training for the private sector yet an effective civil service comes with well-planned training. The reason why UMI was established is to make sure that the civil service is well trained.  

Many a time I receive communication from some of the districts being invited for a meeting without indicating the venue and time which is because these young men, competent as they are, they have not been trained.  The reason why Amin was able to govern this country for that time is because there was an effective civil service, which had been properly trained.  Fortunately, before us is the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill and my view is that UMI should revert to its previous role because we now have so many universities that can train people who want to get higher qualifications.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to address myself to the question of Gender, Labour and Social Development –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, in view of what we have agreed on, don’t you think we should limit our contribution to five minutes?  Because if you are going to go to another territory, you can imagine – just say something about gender.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, I am most obliged but you know this is the heart of my presence here, so let me just make - otherwise I will be accused for not speaking for my constituents. The report on Gender, Labour and Social Development is as short as Government’s commitment to social development. If you look at what the report is saying on gender and labour, it is just three small paragraphs. The only recommendation is on operationalisation of Article 246 on provision of benefits to traditional leaders as if benefits to traditional leaders are higher on the priority scale of this country than the unemployment policy and the enforcement of labour laws.

We know, Mr Speaker, in this country today we have laws that are not enforced and because of that many people work without appointment letters, they work for months without being paid salaries and the reason we go to work is to earn. These people are not being paid their salaries because the Department of Labour is one of the least funded departments and they can therefore not carryout inspection.

So, I would like to urge my friends to take the Department of Gender, Labour and Social Development very seriously.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.55
MS. ROSE NAMAYANJA (Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank the minister, the chairperson, and Government for the fact that this year domestic funding has increased from 54 percent of last Financial Year to 60 percent; and then the increase of funding of the Agricultural Sector, which is the backbone of Uganda’s economy.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank Government for the micro finance programme.  According to the budget speech, it is clear that they want to increase availability, affordability and accessibility of micro finance and that in the next three years a situation is envisaged where every sub-county should have a micro finance institution.

But, Mr Speaker, what I want to urge Government or to emphasise is that these village banks or micro finance institutions at sub-county level should be locally owned.  The local people should be shareholders; they should be the depositors and borrowers because most of the micro finance institutions we have today are foreign owned.  I would not envisage a situation where FINCA a US owned micro finance institution goes and establishes an office at sub-county level and then begins getting deposits from people.  So, I believe these micro finance institutions at sub-county level are going to be locally owned.  

Mr Speaker, the other issue is on unemployment.  In the budget it was highlighted that unemployment stands at a rate of 12 percent and it affects mostly the young people between the age of 20 and 29I want to add my voice to that of hon. Wandera that the Government should handle the issue of a policy on employment. We should have a policy on employment in order to curb the levels of unemployment in this country.

I also want to thank Government because in this Budget Government has provided for Shs 1 billion for women and youth to help them in agriculture. Secondly, it has also provided for a situation of leasing land especially for youth who are engaged in organized agriculture. However, on the issue of land still in this sector of agriculture, I want to say that land is an essential factor of production. It is essential for both local and foreign investment and it is an asset base for capital generation but the land registry in this country is antiquated. The land registry is antiquated; the cost of transaction is very high; there is a poor and chaotic state of the manual records; missing records, and poor service delivery. So I want to urge Government to computerize the land registry in this country.  

I also want to finalize with the issue of local government. In the Budget they say that the local government and fiscal decentralization strategy aims at harmonizing the transfer of funds to local governments, at the same time giving autonomy to these local governments. However, with the scrapping of graduated tax, which leaves a funding gap of Shs 80 billion, I look at this as a contradiction because local governments have been using locally collected revenue to pay for the political leadership. This includes the executive, the councilors and then operation of the non-grant department things like local administration police, prisons, co-funding of the local government development budget, co-funding on NAADS, and the CAO’s office. They have debt obligations, which include sending money to the sub-counties.

The Shs 30 billion that has been provided as compensation leaves the local governments with nothing to facilitate this. Mr Speaker, I want to call upon Government to re-assess the parameters for the change of policy and to also retaliate the position of the committee that a further study should be done to ensure that these local governments do not collapse.

Mr Speaker, allow me just one more minute to finalize with sports. The chairperson of the committee has said that there is no budget line for sports, and no funds in the MTF. Like the Rt hon. Prime Minister noted when we were paying tribute to Inzikuru, he said that Government’s image was enhanced in just nine minutes and 48 seconds just because of sports. We have seen that there are funds in other departments to clear the image of Uganda yet sports can do a lot. I remember when we had a football match between Uganda and Rwanda, Ugandans went in bigger numbers and it enhances the relationship between these countries. 

Football in this country, if I may give an example, has gone to very low levels to the extent that you can get a child in primary three mentioning the entire squad of Arsenal but does not know any player in the national squad. To me this is social colonialism for us to lose interest in our local sports and then think of the others. So I want to call upon Government to increase their commitment because you cannot say we have a sports policy and at the same time you do not provide for sports in this country to an extent that the sports administration is in the hands of unscrupulous people; people who are supposed to do the coaching are instead poaching on the players.  

I want to end here by calling upon Government to increase sports funding. I thank you so much.

4.06
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I just want to respond to the comments by the chairperson of the committee on two items concerning NGOs and the feeding of internally displaced persons. Although she said we wait until later, I think this is a bit urgent and more recurrent so perhaps I will be able to inform the House so that when the time comes we shall also give more information as the situation develops.

The NGOs here in this country fall under two ministries: they are created by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and their day to day operations falls under the Office of the Prime Minister. Indeed the committee expressed their fear and if I could read that: “The committee is concerned about the number of non-governmental organizations operating in Northern Uganda with no evident impact.” It is true there are very many NGOs in the North and at that level the NGOs are monitored or co-ordinated by the district disaster management committee.  

The district disaster management committee is chaired by the chief administrative officer and all heads of departments in the districts are members. They meet monthly and these NGOs are supposed to give their plans to these district disaster management committees and even to show how much they are going to spend in the district and for what purposes. Without this district disaster management committee, which is a branch at district level of the Disaster Department at the national level, should be the one on the ground to watch the day-to-day management. 

At national level the department has come up with this IDP policy, I think each one of us has got it. If you read it on page 14 it has talked about the functions of district disaster management committees and since we have so many things to read, I will call on colleagues to perhaps go back and refresh their mind because they are very detailed operational works here. 

Some of the NGOs are rather reluctant. They do not want to co-operate; they want to use their own methods and I am sure the district disaster management committees discusses with them the operation and how to provide even the security of how to escort them, and so on. Some of them even do not want the escorts, rather they want to use their flags and they think their flags are enough. This sometimes - I think Defence is even aware of it - becomes a problems. They seem to be compromising our efforts because if they are hit they will blame the country: “Why do you not provide security?” At the same time these NGOs, some of them do not want to be escorted because their regulations do not allow it but where does this regulation apply? We want to know. 

Does it mean in Uganda when they come this regulation overrules our authority? When we want to provide security to NGOs then you say, “Because of our regulations, I do not want your security.”  And if they are hit nobody asks about their regulations. So those are some of the confusions; some of these NGOs are bringing up. Of course they say that he who pays the piper calls the tune, but to what extent? I think we leave this to Defence because they are on the ground to handle the situation.

The other comment is on feeding. This statement by the committee, the committee notes that this is pathetic and unacceptable because there is a dire need for Government to fill the gaps in the food supply by the World Food Programme. That is true. Uganda, we are trying as a Government. We are also contributing to the World Food Programme, by the way, in addition to what the Department of Disaster is doing. However, it is the scarcity. 

And one technical thing the Finance people probably should realize is that whatever we are given, however little, we should not be subjected to the Vote-on-Account. If you give us Shs 243 million then you subject us to Vote-on-Account, then that means we will get Shs 119 million; then we have to wait. The Shs 119 million will buy nothing and there is a lot of outcry from all over the country, out of draught, et cetera. People want help and there is nowhere we can get the help. 

When you go to the World Food Programme, it means you are diverting World Food Programme because for them they are concentrating on IDPs, but now you want them to go to Ssesse Island because there is a storm there; you want them to go to Kasese; you want them to go to anywhere. All these are very difficult. We should have handled those ourselves as our national problems but Shs 119 million is not enough. However, that is what it is and we have agreed with the committee that indeed we need more money if possible. Otherwise, more reports will come later. I call on my colleagues to revise their national policy on IDPs as has already been provided. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.15
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I listened to the honourable member presenting the budgetary estimates, one thing that comes out is that there is not enough money in almost every sector. So what is happening? Are we over budgeting or are we budgeting certain amounts of money and it is siphoned off somewhere? We have to establish that so that we can make a correction somewhere. Let us cut our coat according to the cloth we have.  

On the point of health, I usually go around some of the hospitals and I have worked in quite a number of hospitals. Apart from the morals of the doctors and nurses, the maintenance of the equipment creates a lot of loss to the ministry. We should train - I really do not see trained people who can maintain say X-Ray machines, ultra sound machines, microscopes and the equipment in the laboratories. We need to take special interest in training technicians to work in the hospitals, and that is what happens in every country. I think we have neglected that sector in this country and we have to be serious and start training technicians if we are going to save money in the health sector.

With agriculture and veterinary services I feel - I do not know whether I am right - that we were wrong in decentralizing most of these services. When I go to Pallisa District you find some of the equipment, which was sent to the district for veterinary services, just stored. Nobody utilizes it and I will speak about this until maybe my face goes blue. We had a project in this country by the hon. John Babiiha. I am not being partisan or anything of that kind but they had started a programme for dipping cattle. In every sub-county I think there were about three dips. This was abandoned and our ability to produce milk and feed our people has been retarded because of our failure to control ticks. If we were able to control ticks and then we were able to supply bulls to rural areas, we would produce cows, which would give more than two cups of milk. Most of the cows give only two or two and a-half cups of milk, not even two pints. 

When you go to South Africa, when you look at the pictures of cows, which were there in the old days, the days of Chetewayo or someone, the Zulu, the cows are now different in South Africa. These do not have humps and they produce more milk. This was because they were able to supply bulls to the native cows and they have produced a totally new breed of cows, which are able to produce more milk, and they were able to control ticks. In Kenya you see almost the same thing happening. Here we have to be bold and start fighting ticks, East Coast Fever and those other diseases that affect cows so that we can increase the production of milk and let milk be provided in schools to combat malnutrition in this country. 

When you go to schools I am told about 80 percent of the children are malnourished. We need to start lunch programmes and to do that; we need milk. Every child should be entitled to a cup of milk in school.

To wind up, something was mentioned about Uganda Management Institute (UMI). This is still badly needed in this country. We have civil servants who end up in offices but do not have the skills and I remember somebody mentioned something about Amin’s days when the civil servants were highly skilled. I regret to say that in some of the offices I go to nowadays, that level of skills and professionalism is lacking. We need an institution like that. We have enough universities for people who want degrees. 

Let us train our people to get skills in order to serve us in the civil service. It is wrong for us to think that the purpose of the Government is to provide jobs; it is not. The purpose of Government is to provide services. So, let us make services available to our people by increasing the skills of those people who provide the services.

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and my colleague. I realize that the subject my colleague on the Floor is talking about might attract other comments, and I think I should correct the impression. The Institute of Management is continuing with the training but what was done recently was to upgrade it to a degree awarding institution. Otherwise, it does not train any new A’ Level leavers. It is continuing with the civil servants but awarding them degrees. 

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I hope this will continue and we shall have more skilled civil servants.  

I want to wind up by saying something about fire fighters. You cannot privatise fire fighting. Fire fighters have got to be public servants. They have got to be part of the Police, with special training. If you privatise it there arises loopholes and you introduce too many problems. Let us revert to making fire-fighting part of the Police. That is what it is in every country. Where did we get the idea of privatising fire fighting? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before I call Apac, I want to introduce to you pupils from Lira Integrated Primary School, Lira Municipality. You are welcome to your Parliament. (Applause)

4.24
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Budget Committee for the work, and I want to confine myself to the issues related to Northern Uganda.  

It is unfortunate that the First Deputy Prime Minister in charge of disaster talked and left but since the real one is in charge – I think he did not answer the real question. The question the committee is asking is that there are so many NGOs in Northern Uganda but the impact of the NGOs compared to the numbers of the NGOs is not compatible with the numbers of the NGOs. This is actually true that there are so many NGOs with very good missions and statements but when you go on the ground and you look at the sanitation, water, food and all that, you see very pathetic conditions.  

Mr Speaker, we had the Alaso Report, all of you watched the situation in Northern Uganda, and it has not changed. Perhaps the humanitarian situation is even worsening in Northern Uganda and unfortunately, when the hon. Amongin presented her response she told us that there was a budgetary allocation of Shs 390 million from the ministry to cater for the food. She went ahead to add that there was mobilized funding from donor partners up to the tune of Shs 72 billion. However, I am from Apac District right now trying to see the intervention of Government in that district. From the time of the Alaso Report until now, I have not seen for example in Apac District, there has not been any additional food from the Office of the Prime Minister.  

Unfortunately, when the World Food Programme was requested to go and carry out an assessment to start operations in Apac District, the World Food Programme also decided to bring a report stating that Apac District does not need food in the IDP camps. Mr Speaker, this is not true. The Alaso Report was presented here, the situation in Apac District is very pathetic but up to now the World Food Programme is not operating in Apac. I do not know whether the Office of the Prime Minister has a say in how or where World Food Programme operates.  

But if we may ask, why is the World Food Programme not operating in the 18 IDP camps in Apac District? Why is the World Food Programme not operating that budget allocation, which the minister had pledged? Why is it that it is not really directly moving to Apac District? This is an issue that the minister needs to clarify because to talk about Shs 443 million to feed people in IDP camps in the region of Lango and Acholi is a very limited budgetary allocation compared with the needs of the people in that region. So we would like to know why this budget couldn’t go beyond that. What is the problem?  

I have also read that they have returned monies from the insurgent districts, and I assume that it is the districts of Lango and Acholi that the allocated monies are returned from. But where are those monies that are returned reallocated to? What is it used for? We want to know because if the leaders of Northern Uganda had a choice we would have opted that the money that has been brought back be reallocated to the disaster management budget to cater for the food items in IDP camps. So can we know this budget that comes –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I want to give this information that while it is true that in some districts, which are peaceful, when some money is not absorbed it is returned to the centre, for the areas of insurgency Government took a decision to utilize whatever unspent amounts in providing food and other welfare provisions to the people in camps. So, it is not true that for areas where there is insurgency any money is returned to the center like it is done with other areas of the country, which are not under insurgency. For some time now money has not been received from areas with insurgency back to the center as it is with other areas, which are peaceful. I am reminded specifically by my sister in charge of Defence that for Apac the amount of money was used specifically for construction of a security road. 

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: I want also to inform the House that the information I am hearing from honorable member contradicts our own information. Apac has been one of the ten districts that receive attention more or less on a daily basis, unless there are two Apac districts in this country. So, I would not even dare to say she is actually confusing the House by bringing vague and untrue information. If she wants true information maybe she should come to our ministry and we sit down and we shall give her day-to-day performance. 

This idea of lamenting here, confusing the people, is not worth it because if people hear you say they do not perform and yet they are on the ground on their own, I do not see what you are trying to achieve. 

Mr Speaker, can the honorable member give us the standard measure that we should use, according to her, for whatever we do so that if we do not reach that standard we are considered as having not performed anything? Otherwise, we know ourselves. We have been in the field longer than her; we know what we have achieved and what we have not achieved and we know with the little we get there is a big achievement. Apac is not being left behind so she should not be confusing the House. 

The World Food Programme is getting – Apac has not got as many IDP camps as other districts but we now know where these people are. They are living with host communities and we reach them. For a change one day she should also say something good or positive about Apac rather than confusing people all the time. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you very much, I am going to respect you because I am telling you I am from Apac District and if you saw I am not here to vote for the Third Reading of Bill No. 3 and No. 2. I have these things on tape; the good thing I have recorded them and where I have gone in the IDP camps. What people are saying is on the tape if you want I will bring and lay it on the Table. 

Hon. Prime Minister, it was me and hon. Ben Wacha who went to the World food Programme and begged them and asked them that we want them to operate in Apac. They are not operating in Apac officially the way they operate elsewhere. Maybe the information you have you get from your staff; I am telling you what is on the ground. You go and ring the World Food Programme now and ask then whether they are operating in Apac. They do not operate in Apac; that is the information I am giving you -(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Thank you for giving way and I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Member for Apac because when you move to the World Food Programme as a Member of Parliament, they request that you communicate to them in writing and give the reasons why they should be in your area and if Government can back you up. It happened to me when hon. Moses Ali sent me to them when I wanted aid. I was obliged to write and I did. I am seeking clarification. Can you provide to this House your communication in writing?

MS AMONGI: I am not going into such trivial issues. The issue here is that the Office of the Prime Minister is supposed to give which districts the World Food Programme can operate in depending on the problems in that district. I am telling you that at the moment World Food Programme went to the field they came out and up to this moment the report has come and it is not operating in Apac. 

There are 18 camps in Apac District and there is no food distribution from the World Food Programme and the people of Apac are saying, “Why are they treated differently?” The World Food Programme operates in Lira, it operates in Pader, it operates in Gulu, in Kitgum, it is only in Apac District that it does not operate in and when we ask they say, “We are waiting for communication from the Prime Minister.”

I am telling you I have been in that office; I have been to the Disaster Management Office; I have been to your Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness several times. The officials from Apac have been to your office, including the RDC, and we work together on issues of disaster in Apac District; whether you are NRM/O or UPC we are working together. I am so surprised that you are not aware. Even if you ring the RDC for Apac now she will tell you that the problem of Apac for food is there. You ring the chairman for Angayi, he is even an NRM/O; so it is very unfortunate that you could come with that statement.  

Lastly, I am disappointed that this report did not touch something under Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs on NUSAF because now in Northern Uganda we believe that NUSAF should be one of the frameworks to address the dire poverty situation in the region. The leaders of Northern Uganda even met His Excellency the President to ask him that there should be a reversal of funding of projects in the area of Vulnerable Groups’ Support (VGS) Vs Community Development Initiative (CDI). So, it would have been good for us to know the recommendation of the committee in the field of NUSAF, which is not touched at all because Government has a direct involvement in NUSAF. 

The people in Northern Uganda want 75 percent of the funding to go to income generation, which is for vulnerable groups’ support, compared maybe to 15 percent that should be in CDI, which is infrastructure development so that the poverty, which we have in Northern Uganda, can be addressed.  So, probably it would be good to understand how we can, within the budgetary framework, change this principle of NUSAF.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, please bear with me. Again in the public gallery this afternoon we have 15 teachers from Nakuru of Kenya. They are in Kampala on an education visit. You are welcome. (Applause)

4.37
MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have something to say about the Judiciary. They introduced the system of paying to the bank but this system is so painful because you get a boy to go to Nakawa to file something for only Shs 1,500. On getting there he may not find the magistrate to sign the papers and so he comes back. The following day he goes back. When he takes the Shs 1,500, he is required to pay another banking fee of Shs 2,000.  

We have found that the system is not fair to the poor men. Sometimes, you may do about three or four trips before you can get your papers signed before going back to Nakawa. So you find that what you spend in filing the papers is less and the labour much more expensive. I have talked to the Minister of Justice; he told me that he was going to look into the matter. The Judiciary and the Ministry of Finance know it. He tells me that these were the people controlling the matter but they have not done anything.  

And if you get bail for a person at around about 4.30 p.m. on Friday, you can be sure that money will be coming out on Monday because you cannot finish all the transactions within time before the bank closes. And the man has no alternative, besides paying the cash bail he must be taken to Luzira, where he will spend Saturday and Sunday and then probably on Monday they produce him again. So we find the system very painful. The Ministry of Justice or the Ministry of Finance should find another way of paying cash to the bank.  

My other query goes to the land office. The land office has also got the responsibility of these land tribunals, but it has not been able to furnish them sufficiently. They are very few and yet the cases are very many; they cannot hold them all since they sit occasionally. So if one man does not turn up, it means that the court is not going to sit that whole day. In such circumstances you find that even the stationery itself is not there. They complain that they are not paid their allowances and work continues to heap. I am, therefore, asking either the Ministry of Lands or the Ministry of Justice to find the solution that can be given to the society.  

As far as the Land Act is concerned, it must be repealed or wholly overhauled. It is not with the common man. It is for the rich men only. The so-called peasants for whom we are working evict people; they are evicted on Fridays. They give notice to these people to vacate and the compensation that they normally give them is Shs 200,000, which cannot even buy another piece of land or enable this man to put up another small house like the one in which he has been living. So the law is really painful to the ordinary person. That is why it is common to find 2,000 people being evicted from a piece of land, because a rich man has bought it. 

The law we have at the moment is even worse than the old Busuulu and Envujjo law. In fact the Busuulu and Envujjo law was protecting the peasant. The present law is for the rich people and they are afflicting the poor. If they evict a man on Friday, he has nowhere to go, they usually do it in the evening, then they throw out the goods and thieves come –(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA: Is hon. Nsambu in order to insinuate that the current law is in fact against the poor people, when the current law is actually squeezing the people who have got land by the fact that this law empowers the squatter to pay only Shs 1,000 and keep squatting on the land? Are we living in the same country as the honourable member really? He says that the law is against the peasant when it is actually against the landlords!

THE SPEAKER: This is a question of appreciation. You may think that it is effective while for him it is not. So, how do I rule him out of order?

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This question does not very much arise in Busoga; it is mainly in –(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA: Is the honourable member in order to suggest that I do not own property in Buganda, because I am from Busoga? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No.  Can you inform him that you own property in Buganda? (Laughter)

MR GAGAWALA: Yeah, obliged. I am informing the honourable member that owning property in Buganda does not depend on somebody’s tribe. You are free to own property whether you are from Busoga.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Mr Speaker, I am glad that my brother has land in Buganda and that he has not yet evicted any person and I think he will continue living that way.  

All I am saying is that people are being evicted and there is no mercy. These people come with tractors, graders and the Police. So they do not really know what to do; they are laymen. They cannot go to the Police because it is the Police supervising the eviction. The following morning, there is no court because it is a Saturday, so they remain outside. If it rains, all the little things they have put outside will get wet, then they will think of some other relatives whom they left either in Kangulumira or Busoga and these people have no means of transport.  

So a man who left his place of birth about 30 years ago and he has had children in that place, where he is being now evicted, really suffers a great deal. It appears that by Monday he has no alternative. Sometimes they simply walk back to their places of birth. 

It is my call either to the minister or to the whole Government to think about the question of land, particularly in Buganda here where I live, because people come to me complaining and we have no means of stopping them. Some of them said, “Even if the President comes to talk to me about land that I have paid for, I will not listen to him”. People are being evicted mercilessly and I appeal to society and Members of Parliament to support me and get the Land Act revised. 

I would have wanted to say that the minister they gave us is incompetent but that is too much and I will not say it. We have desired to see this matter between landlords and tenants discussed but the minister has refused and gone further to say he is the absolute authority over all land matters. If you may recall, some time back he almost waged war against the committee that had recommended some form of protection for the peasants and since then he has rescued no one.  

Mr Speaker, it is sad that I have come with such a story but I must say that rich landlords are not merciful to these peasants. We are pleading for them because we are sympathetic to their cause.

4.46
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and its members for the report. They have ably analyzed the Budget speech and highlighted the most important items that are of concern to us.  

I would like to emphasize some points, which I feel are very important to me. One point is the unemployment of teachers, doctors and nurses. These people are professionals who are very vital to the development of this country and therefore we need them. They are trained but are roaming the streets while classrooms remain without teachers and hospitals without doctors. What is the logic behind training these people and not employing them? 

It pains us as parents and other people when you train a doctor for six years only for them to be unemployed. This is very sad and to make matters worse, Government has made efforts to employ them but there is no money for recruitment. This is the second financial year that money has not been allocated for the recruitment of teachers. Therefore, I think that the problem is that of planning. If you feel that the money is not enough, why not reduce the number of people to be employed and use part of that money for the available staff in classrooms?

Mr Speaker, about the primary teachers, the President had excited and promised them that they would be getting Shs 200,000 a month. However, it was disappointing to hear that the increment is only Shs 10,000. Surely with the inflation rate and cost of living, what can an increment of Shs 10,000 do for a person? We have tried to silence them and they have gone back to their classrooms but do you think they are going to teach faithfully? Do you think our children will benefit from them yet we are talking of improving the quality of our education? If we cannot give incentives to the teachers how do we expect our children to get good quality education? We need to think about the issue of primary teachers and increase their salaries to Shs 180,000, from Shs 140,000.  

I would also like to tackle the issue of special schools for persons with disabilities. During the financial years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005, we were allocated money for these special schools. I am aware of two schools that have been constructed, one for the blind in Gulu and another in Salaama, Mukono. However, they are still empty and non-functional because of lack of furniture and teachers to run the schools. What is the point of building these schools if we are not utilizing them? 

If I may give you an example, one of the special schools for the deaf in Wakiso has up to now not been constructed yet money was allocated to it. Where is this money going? Are you diverting it for other things? We need these schools and elections are coming. The President has to fulfill his promises and if we do not have these structures, what shall we have to show? I would like the Minister of Education to take this very seriously and ensure that these schools are functional.  

Last but not least, the money allocated for these semi-autonomous bodies like the national councils for persons with disabilities, women and youth, is actually insufficient. Let me give you an example of the National Council for Persons with Disabilities. Each district gets Shs 5,000,000 and this money is supposed to be shared by the sub-counties as well as for establishing secretariats at the district. With the increasing number of districts and each district getting about Shs 2 million, what will be the use of that money? I think if Government wants to support persons with disabilities it must do so wholeheartedly and not deceive them by giving them insufficient amounts of money. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.55
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad to contribute to this debate concerning the last Budget of this Parliament. I am reminded when we were electing the President that we had a manifesto and it is to that effect that we should be doing a lot of auditing in this Session of Parliament. Today I want to look at only one undertaking that was made in the manifesto and to which I seek clarification. As women of this country we were promised that duty would not be levied on sanitary towels. 

Mr Speaker, sanitary towels are only used by us the women and for that we have to pay tax. For being women we must pay tax that I do not think anybody else pays. I would like to know whether in the consideration of the committee, sanitary towels have been exempted from taxation or whether in fact there are plans of constructing a plant or factory which can produce these sanitary towels locally. This is because this was a promise to us the women of this country.

There is another issue that I mentioned this morning and about which I was informed. I have here a document from the Electoral Commission dated Saturday, 30 July 2005 and the time is 12.24 p.m. It has to do with a declaration from the Electoral Commission on the referendum. I beg to read part of this declaration, which is under the hand of Eng. Dr Badru M. Kiggundu, Chairman of the Electoral Commission: 

“Now therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred on the Electoral Commission by Article 61(b) and 74(1) of the Constitution and Section 8 of the Referendum and other Provisions Act 2005, Act 1 of 2005, the ‘yes’ side having obtained the majority of votes (92.5 percent) in this referendum, the Electoral Commission hereby declares that the people of the Republic of Uganda have adopted the Multi party system”.  

I believe that this happened at 12:24:45 p.m. on 30 July 2005, which was a Saturday. As custodians of the law - because we took an oath to uphold the rule of law - it is my opinion that the meaning of that declaration was that the Movement Secretariat ceased to exist that Saturday and, therefore, there should not be further mention of it in our budgetary allocation. This is why I would like us to be advised because the declaration was very clear. Can we know whether we are operating within the law given the circumstances or whether we need to act differently? I need to be enlightened by the concerned people as to whether we still have a Movement System to go by in this financial year.

Mr Speaker, I also want to comment on presidential pledges. There are so many pledges that were made countrywide and they form part of the covenant that the people have with the President. Last week I got a letter from the Office of the President about pledges that were made in my constituency, to which I replied quickly. One of the pledges was a tarmac road from Kamuli through to Kaliro via Namwendwa, and this includes the Government-aided secondary schools. I have always informed you here that my constituency does not seem to have any and this is a shame because I do not live as far as Karamoja –(Interruption)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Salaamu Musumba for giving way. I just want to seek clarification from the honourable member if Karamoja is not part of this country and if Karamoja does not deserve the resources of this country? Karamoja also was promised a road, water and power and during elections we voted with the hope that these things were going to be accomplished in a few months before the next elections. Karamoja is part of this country and you are responsible for allocating resources to it.

MRS MUSUMBA: I thank you very much for saying exactly what I wanted you to say because it is not my fault that Karamoja has been made to look as if it is not part of this country. I used the allusion for a purpose, which is that there are some parts of this country that do not look like they belong here and this includes Karamoja and my constituency Kamuli among others.  

There are some parts of this country that are not benefiting equitably from the available resources. Otherwise, how do you explain the fact that for 20 years we do not have a Government-aided school in my constituency? How would you explain that to yourself and to the people of Bugabula South? How can you explain the fact that the people of Bugabula South do not have water and that their coverage is only 23 percent or that we do not have a road to talk of even when roads that were not on the Budget are already tarmac?  

My point is that presidential pledges are being selectively fulfilled and at a later time we will show that this has become one of the ways in which marginalisation has been introduced in this country. There are communities in this country that have never benefited from a single pledge of the Government. Some people are promised mangoes while others are promised cows and are given the money there and then. All the while there are places that have never received a thing, and these include my constituency.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to comment on the CHAI project. Much as we would like to have resources distributed and World Bank stuffing us with money on account of AIDS, my view is that this is doing very little to help the recipients who deserve it. Rather it is benefiting the middlemen who work through NGOs and Government functionaries to ensure that communities do not get the maximum benefit of this project. I am very hesitant about this project and will continue to be so until I get an audit of the first CHAI project indicating how it has performed in the various districts and how its benefits have been standardized and achieved countrywide. Only then will I believe that this money has been put to good use. Otherwise from my contacts with the community, my feeling is that this is the surest way of eating on behalf of the sick people. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think the Attorney-General is not here to respond to your inquiry. However, I think that on this issue of the referendum you have to read the Constitution and the Referendum Act together. They say that the results of a referendum will be reflected at the next election. However, preparation for the transition to a multi party system should take place. This is because when you read the Constitution it says that change comes in the fourth year. 

For instance, the Movement System was adopted during the 2000 referendum and therefore it lasts for five years. Should there be a change in the fourth year, this change would become effective at the end of the fifth year by being reflected in the elections. I think if we read the Referendum Act it may assist us. Since the Attorney General is not here, I don’t know whether the minister in charge can justify why the Movement Secretariat should continue.

5.05
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): As hon. Salaamu Musumba said, we have to operate within the law. Besides what you have said Mr Speaker, the Constitution amendments we have just passed by consensus have provided for transitional provisions. It is clearly stated that the organs of the Movement System will remain in place until elections under the Multi party political system are held and those elections are yet to be held.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, is it acceptable for us to move ahead in speculation? This is because the amendments we have made are still at Bill level as you advised this morning. Is it right for the National Political Commissar to speculate on what transition there will be simply because there was a referendum that was assented to? It is my view that that is highly speculative and that the Constitution is still effective. I would like some interpretation and that is all I am asking.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Attorney General should come some time this week or next week and explain the consequences of the results of the referendum on the change of political systems. That should be able to guide us.

5.07
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister and the Chairperson of the Budget Committee for their presentation. In debating the Budget speech for this year I hope you will allow me to pick three issues that I think are very fundamental. The first thing I would like to do is to look at the theme of the Budget and point out the challenges that must be faced by the minister, country and us the citizens if the expected outcome of the Budget is to be realized.

Firstly, the theme of the Budget was to promote economic growth and household incomes through increased savings, increased investment, increased employment and increased productivity. The first challenge in meeting this is for us to recognize the development process that is now changing. There is a paradigm shift from structural adjustment programmes to structural transformation. This is one challenge that we need to fully understand.

Previously it was easy to adjust the structures of the economy to exploit the existing capacities in the economy and therefore achieve higher growth. That possibility is now exhausted and the Budget is shifting from structural adjustment to structural transformation. The challenge that the minister needs to appreciate is that as you move from structural adjustment to structural transformation, the rate of growth becomes very difficult to maintain at the level it was previously targeted and despondence is likely to result if what is stated in the Budget is not realized. 

The medium term budget growth rate is seven percent and I was sharing with the minister that the period we are moving into is going to require a lot more effort than was previously required and consequently harder work to maintain growth. Consequently, this seven percent projected growth is not likely to be achieved and we need to be humble and tell the nation that structural transformation is more difficult.

The second challenge is the overall objective of the entire Budget, which is poverty eradication. We have indicators of reduction in poverty, human development index and life expectancy. When I look at the figures - and this needs to be appreciated - in 1992 to 1993 our total population was estimated at 17 million people of whom 56 percent were living below the poverty line. If we compute 56 percent of 17 million the total number of people who were impoverished were 9.5 million. In 1997 to 1998 poverty was reduced and people living below the poverty line were subsequently reduced from 56 percent to 44 percent of the population. By this time the population had grown to 19.7 million and, therefore, the number of people living under the poverty level were 8.7 million people.

Today the population is 25.7 million people of which 38 percent are living below the poverty line. Thirty-eight percent of 25.7 million is 9.8 million people. The point here is that while the rate of people living below the poverty line is declining, the numbers of poor people are increasing. Poverty has become a real challenge that the minister must find a solution for. The country also must find the link between population and poverty reduction. This point is not reflected in the report and is going to remain a challenge.

Mr Speaker, I have another contribution that relates to budget execution, the way the implemented Budget impacts on its outcome and the crisis between what is said and what is done. If I may give an example, numbers show that almost every year 340,000 new jobs are needed yet the economy is not producing them and the employment policy is not forthcoming. We have many youth coming out of universities and schools with no corresponding increment in employment. You have stated that you want employment but the policy to match implementation is lacking.

Another issue that is even more serious is that while we are attaining growth, its distribution has now become a question of concern. We measure income inequalities using the Gini coefficient. We are attaining growth but it is increasingly distributed among less and less people. Consequently this inequality might result into resentment. Growth is not being shared equally and that is an issue that the minister, the country and Parliament will have to address.

I may beg your indulgence on the question of mobilizing domestic savings. We cannot have investment unless we increase domestic savings as a percentage rate of GDP. This is because if your savings are low, you cannot create growth and because you cannot create growth, you become poor and because you are poor, you cannot save and because you cannot save, you end up in a vicious cycle of poverty. We can only break this vicious cycle if we put emphasis on domestic savings. Therefore, we should support the minister fully when it comes to creating village banks or financial institutions that can reach out and ensure that more people have access to financial services.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of education I want to inform the Minister of Education that learning is simply a matter of going to school. We are witnessing in schools situations where teachers are tired by 11.00 O’clock and are having break tea. They allow the children to go to the compound and play and after they have had their tea they summon the students to return to class and begin to teach. The teacher is well fed while the child is yawning. 

A child cannot absorb anything when he is hungry and because of this Universal Primary Education has simply become a question of enrolment. You may increase the rate of enrolment but the quality of learning will remain low. What am I saying? Primary feeding must be an integral part of Universal Primary Education. If that does not happen we are simply increasing enrolment but the children are not learning. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for the opportunity you have accorded me.

MR AWORI: I am a bit disturbed because I have known in the past that generally we present reports from committees, debate on them and finally the minister responsible comes up and answers our questions. However, I have noted with concern that there are constant interventions by the ministers.

5.18
MR CHARLES KOLUO (Serere County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me start by thanking the Budget Committee for the well-written report that takes the concerns of the public into account.

I will start with the greatest concern of the people of Serere. Serere County is one of the oldest counties in the country yet it is only has one Government-aided secondary school called Serere Secondary School. More recently formed counties in the neighbourhood like Kasilo now have four Government-aided senior secondary schools.

Way back in 2001, I forwarded two application forms for grant aiding of two secondary schools in the county. The schools were properly built by SDDP, which stands for Soroti District Development Programme. In the year 2003/2004, I received letters from the Ministry of Education. The first letter came in 2003 promising that the two schools would be grant-aided. This financial year, Kiera Senior Secondary School was listed 33rd of the 74 schools, which were to be grant-aided. Later, however, it turned out that it was not among the 53 schools that were considered. Now the question is, what criteria is the ministry using?

Another point that is related to this is that Kateta sub-county was one of the sub-counties considered for a SEED school among the nine SEED secondary schools that Parliament approved in the financial year 2002/2003. Again to date the school is nowhere to be found. The people of Serere and Kateta are imploring Government to take into account its pledges and promises. During the campaigns we remember very well that the President promised the people of Uganda that there would be a secondary school in every sub-county. However, as we speak, even the SEED secondary school that was considered by this Parliament in the year 2002/2003 has not been built. I implore the Minister of Education to give us some guidance on this.

I would also like to mention the case of health centres. We are happy and proud that the Government has done a lot in our area in regard to health centres. However, what the people are asking is whether these health centres could be staffed. This is because the problem we are facing right now is that they are available but lack staff. This takes me to the point that hon. Baba Diri was raising to the effect that we have qualified teachers and health workers and they are needed but there are no jobs available for them. Can Government take up this concern?

Two months ago I was in my constituency consulting and I found primary teachers were on strike and had not taught that week. I implored them to help the parents and resume work on condition that I would come to Parliament and implore Government to increase on their remuneration. Again I am happy that Government has increased their pay by Shs 10,000 in addition to the earlier increment. However, this is still insufficient. Please, consider this as well.

As regards health centre Vs, we have one called Serere health centre. It was formerly a dispensary until Government lifted its status to that of a health centre and provided it with a doctor. The SDDP, another Government-funded project considered the health centre for a theatre, which we received although it still lacks equipment. I am glad that recently I received communication from the Ministry of Health stating that it had responded to my request and sent some equipment, which may still be inadequate but it was still in the process of acquiring more. Ministry of Health can you please go ahead and fulfill that promise? Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

5.05
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to make three concise contributions in support of the motion by the hon. Minister of Finance. Although you have already guided on this, the first point I want to raise is that the Attorney-General should come and give legal interpretation of the recently held referendum. From a political point of view, it is important that we give an explanation on the implications of the ‘yes’ vote.

As all of us know the Movement leadership worked very hard to ensure that we obtained a ‘yes’ vote in the referendum. We are aware of our responsibilities. After having taken that decision and we are obliged to wind down the organs that existed under the Movement system. I am happy with the statement made by the Chairman of the Budget Committee that in view of the result of the referendum our budget has to be re-examined since winding down has obligations. For example we have people working in the secretariat who hold contracts. If their terms are going to end before they are due then there are obligations that we have to deal with.

As you know, Mr Speaker, we also have other organs such as the National Conference and National Executive Committee, among others. It is only good business and conduct that we wind down in a formal way. There is no way we can simply drop these organs as if they were causing trouble in the country. Therefore, I accept the recommendation by the committee to look at this budget again. 

At this stage I cannot say which way the Budget will move, whether downwards or upwards. Although I am not a lawyer, everything is quite clear. The Constitution itself talks of a decision being made in the fourth year of Parliament, taking into consideration the fact that this system will go its full length of five years. Therefore, in legal terms the Movement system is here until the five years are complete. As I said before, as Parliament we have to be business-like and ensure that the amendments we have just passed to the effect that these organs live up to the next Parliamentary elections are subject to the consent of the President. 

I am surprised that colleagues are going on that the secretariat and other organs should have left by now. Even before the referendum that they opposed, these are the same people who were saying that the secretariat should have left. I will leave it at that and go to two other brief points.

In the report from the Budget Committee, some very serious observations about wastage and corruption have been made. I would like to inform the committee that when the sessional committees start operation we would like more articulation and substantiation on these points. This is not a challenge. Rather I think these are serious issues that we need to handle in order to meet challenges like the ones hon. Kamuntu was describing. 

The Chairperson of the Budget Committee has pointed out that in certain areas water pipes are lying wasted because they are not being used. This is obviously very serious. Hon. Mallinga has also made mention of veterinary equipment in a certain district that has not been used for a long time. 

These are very welcome observations and Government welcomes hon. Members of Parliament to substantiate further on these points. We have serious problems and we cannot afford wastage. Therefore, I invite colleagues that as you contribute to this subject, if you know of any specific cases of wastage, please inform us so that we can work together to improve our country. The question of corruption and court awards are examples of leakages that we need to fight together.

In my view as regards the issue of privatisation, the statement by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee was rather hanging in some areas and I would like more muscle added to it. However, the statement says that Government is pulling out of many industrial establishments and that it is crucial that the Government continues to play a key role in that area. It goes on to say that if we are going to find employment for our people, industry must grow and very fast too. 

I agree with the committee that Government must continue to play a strategic role. It would be sending a good signal to our development partners, investors and fellow nationals if we could all speak with one voice. Everyday I see reports in the press emanating mainly from newly formed parties who are criticizing the policy of privatisation. This is not good for our country. We should be specific with our criticism in case a particular enterprise has not been handled very well so that mistakes are not repeated. 

But for leaders and future leaders to stand publicly and write in the newspapers criticizing the policy of privatisation is to send a negative signal. We are going to discourage investors and we are not going to be able to find jobs for our children or to put an end to poverty. Therefore, I want to use this opportunity to appeal to all Members of Parliament to form a consensus on this issue and be responsible on how we speak about privatisation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.32
MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, I vote “aye”. I thank you that we have moved away from the era of, “I vote aye”. I stand up here to support the motion of this Budget. There are a number of good things that happen but are not reported here. For example during the last budget the Minister of Finance mentioned that a country rating of Uganda would be undertaken. This was done and the results were very positive. However, this House was not informed and we only saw this in the newspapers.  

Uganda has ratified the Protocol on the African Peer Review Mechanism as well as on anti-corruption. These are very positive things but they were not brought here. Uganda is on top in a number of ways and we should be proud to bring this information to the House so the whole nation and the world can know the positive steps that Uganda is taking. Therefore, honourable minister, please let us have that information.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, hon. Omach. The information I wanted to give is related to the issue of NEPAD. I was happy when, as the President was substantiating the Budget in this House, he stated that we have accepted to be peer reviewed as a country. That was a very important statement. It shows that we are committed to the values of NEPAD and that as a country we are moving in the right direction. I thought I should add my voice to yours and salute the efforts in this direction.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): I am happy the honourable member has raised this issue. We made a statement in this Parliament to the effect that there was country rating and our country was rated B+. The country that performs best gets an A+ followed by A. The good ones get B and B+ is somewhere between very good and good.  

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are a number of positive steps that have been portrayed in this Budget but they are not enough. The first issue I would like to comment on is that of agriculture where the Budget is being increased by four percent. This is good but it is not sufficient. Seventy-seven percent of the total employment in this country is from agriculture and I would like to concur with the committee’s recommendation that the increase for agriculture should have been 10 percent.

MS KIRASO: I have some information, honourable colleague. The Budget for agriculture did not increase by four percent but from 3.4 percent in the last financial year to 4.1 percent this financial year. Therefore, the increase is only 0.7 percent.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much for that information. The point I am making is that the importance of agriculture should be recognized in this Budget so that more can be given to the agricultural sector, particularly in the area of water for production.  

The second positive thing in this Budget is that the deficit financing has moved from 9.9 percent to 9.2 per cent of GDP. Mr Speaker, 9.2 percent is still very high and as a country we need to move this lower. Worse of all is the fact that this has got a very big influence on the external debt. As I speak, the interest that we pay on external debt is in excess of Shs 150 billion. 

Then we have payment to domestic debts where we are paying interest of over Shs 200 billion per year. As you are aware, the domestic debt actually having local capital tied - and if this local capital that is tied up is released to entrepreneurs who are within this country they should be in position to bring more economic development. 

The next is on the issue of revenue as a percentage of GDP, which is expected to rise up to 13 percent by the year 2007. The Government expenditure, which is almost 23 percent of GDP, is moving ahead of the revenue collection, which is standing only at 13 percent of GDP. This needs to be synchronized for us to effectively deal with the issue of deficit financing and revenue collection. In neighboring countries they have reached up to 28 percent of their GDP. What is the problem with our country? Can’t we make this a little more? 

Then the issue of savings, which Prof. Kamuntu did talk about, there is a positive trend that we are moving from savings as a factor of GDP - from 8.8 to 9.8 percent. This is commendable but still not sufficient. What Uganda requires as a country is up to 30 percent for us to have an effective transformation of the economy. Our neighbours are heading beyond 20 and the average for sub Saharan Africa is 18 percent. 

MR ERESU: I am sorry to interfere but the information I want to give is not only a question of savings, which can transform the economy but saving for what type of investments. In this case whether the saving ratio increases as a proportion for GDP, as long as that saving is not invested in sectors, which generate wealth and it is transformed into consumer goods, which in themselves do not generate wealth, the increment in GDP will not take place. 

MR OMACH: Thank you very much for the information.  Mr Speaker, within five minutes you cannot go into the details of all those. But it is important that we should recognize domestic savings as a factor and as a raw material that can generate all the economic transformation that we require in this country.  

We have also capital, which has been tied in form of unfinished construction, there are a number of people who started buildings and due to one reason or the other these buildings have stagnated. If the minister did take stock of how much capital is tied up in that, we would see how much money is being wasted in this country. I appeal to the minister and to this House that we find all ways possible of untying this capital so that it can generate some heat in the economy.

Finally, if we have increased the salary for the teachers from Shs 15,000 maybe up to Shs 200,000, how about the soldiers, the Police and the Prison personnel? They are also getting very meager salaries. Can they also move to Shs 200,000 per month? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.40
MR HENRY KITYO (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by thanking the Government for that little increase in the agricultural budget. However, I would like to say that the NEPAD resolution to agriculture recommended 10 percent of all national budgets to be able to cover the production sector of agriculture. If this budget was promoted to 10 percent, areas of mechanization, irrigation, farm planning, marketing will be properly catered for.  

If you look at this budget, we put a lot of money in non-productive sectors and we put very little money in productive sectors. Sometimes you ask yourself, “Do we know how to make money?” because money makes money. If you want to get more money you put money where money is generated. I would like to request Government to look at productive sectors to make sure that the economy of this country moves at a very high speed. 

On water for production, this country is covered by 25 percent of the land surface by water. It is a shame on us as a country not to be able to even develop simple irrigation. I visited the farm of the First Deputy Prime Minister in Adjumani and I was amazed. River Nile just kisses his land. River Nile has got many spots where it kisses land and they only need a little diversion to be able to irrigate crops and feed the animals. (Interjection)- may I develop my argument because even time may not allow me. 

I have seen in this report on page 6 where they have put it properly that some farmers’ organizations like Uganda Beef Producers and Exporters Association, Uganda National Farmers Association, Uganda Cotton Ginneries and Exporters Association may get some support from the Budget. I thank the Government because all farmers’ organizations in this country have been supported by donors and donors come with their own programmes. They have been directing these organizations on what to do. If Government starts to put in some money then you have realized that these are partners in development. I say thank you and I request you to give them a little more money. 

On the export of goats and other livestock outside Uganda, I had got an order for two metric tonnes of goat meat to Muscat, Jordan. But to export to Arab countries you need to slaughter these animals in a recognized Halal abattoir. The Halal abattoir we have in Kampala is the City Abattoir. Unfortunately, this abattoir was allocated to an individual and as a businessman he cannot freely allow people to slaughter their animals and export them. In fact I had approached him but he wanted to take away my order and I declined. 

There are also other hurdles if we had to export livestock. Uganda has not got a certificate of zero disease, which is given in Geneva and I am happy my sister is here, the Minister in charge of Livestock. I want to request Government to work on this certificate otherwise we shall never be allowed to export any meat outside Uganda.

With zoning – we have six million cows, Botswana has got one million animals but they are exporting daily because they have done away with most diseases. They have done away with most worms. If we have six million cows, then we have 50 million worms. There is a need to zone areas of livestock and concentrate our efforts on disease control if we are to export. 

Under the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry, Ugandans are doing handicraft and it could be a very big industry for our women and the youth in the villages. But our handicraft is all poor quality. I have just been to California, Long Beach, one Ugandan imported one container but unfortunately she cannot compete with Kenyan handicraft, with Ghana handicraft and even Rwanda. Because our handicraft is poor, we have not put money to perfect our handicraft to be able to be competitive and this lady is losing the whole container. 

I want to request the Ministry in charge of Tourism and trade to find money to help these handicraft makers to perfect whatever they do so that they do a good job. When we look at a mat here we say it is wonderful but if it goes to the world market, it is very poor and uncompetitive. 

I have one message for the Minister of Transport. The people who have died in accidents, up to 40 percent die from the trucks, which break down and remain in the middle of the roads. I want to make a law so that it is criminal to leave your vehicle in the middle of the road and then you cause accidents.  Whoever has –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I come from the Eastern part of the country and the trucks, which have caused deaths in greater percentage along that road, are the trucks belonging to Kakira and Madhivani Sugar factories. These trucks do not have lights, they do not have number plates and I think they are not even licensed. They are loaded beyond capacity. 

I have talked to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, I have talked to Government, and nothing is being done. As he says, in other countries the Government licenses private companies and I would propose this to hon. Nasasira. Just license a private breakdown company, give them authority that if they find any truck that is left along the road they take it and the owner pays for transportation of removing it from the road.

Besides that, these trucks release oil during repair on our tarmac road and therefore, it shortens the lifespan of the road. Thank you. 

MR KITYO: Thank you very much for the information. UPE is doing very well but UPE funds are very erratic. Schools are doing exams but head teachers are just improvising because the last UPE funding, at least in Mpigi District, was in July. If we are to perfect UPE, money should come on time; and sometimes this money is slashed by 50 percent. 

I would also like to know from the Minister of Finance how we are going to utilize the funds from the debt, which the donor countries have cancelled? How are we going to use the debt, which has been cancelled to benefit out economy? We would like to know this information. Do not keep quiet in the Ministry of Finance; we are interested in knowing how the debt cancellation is going to benefit Uganda. I thank you.

5.51
DR MATOVU BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much indeed, Mr Speaker. I would like to start off by thanking the committee and the chairperson for the report. I would like also to recognize the fact that the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry is now getting more recognized as a very important ministry. I think this is something very commendable although we have got one or two things to sort out about the duplication of activities, which are being done in the ministry and then the President’s Office. But I think this is a good trend because trade and tourism are very important indeed. This is very good for our trade. 

However, Mr Speaker and honourable members, one thing we have to look at is that if we are going to talk about trade then we have also to think about markets. What we are doing is that at least we are concentrating too much on bigger markets outside the region and so on and we forget all about domestic and regional markets. That way we will run into trouble of our things not being sold outside because of the fierce competition on the global markets. 

Hon. Kityo has just talked about the quality that concerns the handicraft but then there is agricultural produce that we could very easily sell within the region or within the country itself and then farmers will be able to get money and that would be trade. Trade does not mean only selling AGOA stuff to America or Europe. This is something that we have to consider very seriously. 

My second point is about education and this concerns vocational skills. There is a good programme, which we need to consider, review or sort of upgrade and that concerns the comprehensive secondary schools. These are very good and if we put more emphasis on them - the polytechnics seem to be quite elusive. We are not going very far with polytechnics as such but if we put more emphasis on the comprehensive secondary schools, we will be at least creating more interest in vocational schools amongst our children. They will create that interest and at the same time they will be having the normal secondary school education, which will probably go a long way for children. If they do not go to university, they could at least go for some other skills somewhere else. 

Comprehensive secondary schools – I know it is good to think big and it is good to aim higher but if we cannot get the polytechnics right now, why can we not utilize the little money that we have to promote vocational skills by investing in comprehensive secondary schools? This is going to be much more useful when we start at that level and as the economy grows further then we will have an opportunity to build polytechnics. 

These are the two points that I would like to put across, the domestic and regional markets for our produce and then the recognition of the Ministry for Tourism, Trade and Industry for purposes of tourism and trade so that we move forward. It is good to think big but at least you have got to start somewhere small if you are going to go that high. Thank you very much.

5.57
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to those of members who have thanked the committee. 

First, I will go to privatization, which was alluded to by hon. Kiyonga, but I will especially deal with the business community in this country. The Government has to review its policy as regards the private sector. Yes, I know it is a policy to promote the private sector but at the same time it is the Government, which is killing the private sector. 

The biggest consumer in every society is the Government itself. Therefore, most of the goods that the private sector produces are supplied to the Government but the Government deliberately does not pay. They are sitting on billions of money of the business community and this has crippled the industrial sector specifically the taxation system where they tax using the invoice system. You can imagine somebody supplying goods to the Ministry of Defence and is issued with an invoice, the following day Uganda Revenue Authority comes and taxes the invoice when one has not even received the money! Really, I do not understand how we are going to continue with this situation. 

This country has come from far as far as the economy is concerned. We came from the shattered economy, something resembling the developing economy and here we have reached at the crossroads of how to propel this economy to continue growing. Is it by investing more in the service sector that this economy will grow more? Is it by investing more in the production sector that this economy will continue growing? 

Some people think that by investing more say in education then the economy will grow but the question is, if you over produce labour where will the jobs come from? Also at the same time factories cannot exist without labour. Therefore, this country needs sort of a marshal plan whereby we have to starve one sector and develop the sector, which can propel the growth of this economy. 

I support the honourable member who has just left. We need to invest more in the production sector. Specifically, we need to improve the infrastructure; we need to have power in order to have industrial growth. You can imagine this country does not have power at all! We do not have any electrical power. I am not talking of political power. This one we have. In electrical power every two hours there is a breakdown. There was some improvement at the beginning when the thermo generators came in.  We thought things had improved but things have worsened and the Government cannot sustain thermo generation because of the fuel being very high. 

There is a programme of rural electrification. We borrowed money from the World Bank but then the Government came again with a funny policy whereby they require the private sector to participate by contributing 20 percent of the cost of setting up these very many hydro power stations and now it is 30 percent. 

You can imagine a power station like in Kikagati, which was destroyed in 1979 up to now the Government has failed to get US $15 million to put it back. It was lighting the whole of Western Uganda. If you say the private sector should take it up, 30 percent of US $15 million, how much is that? How many businessmen can afford that amount of money? It is the Government to take it up to utilize that money, build those many hydro power stations and transfer them to the private sector to run. The money is already there. The only thing is to change our policy and if we continue delaying I know this money will go back and we shall lose but since that project was started, it is only one mini-hydropower station, which was in Arua, which up to now has not taken off, in which the private sector showed interest. Therefore, the Government must take up its task to develop power. 

You can imagine a country with a railway network, which takes two months to move from Mombasa to Kampala, a distance of only 1,200 kilometers. Yes, you can imagine how much capital of private businessmen is tied up in the goods moving from Mombasa to Kampala. To a businessman, time is money; you move slowly the businessman loses money. How are we going to attract the investors whom we are going to start telling that, “Look, when your machines are moving from China to Mombasa, it takes two weeks, from Mombasa to Kampala, five months?” 

We have to think seriously about how we are going to attract investors. No wonder the President goes and attracts them, they come to Kampala, the following day you hear them in Tanzania and in Kenya. We remain with the briefcase so-called investors who want to get the capital from the Government. We have to think seriously of how to develop this economy.

Finally, again on privatization, the policy is good and I support it but how it is being implemented leaves a lot to be desired. You can imagine - let us take an example of the electricity sector, whereby UMEME - they are in generation, they are in supply and distribution. Even as I talk now there is a private arrangement for UMEME to procure materials for Uganda Transmission Company, which means they have taken over the whole thing. 

I am privy to a document in which Uganda Transmission Company is procuring poles, transformers and the specifications, which are in that document are pegged on South African’s Bureau of Standards. Since when was a private company in South Africa used as a parameter or as a measure for international procurement standards? This Government has been using international standards, IEC or British standards, but now we have got ESCOM standards being regarded as international standards. This is creation of a monopoly –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I rise to give the following information that UMEME is actually composed of two companies, CDC and ESCOM and when you look at it in detail, while we disbanded UEB - and I remember I raised this on the Floor of the House asking the minister to explain in detail and the ruling from the Chair was that a company can take over all branches. I would like to inform the House and the member holding the Floor that we are gradually moving back to a position of UEB, which we disbanded. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean we have to change even the sockets because their standards are different from what we have been using?

MR BYABAGAMBI: That is where we are going, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Kamanda Batalingaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to clarify on some of the two issues, which hon. Byabagambi raised. I want to inform him that UMEME is different from ESCOM. ESCOM is involved in power generation but it has a joint venture with CDC, forming UMEME. It is only ESCOM, which is involved in power generation.  

Then he talked of UMEME procuring for transmission. Transmission is entirely owned by the Government - 100 percent - and it has high voltage lines, which use different types of poles to transmit power. So, when you talk of poles they also purchase poles. UMEME purchases poles for power distribution while the transmission company purchases poles for high voltage. Thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I think it is enough information, which I have about UMEME and I am very glad that the minister has acknowledged that actually ESCOM is a joint shareholder with a certain company in UMEME and then ESCOM generates electricity with majority shares. I thank you very much hon. minister for that. 

To emphasise my point, recently UMEME and ESCOM advertised to procure poles and the specifications they gave were ESCOM’s specifications from South Africa. I have got a document, honourable minister, if you want I will give it to you and you read. The poles were imported at US $270 per pole whereas the local companies have got factories here to treat poles and they were supplying those poles at US $150.  

THE SPEAKER: What was the cost?

MR BYABAGAMBI: The cost of each pole from South Africa is US $270 each, whereas the Ugandan companies with those treatment plants sell at US $150 per pole. You can see where we are going.  

Today, I read another page where I found that they were procuring transformers and still the transformers –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Therefore you mean the tariff will have to go up?

MR BYABAGAMBI: That is true. Electricity tariffs will have to go up automatically.

I want to conclude by going to the pipeline. I am still on the Government. We have got a pipe, which stops at Kisumu and in this Budget I understand there is a funding gap, which means we are not seeing this dream being realized very soon. Yet as I talk now Kenya has changed the system of taxation and we have got shortage of diesel in this country. That notwithstanding, we have got these heavy trucks destroying the fragile roads, which we have put in place. Therefore, the Government should expeditiously think of how to implement the building of the pipeline from Kisumu to Kampala and beyond. Thank you.  

6.11
REV. DR KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you and thank the chairperson of the committee and the minister for the good report. Somebody has just sent me a note here, a good friend, that what we need in this country is not money, not good speeches but prayers. Maybe he is right, but on top of the prayers we need to put a good face to our policies. 

In my village and in my constituency there is a lady who started a small orphanage. She was working in TASO. These children are from families that have lost people to HIV/AIDS and she has now over 80 children. She has to find a way to maintain and sustain teachers. If she goes to the Minister of Education, she may say, “I am not authorized to send teachers on secondment to private schools.”

Mr Speaker, could you find a policy to protect the Minister of Education so that she can actually send teachers on secondment to such needy charitable organizations? That will be a contribution because these are children of the nation.

Secondly, on the NGOs, I do not know whether the NGO board may not need the support of the Ministry of Internal Affairs because every other day or every other week we read about money that has gone to the North but I have been to the North three times; there are these night commuters, the children. You see children walking to town for protection, they go to school without lunch and in the evening they go to their parents to have supper and walk - some may walk two miles to come to the centre of the town.

What happens, I am surprised that you do not find one child of these night commuters with a blanket. It is really embarrassing. One day I was in America and I saw a film about Gulu with these children again walking with papyrus or mats. What happens? Who is there to monitor the money, which is sent to help the children in the North? Members of Parliament maybe are not there to provide oversight to issues of NGOs; who is there to protect these children? Maybe we need a policy to find a way to monitor the NGOs, especially international NGOs, which claim so much money that has gone to the North to support these children when actually the children continue to live in misery.  

Thirdly, the micro finance institutions are a disaster in my constituency; three people have lost their homes. When one takes a mortgage, who is there to protect the person who has taken the mortgage? I have been approached by people who have taken money from micro finance institutions. The interest starts very low and may go up to 40 percent. To somebody in the village who has borrowed money to get rid of poverty, we need to review the issue of micro finance in the rural areas. 

In my village I do not think it can succeed anymore because even women have lost the little they had, including their furniture, to micro finance institutions. We need some banking laws that give protection to our people. They may not have gone to school for much education and all these things are being interpreted to them and they take this money with a view that they can pay back, but we have the banking system including the micro finance that does not have any mercy to anybody who borrows money because they are there to make money not really to help our people. We need to get it that the poor man or woman in the village needs help. Even those who have taken money from the bank, there is no assistance.  

I will be very happy if these poor homes taking charge of orphans may get a human face from Government for support. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I thank you for the contribution so far. Apart from the Minister of Finance, 17 members have made their contributions. We shall continue with this debate tomorrow morning, starting at 10.00 a.m. and then continue until our – we shall break until our distinguished visitor comes. I urge you to be punctual so that we can start at 10.00 a.m. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.17 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 August 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)





