Wednesday, 28 August 2002

Parliament met at 2.15p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members I request you to adjust the Order Paper so that we can receive a statement from the Minister of State for Health because of an important event that is coming on Saturday. So we start with that and then we follow the Order Paper.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Capt. Michael Mukula): Mr Speaker, honourable members of Parliament, Uganda is going to hold sub-national immunisation days in the districts that border the Democratic Republic of Congo and southern Sudan. The rationale for carrying sub-national immunisation days in these districts is that the wild poliovirus is still being isolated in the Democratic Republic of Congo and southern Sudan. In addition, routine immunisation coverage in those areas is still low and surveillance (disease tracking intelligence system) is still weak. 

It is important to note that Uganda’s borders are porous and there is free movement of people in and out of Uganda. This puts our children in the above districts at high risk of contracting the polio disease due to possible importation of the poliovirus.  

The following 18 districts will carry out sub-national immunisation days in the year 2002 as indicated on the map attached: Kisoro, Kanungu, Rukungiri, Bushenyi, Kasese, Kabarole, Bundibugyo, Kibaale, Hoima, Masindi, Nebbi, Arua, Gulu, Kotido, Kitgum, Adjumani, Moyo and Yumbe.  

Sub-national immunisation days, Mr Speaker, will be implemented on the following days: round one will be on the 31 August and Sunday, 1 September 2002. Round two will be on Saturday, 5 October and Sunday, 6 October 2002. The exercise will cost Shs1.7 billion. World Health Organisation and UNICEF will be contributing 90 percent of the resources for this exercise.  

The target population is children aged under five years of age i.e. 0 - 59 months. The total number of children to be vaccinated is 1,207,606, and through your support, we will achieve 100 per cent coverage.  

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to make it clear that the vaccine, which is going to be used in this exercise, is the usual vaccine used in the routine immunisation.  The Ministry of Health, UNICEF and World Health Organisation have approved this vaccine as safe and effective.  

The activities that have been carried out so far in preparation for the sub-national immunisation days implementation 2002, include the following: 

• Training and micro-planning at district and sub-county levels have been completed.

• Adequate immunisation posts have been established in each of the 26 districts.

• Cold chain maintenance is ongoing.

• Funds for social mobilisation have been disbursed. A package has been budgeted for the RDC, LCV, councillors, the women, the youth and the disabled councillors and schools involvement at the district level. At the sub-county, there is a package for the sub-county level, parish, LCI, municipalities and town councils for community mobilisation.  

I am happy to inform you that the campaign in Uganda is going on well and is closely monitored by government and development partners namely, the World Health Organisation, UNICEF, Rotary International and other bi-lateral agencies, who are great supporters of this exercise.

Let me clarify that this campaign is not a substitute for the routine immunisation; it only supplements it. Therefore, parents should continue to take their children to complete the necessary routine immunisation schedules.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I appeal to the honourable members to advise parents and caretakers of our population to take their children for immunisation. In the same breath, I appeal to the civic, religious, cultural, community and other political leaders to mobilise the communities to participate in the forthcoming exercise so that, together, we can kick polio out of Uganda.  Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Honourable members, I believe this is a clear statement and, therefore, we proceed with the other business. Thank you very much, Minister.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL RESISTANCE ARMY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled “The National Resistance Army (Amendment) Bill, 2002” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Mr Speaker, once again, I have to apologise.  I am not able to lay the bill on the Table because we got a technical problem. We do not have a copy as yet, but we shall get it in due course. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, we have a problem with our computers and we were unable to have these bills ready, but they will be ready either today or tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: You mean you don’t have this Supplementary Schedule No.3?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table Supplementary Schedule No.3 of 2001/2002. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee handle the schedule.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

VOTE 007 – MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs10,120,719,000 under Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 107 – MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs17,810,994,000 under Head 107 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 045 – DIRECTORATE OF PUBLIC PROSECUTION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs3,427,000,000 under Vote 045 - Directorate of Public Prosecution be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 145 – DIRECTORATE OF PUBLIC PROSECUTION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs794,163,000 under Head 145 - Directorate of Public Prosecution be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SERVICE 311 – JUDICIARY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs14,740,000,000 under Service 311 - Judiciary be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 111 – JUDICIARY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs7,444,964,000 under Head 111 - Judiciary be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 048 – JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs760,000,000 under Vote 048 - Judicial Service Commission be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 148 – JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs46,000,000 under Head 148 - Judicial Service Commission be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SERVICE 349 – ELECTORAL COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs16,941,000,000 under Service 349 - Electoral Commission be provided as Recurrent Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 149 – ELECTORAL COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shillings 2,437,242,000 under Head 149- Electoral Commission be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SERVICE 347 - UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shillings 2,630,000,000 under Service 347- Uganda Human Rights Commission be provided as Recurrent Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 147 – UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shillings 612,900,000 under Vote 147 - Uganda Human’s Rights Commission be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SERVICE 337 - UGANDA LAW REFORM COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1,250,000,000 under Vote 337 - Uganda Law Reform Commission be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 137 - UGANDA LAW REFORM COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs120,000,000 under Head 137 - Uganda Law Reform Commission be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SERVICE 331 - INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs6,760,568,000 under Service 331 - Inspectorate of Government be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 131 - INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs906,115,000 under Head 131 - the Inspectorate of Government be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SERVICE 315 - PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs32,394,290,228 under Service 315 - Parliamentary Commission be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the figure as was agreed upon ought to be Shs31,717,108,000.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you mean the 228 is not there?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, we sat with the Ministry of Finance in the committee. The Parliamentary Commission had proposed 36 billion but after discussing with them, the ministry came up with Shs31 billion and there was a short fall of Shs677 million meant for the committees of Parliament. Yesterday, when I presented my report, I recommended that the committees of Parliament should be enabled to sit and additional money amounting to Shs677 million be added to what he is talking about to make it Shs32 billion as the figure you have read suggests.

THE CHAIRMAN: So the figure I read is correct.

MR MWESIGE: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, the position is this: The budget of Parliament is worked out by Parliament and it is submitted to the President who makes comments without deduction. The Parliament considers the comments, accepts them and adjusts here and there. Now that I have been told that Parliament has adjusted the figure, which has been confirmed by the chairperson, I am going to read this figure.  What happens later, I do not know. So I put the question that a total sum of Shs32,394,290,228 under Service 315 - Parliamentary Commission be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 115 - PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs2,745,157,000 under Head 115 - Parliamentary Commission be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 007 – MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS, STATUTORY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs9,382,000,000 under Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Statutory, be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto. I beg to move.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the following Heads and Votes and passed them without amendment:

Head 107: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs - Shs17,810,994,000
Vote 007: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs - Shs10,120,719,000

Head 145: Directorate of Public Prosecutions - Shs350,000,000
Vote 045:	Directorate of Public Prosecutions - Shs3,427,000,000

Head 111: Judiciary	- Shs2,530,000,000 
Vote 311: Judiciary - 14,740,000,000  (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, honourable minister, are you reading the figures that I read? Maybe even without reporting on figures, you could just say that we passed such and such a vote, because our records will show the figures we have passed. Because there is a variance between what you are reading and what I read!

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. 

• Electoral Commission - Vote 349, Head 149

• Uganda Human Rights Commission - Vote 347, Head 147

• Uganda Law Reform Commission - Vote 337, Head 137

• Inspectorate of Government - Vote 331, Head 131

• Parliamentary Commission Vote 135, Head 115

I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in my communication, I should have introduced our guests but they were not here. They are now here, and they are children from Nakivubo Primary School. You are welcome! 

I think at this juncture, it is also appropriate to bring the good news that our honourable member, Nusura Tiperu, has given birth to a baby girl at Mulago Hospital  -(Applause).  

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2001/2002 

(ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/2003 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Simon Mayende): Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament, I beg to present to you the report of the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, for the budgetary proposals for the Financial Year 2002/2003 in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution and Rule 154(d) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The scope of this report covers the following:

(a) Ministry of Defence headquarters. 

(b) Uganda People’s Defence Forces.

(c) Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters, which covers the Immigration Department, the Amnesty Commission, the Government Analytical Laboratory, the Community Service Programme and the NGO Board. It also covers the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Prisons Service.  

When considering the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Defence policy statements, the committee proceeded as follows:

(i) We studied and analysed the policy statements of the ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs and raised queries for answer by the respective ministers.
  
(ii) We interacted with the First Deputy Prime Minister, who is also the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Defence, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, the Minister of State for Defence and heads of department and officials from the two ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs.  

(iii) We did interact with the Minister of State in the Office of the Prime Minister in-charge of Karamoja Affairs.  

(iv) We also interacted with honourable Members of Parliament from Teso, Karamoja and Kapchorwa districts.

(v) The committee also visited Kakiri and Magamaga barracks. 

(vi) We also met officials and beneficiaries of one NGO called COWE.  

The committee wishes to register its appreciation to the ministers and the ministry officials who appeared before the committee.

Further thanks go to the Members of Parliament from Teso, Karamoja and Kapchorwa, whose submission on the Karamoja disarmament was vital in compiling this report.

Finally, we wish to thank other stakeholders and the Office of the Clerk to Parliament for facilitating the committee in one way or another.  

The Ministry of Defence has the mandate of preserving and defending the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda, plus safeguarding and protecting the lives and property of Ugandans.

The Security Situation :

In a bid to rid this country of rebel activities, the government of Uganda entered into an understanding with the Sudanese government, to enable the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces launch operations inside Sudan against the Lords Resistance Army (LRA).  

Indeed, on 15th March, “Operation Iron Fist” was launched. As a result of this operation, several LRA bases in the Sudan have been destroyed and a lot of arms and ammunition recovered. The LRA have been dislodged from their bases in the Sudan. They are right now inside Uganda. 

This operation has also resulted into a challenging security situation in the northern part of Uganda since LRA is now terrorising the civilian population, thereby disrupting normal activities in the region. They are killing and abducting people, and destroying property. 

The UPDF cannot protect each and every inch of the ground in the disturbed area of northern Uganda however, the UPDF is deploying in order to contain and neutralise that terrorist rebel group.  

The committee appreciates the effort by His Excellency the President in trying to improve the morale of the troops by pitching camp in Gulu, and also the recent promotions, appointments and transfers aimed at improving command and control.  

There has been some initiative by religious and political leaders, including honourable members of this Parliament from the Acholi sub-region. They want to talk peace with the LRA. His Excellency the President has welcomed this initiative with conditions, and he has gone ahead to appoint a team of officials for the peace talks.

The committee welcomes both approaches by His Excellency the President and the Acholi and religious leaders as a move in the right direction. Indeed, this matter should be handled expeditiously.

The Uganda National Rescue Front II:

The Uganda National Rescue Front II entered into negotiations and signed a peace agreement with the government of Uganda on June 15th aimed at bringing an end to rebel activities in the West Nile region by this very group.

Documentation of former fighters under the Rescue front II has been completed. A total of 1955 former fighters have been documented and of these, 455 qualified to be absorbed into the UPDF. The Ministry of Defence is in the process of giving this group service numbers and integrating them into the army.  

Armed Robberies: 

The months of June and July this year witnessed an increase in the incidences of armed robberies in major towns and along highways in Uganda. The specific security operation code named “Operation Wembley” under the command of hon. Elly Kayanja was launched to contain the situation. 

Reports from this operation indicate that the robbery network has been dismantled with many of the robbers arrested. The few remaining ones are on the run. In addition, a court-martial to try suspected robbers has been constituted and is chaired by Lt. Gen. Elly Tumwine.

Relations with our Neighbours: 

• The relations between Uganda and her neighbours are at their best, compared to the recent past.  

• The East African Community has cemented the relations between Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania that involve a number of joint programmes. 

• Sudan is in support of “Operation Iron Fist” and Uganda is implementing the Lusaka Peace Accord.  

• The relationship with Rwanda is cordial following the London understanding.

The major achievements by the Ministry in the fiscal year 2001/2002: 
 
The Ministry of Defence received 99 per cent of the non-wage recurrent budget while only 68 per cent of the development budget was released in the last financial year. However, during the same period, the ministry managed the following achievements, among others:

•The Allied Defence Forces (ADF) banditry activities in western Uganda have been paralysed.

• The Karamoja disarmament programme was launched and about 10,000 guns were collected as at 1st July this year.

• Gratuity payments to members of the Uganda Veterans Assistance Board were completed. 

• The NRA Statute (Amendment) Bill was approved by the Army Council and Cabinet. Indeed, this afternoon it has been laid before us.

• The Defence reform programme, which is expected to be the main driving force in the process of professionalising the army, was launched.  

• The ministry commenced construction of barracks for soldiers and started with the first division headquarters at Kakiri. 

• They completed and documented all the ministry assets and started a process of securing them.

What were the constraints?

The ministry was not able to implement all the planned activities in the last financial year due to a number of constraints, which include: 

• The depreciation of the Uganda shilling against the United States dollar;

• Lack of banking facilities in some parts of this country; 

• The dependence of a sizeable part of the general public on the limited resources and facilities that the ministry has to offer; 

• Inadequate resources to retire the domestic arrears.  

Some of the planned activities this financial year:  

• The ministry intends to eliminate all banditry activities in this country - if you give them all the money. 

• Build and commission barracks to accommodate five battalions. 

• Fully acquire and document the records of ex-service men for purposes of processing their dues.

Mr Speaker, honourable members, the committee observed, under construction, that the ministry has put in place a plan to construct accommodation barracks, and that is to be implemented in a phased manner over the next 10 years. So far, work has started in Kakiri where the ministry is constructing low-cost houses scheduled for completion in October this year.  

Four other barracks are planned to be constructed in the north, north-east and West Nile. Shs10 billion has been earmarked this financial year for this purpose. It should however, be noted that the bulk of the funds, that is, Shs6.5 billion, is budgeted and released as housing allowance to the soldiers.

We do have ghost soldiers in the army, but what has the ministry done? The ministry says they have employed means to weed out ghost soldiers from the payroll by: 

• computerising the payroll, 
• payment through banks, 
• surprise cash payments to a given barracks, and
• They will do actual head count of the soldiers.

The recommendation of the committee is that the ministry should intensify its efforts to eliminate all ghost soldiers and punish the culprits.

The Welfare of the Soldiers:

Due to budgetary constraints, the ministry has not been able to meet the minimum requirement of the soldiers’ welfare. During the committee’s interaction with the ministry officials and tour of the barracks, we did note the following:

• Some soldiers have a single pair of uniform for use the whole year. The committee discovered that some soldiers who can afford buy second-hand clothes that resemble army uniforms and boots from the open market.  Furthermore, some officers print T-shirts that have the Army emblem and force soldiers to buy them. 

• The soldiers have not benefited from the 10 per cent increase in salary that was announced in the budget speech during the 2000/2001 financial year. The reason for this was that payment of the 10 per cent increase would burst the Defence budget beyond the 2 per cent of the GDP that was agreed upon with our development partners.  

• Drugs in the barracks are grossly inadequate. This forces soldiers to move on foot for long distances to neighbouring health centres. 

• Most barracks have not been rehabilitated for a long time, and many of them have leaking roofs that force soldiers to “sleep while standing” when it rains at night - (Laughter). 

The committee also noted -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean dozing or sleeping? (Laughter)

MR MAYENDE: Mr Speaker and honourable members, we are quoting verbatim what we were told, and that is why that phrase is in italics in our report. 

• We found that water, electricity and telephone facilities have broken down and most barracks are dilapidated. Indeed many house units have no shutters and roofs are leaking. The sewage system is non-functional and the water system has broken down. There exist dangerous electrical installations that pose a danger to the inhabitants of the barracks. Indeed, Mr Speaker and honourable members, when we were in Magamaga we found that a lady had been electrocuted recently.  

• Although it is reported in the ministry’s policy statement that salaries are received by the 28th of every month, the fact on the ground is that some soldiers take up to two months before receiving their salaries.  

• There is lack of transport in the barracks, and in instances where soldiers die in the barracks, bodies to particular routes have to accumulate before transport is provided, and this takes up to eight months. In other cases, fallen soldiers and their relatives who pass away are buried in the barracks. 

• The committee was not able to visit all the army units but in the two that were visited, it was observed that the morale of soldiers leaves a lot to be desired.  

The committee therefore recommends the following under Defence:

• Given the big numbers of people within the barracks, government, through the Ministry of Health, should establish continuous support to health units within the barracks under the health sub-district programme in the Ministry of Health.
 
• The Ministry of Education and Sports should facilitate primary and secondary education, which are currently under the Ministry of Defence, to enable those in the barracks to benefit from educational programmes and projects under the Ministry of Education.

• The construction of security roads should be off-loaded from the Ministry of Defence and transferred to the responsible ministry.  

• The ministry should undertake to rehabilitate barracks in the country to improve on the accommodation of soldiers.

• The committee takes serious note of the unpaid salary increase of 10 per cent, which was passed in the 2000/2001 financial year. The Minister of Defence should devise every means to accommodate the increase.  

• The LDU personnel under the Anti-Stock Theft Unit, who are operating in Karamoja and Teso regions, should be subjected to joint training, deployment and transfers within the region. Currently the training and deployment of LDUs is based on the county.  

MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

The mandate of the Ministry of Internal Affairs is to ensure and maintain internal peace by enforcing law and order. The ministry implements this through its departments that include the ministry headquarters, Uganda Police Force, the Uganda Prisons Service, the Immigration Department, Government Analytical Laboratory, the National Community Service Programme and the Amnesty Commission. They also have the NGO Board.

What are the major achievements in the past financial year?

• The ministry recruited and trained 543 new staff in the Prisons Department. 

• Police purchased two hydrafoam machines.
 
• 145 unipots were purchased for the Police. 
 
• The Community Service Programme was launched in the districts of Masaka, Mpigi, Masindi and Mukono as a pilot scheme.  

• The Amnesty Commission opened reception centres in Gulu, Arua, Kasese and Mbale, and received up to 5000 reporters and provided them with certificates.  

• The Police constructed new barracks at Kalangala and Sembabule, among others, and finalised the strategic investment plan. 
 
• An office block for the Immigration Department was constructed at Katuna and, 

• The NGO Board handled 441 new cases, made 307 renewals and de-registered two NGOs.  

The ministry was constrained by the suspension of voted money and the low budget ceiling that was imposed on them by the circumstances. 

The committee observed, when we were interacting with the ministers and the ministry officials, that the ministry’s proposed capital budget this financial year is Shs5 billion compared to Shs6 billion last financial year.  This is in spite of the increased need to equip the ministry headquarters, the Police, Prisons and many other activities.  

We, therefore, recommend that in the MTEF provision, an adjustment should be made upwards for Police, Prisons and the headquarters, considering that security plays a pivotal role in poverty eradication. Indeed, without security, all other programmes and activities are difficult to implement.  

The Government Analytical Laboratory has received inadequate attention from government over the years considering its importance. The laboratory has a big bearing on the disposal of cases related to murder, rape, defilement and paternity. A large number of people on remand in our prisons are accused of defilement and rape, but whose cases cannot be disposed of due to lack of appropriate equipment and sufficient personnel, including a DNA test machine.

The committee therefore recommends that the Government Analytical Laboratory needs to be facilitated through manpower training, availability of equipment and opening up regional laboratories to expeditiously handle upcountry cases. Mr Speaker, honourable Members, cases have to pile up. Because if, say, they have to be disposed of in Mbarara somebody from the headquarters goes there, then the same gentleman has to go to Mbale; the same gentleman has got to go to Gulu.  This is a serious matter.

Community Service Programme:

That has been operating on a pilot project basis in the districts of Masindi, Mukono, Masaka and Mpigi. Our development partners wholly finance it.  The project is ending in May 2003. The current budget for the financial year 2002/2003 has no provision for community service activities. 

So, the committee recommends that the community service programme, when the project ends in May, government should take it over fully. The Ministry of Internal Affairs should liaise with the Ministry of Finance to avail funds this financial year. 

The Non-Government Organisations Board: 

In the course of the last financial year, the NGO Board de-registered two NGOs namely: Care for Orphans, Widows and the Elderly (COWE) and the Kawaala Children’s Home. COWE was licensed to operate in three districts but extended their activities to 13 other districts without the authority of the NGO Board. They were also operating as a micro finance institution, an activity, which was not licensed.

On the other hand, Kawaala Children’s Home was registered to care for the education of orphans by giving them education services. This NGO was getting funds from abroad and yet the orphanage was non-existent on the ground. The orphans for whom these fees were being raised from aboard were systematically begging in and around Kampala using NGO forms The Ministry is making further investigations on these two NGOs.  The committee awaits final investigations and a report from the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The committee will subsequently report to you about those two NGOs.

The Karamoja Disarmament:

Phase I of the disarmament exercise was a great success, yielding about 10,000 guns handed over to government voluntarily. Phase II of forceful recovery is ongoing, but has not yielded as many guns as Phase I did. So far, some successes have been achieved but with failures, challenges and constraints.  

The committee interacted with the Minister of State for Defence, the Minister in the Prime Minister’s Office in charge of Karamoja Affairs, Members from Teso region, Karamoja and Kapchorwa, and we noted the following:

1. It had been planned and agreed that 292 people should be recruited as security vigilantes/LDUs in sub-counties that border our international boundaries. For those inland sub-counties, only 146 would be recruited under ASTU. But what we discovered was that only 60 were recruited in every sub-county, and we were told it was due to financial constraints.

2. Some of the LDUs recruited under this programme were removed and allegedly re-deployed to fight the LRA thereby leaving security gaps in Karamoja and Teso.

3. During the first phase of disarmament, some groups among the Karimojong and the people of Kapchorwa handed in their guns while others did not. Those that handed in their guns became vulnerable to attacks from the groups that did not hand in. This resulted in fresh purchase of guns by some groups in Karamoja.

4. The sensitisation of the Karimojong during the disarmament process was inadequate. It was noted that there is no radio programme in a Karamoja that could be used in sensitising the people.  

5. The Master Plan Programme for the Development of Karamoja under the Prime Minister’s Office has not been implemented. This is partly responsible for the delays in implementing the disarmament programme.

6. The impending elections in Kenya have made it difficult for the Kenyan government to embark on disarming the armed cattle keeping communities in their country.  So we are affected as neighbours.

7. There still exist elements of cattle thefts and attacks by the Karimojong worriors in Kapchorwa and Katakwi.

8. There are incidences of armed attacks along the roads in Karamoja by groups of the youth.

9. There is a looming famine in Karamoja, which has been brought to the attention of government. 

Successes in the disarmament Program:

• There is a feeling that illegal holding of guns in Karamoja, now more than before, is known as a crime.  

• The number of guns illegally held in Karamoja region has reduced, if anything, by 10,000 in number.

• The crime of rustling in Karamoja region has now reduced to cattle thefts, especially by the younger generation called Karachunas. 

Constraints and challenges of the program:

The changed and challenging security situation in the Acholi sub-region following the launching of “Operation Iron Fist” by the UPDF has affected the disarmament program by way of moving personnel. We also have the changed security situation in Karamoja and along its international boarders.

The Multi-Sectoral Budgetary Constraints of the Karamoja Development Program: 

Virtually every sector that links with the Karamoja Development Programme has a budgetary constraint, which in turn affects the disarmament and the development programme.

The looming famine in Karamoja is also a big challenge. 

What does the committee recommend?

1. Government should address the problem of apparent inadequate manpower in the Karamoja region through immediate recruitment, training, arming and putting in place central command and control. 

I will further explain the above. We were told - if I can refer to the various communities - that if the Pian, the Bokora and the Pokot can be trained together, it will help ease tension. It will cause understanding of each other. Much of the present friction might be eased. That is what we think.

2. Government should institute mobile forces for rapid response to armed thuggery on Karamoja roads against cattle thefts.

Mr Speaker, if there is an immediate response to cattle raids, the people in the area will believe that there is a government to protect them. 

3. The Karamoja Multi-Sectoral Plan should be implemented in the spirit of the purpose for which it was created. The multi-sectoral budgetary constraints should be eliminated. 

Mr Speaker and honourable Members, we have many people in Uganda that are internally displaced. They are surviving on relief and donations. The areas affected are northern Uganda and West Nile, as a result of rebel activities by LRA; Bundibugyo and Kasese, as a result of past rebel activities by ADF; and Katakwi, resulting from the Karimojong cattle rustling activities. 

The campaign to disband the internally displaced camps in northern Uganda was disrupted by the recent surge of insecurity caused by LRA rebel forces. The committee appreciates the effort of the civil society in addressing and providing for the needs of the displaced people. We do encourage other efforts originating from this Parliament. Additionally, government effort in enhancing security through the establishment of the Fifth Division, specifically assigned to protect the internally displaced persons, is appreciated.

The Uganda Police Force:

The committee observed that the Uganda Police Force has not embarked on constructing the proposed Police headquarters. The force has inadequate offices and residential accommodation.

Their machines and equipment are not up to the level that can enable them to adequately cope with the new and advanced crime wave.  

We therefore recommend that specialised training to handle the new wave of crime, and the advanced level of criminality, should be carried out.  

Government should prioritise measures that will improve the efficiency and the effectiveness of the Police Force. This should include provision of equipment, adequate and appropriate training. We do know that Police has not yet been considered as a priority area by government.  

Prisons Barracks:

All the prisons in this country were built before independence, and indeed some were built as way back as 1930. The most recent prison was built in 1962. The prison cells and the barracks are indeed in a very sorry state due to old age and a long time of negligence. Many are not fit for human habitation.  

The committee therefore recommends that government should speed up the process of rehabilitation of prison cells. A programme should be put in place to replace those that are inhabitable. Government should also embark on simultaneous action on rehabilitating the prison warders’ accommodation.  

Prisons Training:

This department plans to get 500 recruits this financial year. Honourable members, this will not be possible because we are told that the Ministry of Finance has not provided the funds for training. This is in spite of the fact that the Ministry of Public Service has provided for salaries of the proposed recruits and the funds are in their budget.

The committee therefore urges the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Public Service and the Prisons Department to come up with an amicable solution that will enable the department to recruit and train additional manpower. We were told that the Prisons Department is currently operating at about 40 per cent of the desired force.

Prisons Farms:

Last financial year the Prisons Department embarked on a commercial crop production project that is aimed at achieving sufficiency in food requirements within the department. We were told that since it is commercial, it could generate income in form of enhanced appropriation-in-aid. Unfortunately, this initiative is bound to fail because of the nature of releasing funds. Only one-twelfth of the budget is released every month. The release does not match with the farming requirements where activities are done on a seasonal basis. 

Honourable Members, we were told some time back that the department received money at the beginning of June. They wanted this money in September but they received the whole amount that they had been asking for, a month before the end of the financial year. 

We believe that the Ministry of Finance should consider releasing funds to the prisons’ farms in a timely manner. It should be in a lump sum to enable them carry out agricultural activities that fall within a given season. It should not bring the money after the maize is stunted.

In conclusion, the committee recommends the adoption of this report and approval of the budget on the following Votes - honourable members, I wish to point out that although you have already got some papers indicating changes to the votes, we are told by the Ministry of Finance that there are new adjustments. So I hope that what I am going to read are the final adjustments. 

Mr Speaker, the latest figures that I have are as follows:

Recurrent Expenditure:

Vote 021: Ministry of Defence - Shs232,311,497,000

Vote 022: Ministry of Internal Affairs - Shs5,725,156,000

Vote 038: Uganda Police Force - Shs65,510,542,000

Vote 039: Uganda Prisons Service - Shs18,271,480,000

Development Expenditure:

Head 121 – Ministry of Defence -(Interruptions)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure with regard to the allocations for the various recurrent and development expenditures, which are being read out now. I have very keenly been following what the chairman of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs was reading. However, I am now confused as to which adjustment to follow.

I thought that the committee sat down and went through all these allocations and that they were going to read to us what they considered as a committee and what they signed for. Now there are new allocations that have come up. Is it their responsibility or that of the Minister of Finance to tell us these new adjustments? 

Mr Speaker, I would like to be guided. What then is the relevance of committees sitting and approving certain allocations, only to come to the Floor of the House and we get new allocations? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, I am as equally concerned as you are. That is why yesterday I did not proceed with the vote, which I read this afternoon. I had detected that there were errors in the figures. So I gave them sufficient time to go and correct the figures.  

The good thing with these figures, which are being read now, is that they are increased. Actually, the committee was lamenting about inadequacies, but this is now enhanced and that is something good. Of course, this is not an excuse for the confusion these errors are causing us. So I will ask the minister to explain why we have been getting these changing figures. Do you have a cause?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the budgeting process is not a very simple one. You have to go through all the figures, make adjustments, harmonise votes here and there, and consider so many things. 

In the process of harmonisation and re-adjustments, we make some inadvertent errors and when we detect them in time, we correct them. Of course, we apologise for the embarrassment, but figures are not so simple to deal with. So, the cause is the process of negotiations, adjustments and harmonising the various interests. 

I am, however, happy to say that the figures being read now are reflecting the final and agreed position. I am sorry, and I beg that we be forgiven.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Chairperson, please proceed.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I want further clarification on these figures before we give a blanket approval. There are figures that were presented to this House by the Minister of Finance. The Sessional Committees and the Budget Committee looked at them, and based their proposals on re-allocations between programmes within and between sectors. Is the minister trying to tell us that those figures were wrong, and therefore whatever work we did at that time is null and void? Which are the right figures? Are these ones synchronised with the old ones or is there a completely new scenario? Do you expect more revenue mobilisation?

MR RUKUTANA: What the committee did is not null and void, definitely. I assure this House that the re-allocations and adjustments will not adversely affect the Votes.

MR MAYENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I had reached development expenditure.  

Development Expenditure: 

Head 121: Ministry of Defence - Shs13,756,554,000

Mr Speaker and honourable Members, I do request that as I read the numbers, you note them down, because these are different from all the others.

Head 122: Ministry of Internal Affairs - Shs1,160,000,000

Head 138: Uganda Police Force - Shs3,950,000,000

Head 139: Uganda Prisons - Shs1,412,000,000

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the committee.

MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to comment on the committee’s report. First of all, I am grateful for the report. It is good work. For a committee comprising 30 per cent UPDF Officers, it takes so much courage to come out with a document like this. For example, on page eight they explain certain situations. 

I have a few comments to make. On page three, I want the chairman, and perhaps the minister, to substantiate on this statement. They say, “The UPDF cannot protect each and every inch of the ground in the disturbed area of Northern Uganda.” I would be most obliged for an answer. 

I also want to understand the last sentence on page four, on armed robberies. It says, “In addition, a court martial to try suspected robbers has been constituted, chaired by hon. Lt. Gen. Elly Tumwine.” I want to understand the legal basis upon which the non-armed people arrested in this Operation Wembley will be court-martialled. My layman understanding is that courts-martial are for combatant professions like the army.

On page five - my voters have always been asking me, because many of them are veterans, about gratuity payments to members of the Uganda Veterans Assistance Board. People have sold their goats and hens, especially at the peak and the eve of the presidential elections, to come to Bombo to check for their names. Could we really get a clear explanation? At one time I even talked to the minister about this issue of veterans but I would rather have an authoritative explanation. Who are the members of the veterans’ board, and what of the other veterans who are still claiming a lot from the government? At the eve of the elections they sell their pigs to come to Bombo! 

Page eight contains very powerful literature. It said, “the soldiers sleep while standing.”  When I was going to my constituency, people in army uniform stopped me. I was not sure whether they were UPDF soldiers or LRA. When I stopped I was asked by one of the soldiers to buy for him gumboots. Their feet looked so miserable in slippers, they were swollen. And they were carrying out their usual operations. They were UPDF soldiers - (Laughter). To my surprise, they also wait for relief supplies together with other people. Many of them “drink lunch.” My understanding is that people should “eat lunch,” but many of them “drink lunch”. I think that this is another powerful expression, which should be added to “they sleep while standing.” What is happening?  

Then the Local Defence Forces in my constituency have all, in a proxy manner, turned out to be UPDF soldiers. We recruited them to guard us but we do not see them, the LDUs –(Interjection)- honourable Minister of Defence, can you address me through the Speaker? So, it would be very interesting to find out the whereabouts of the LDUs we mobilised. We have been eloquent, very loud in crying out for these young brothers whom we do not know where they are. Under whose command are they?   

I move on to page nine. People are opposing the current practice whereby not all the UPDF soldiers at the battlefront get an honourable burial, worthy of the struggle they are going through across the country. There have been complaints by some officers that many soldiers have been buried at the battlefront. Some of them do not come back home to get the recognition they deserve. 

We should not think soldiers have different lives. They are deep in Sudan fighting a cause for the country, and when you cease to be a human being, you deserve some respect. You should not just disappear like a pig without proper explanation. So, honourable minister, I beg you to comment on this. Otherwise, as a Member of Parliament for Aruu County, I would rather call “Operation Iron Fist”, “Operation to bring our Problems Home”. The UPDF struggled so much to destroy the bases of the LRA in Sudan, so they are now home. One MP said it is like stoning a beehive because you do not want bees there; they attack you instead. 

I am however grateful for the establishment of the Fifth Battalion in Acoli-Pii camp where we had 43 UPDF soldiers before. As I talk now, we have 10,000 UPDF soldiers there. You see, if someone steps on you in a crowd, you must cry. You must not be courageous simply because people will hear you cry. So at last I am so grateful that our cry at Acoli-Pii camp has led to the increase of soldiers, by 9,800. It is such a commendable effort.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I urge members of the House to support all the actions taking place in the North geared towards peace negotiations. I however advise that we must not talk about what we do not know. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR KASSIANO WADRI (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion on the Floor. First of all, I thank the committee for the work well done. I have a few issues that I would like to comment on. 

I commend the Government of Uganda, and in particular His Excellency the President, for having come out after such a long time and accepted to dialogue with the LRA. I would like to share with the House a very bitter experience that I went through when I was still a civil servant. 

In November 1993, I had the very unpleasant duty of performing the services of an office messenger, and I carried four letters from the Lord’s Resistance Army in Chwero. These letters precipitated the first peace talks in 1994. 

I remember my first letter was passed on to the Resident Minister in the North, honourable Betty Bigombe; then the late Lanek, the LC Chairman, there was also the Brigade Commander and the late Capt. Kabula who was the RDC. Those efforts were, however, wasted when at the end of the day the rebels were given an ultimatum of coming out of the bush within seven days or face fire. Nine years down the road, the people of Northern Uganda have suffered very colossally. 

According to the UNICEF Report of 1999, the Lords Resistance Army burnt 75 primary schools then. 57 teachers died in the hands of the LRA and a number of school children, women and the elderly died in the hands of these merciless groups. 

Surely, the time has now come when every other person is fed up of this war. The war in the North is not only a problem of the northerners themselves; it affects each and every one of us. I think at this point in time, now that we have accepted to dialogue peace, I will implore that let all the parties be as calm as possible rather than giving contradictory information. 

I am perturbed, Mr Speaker, that this morning in the media, when you read both the Monitor and New Vision newspapers, the cease-fire that was decided upon by both forces is not being respected. Are we serious that we are dialoguing for peace? If we are dialoguing, I think there is need for both sides to restrain so that the long-awaited peace negotiations can be pursued to their logical conclusion.  

In the same breath, I would like also to mention those who lost their wealth and lives as a result of this insurgency. In 1996, a number of businessmen and women hailing from Arua lost property; people had their buses and lorries burnt in the park and even in Kasese. 

I have the following people who even made personal contacts with the Office of the Prime Minister and the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development: We have Mr Wayiga Muhammed, a businessman from Arua who lost a lot of money; Mr Lwanyaga Paul of Kampala; we have Samuel Black of Kasese who lost four vehicles (buses) and lastly but not least, we also have James Manyindo who equally lost property.

Letters were written to the government through the Ministry of Internal Affairs; the Office of the Prime Minister was consulted and the Prime Minister assured these people that government was due to come up with a policy on compensation of people who have lost property as a result of insurgency. At this point in time, can we know what has happened to this policy?  We in Uganda we are fed up of saying, “Ebintu bijja, biri mu kkubo” meaning things are coming – (Laughter). How long is the pipe? 

Mr Speaker, I have in my possession these documents, which I will put on the Table. (_Prof. Nsibambi rose_)- I know the Head of Government Business would like to inform me but anyway let me take the information.

PROF APOLO NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Wadri for giving way. As you know, we are systematic and we have to use sustainable arrangements. I did set up an inter-ministerial meeting chaired by the First Deputy Premier to handle this matter and he has assured me that they have made proposals, which they have put to Finance and the matter is being addressed. As you know, Finance is getting a lot of demands and their resources are scarce. 

What is happening in various parts of the country especially where there is insurgency; we are not getting money. We have to pump money in those areas. So, when we make demands on Finance, we must realise that the resources are not readily available. So, Finance has not been able, for understandable reasons, to handle that matter. 

So, I want honourable members to understand that we are disaster prone. We are trying to create national integration, but our problems are many. But considering that this country died, we are doing very well. We are on the mend. But the problems are still staggering. So, when resources are available, we shall be in a position to announce, but we do not want to announce something, which is not sustainable because it is going to hurt you more. If you like, I am willing to say that we have nothing to give to those people who have lost. It will be an easier answer. Is it not? May I say we have nothing to give them? I would rather wait a bit just in case. So, we are waiting until the resources are available and that is a better approach. I thank you.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I have very attentively listened to the explanation given by the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister. He should appreciate that those days when we were his students, he used to be very systematic – (Laughter)- and being systematic will mean that as soon as you mark an assignment, whether the student has failed or passed, you must communicate to him. 

What I am saying is, if government is handicapped in as far as resources are concerned, it is only prudent that it should make that communication to the people who have taken the trouble to make a formal appeal to the government. It is no point for somebody to wait until Wadri comes on the Floor of the House to demand an explanation that you rise up to make this explanation. People out there want an explanation. Even if the government does not have money, let government come up and say “We appreciate the suffering that you have gone through but, unfortunately, we do not have the money to address your issue at this time in point” and people will appreciate it.

My third concern is on the issue of community service. Community service is a very important programme that will go a long way to decongest the already overcrowded prisons. I remember I was one of the founders/conceptual core group that conceived the idea of community service when I was still the Commissioner for Youth and Children’s Affairs, because I was responsible for probation services. So, I am conversant with what I am talking about -(Applause).

Mr Speaker, you need to appreciate that for community service to run very efficiently, it is not enough for you to resource Ministry of Internal Affairs or the Prisons Department for that matter. The Prisons Department is at the receiving end and it does not have community outreach approaches. We have the probation officers who are officers of courts and whose duty is to make sure that offenders get rehabilitated from within the community. 

In a similar vein, I will appreciate that the Prisons Department and the Ministry of Finance should consider also equipping and resourcing the other line ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. This is because even if we talk about this programme now, and we do not facilitate those who are supposed to supervise these offenders, our efforts will be laid to waste.

Fourthly, we have got the Uganda National Rescue Front II who have been operating in Sudan and Zaire, now the DRC, who have now come home. We are told they are 1555 and government had made a pledge to assist only 455. What happens to the rest?  

Since 1979, many of the former soldiers are out there asking for compensation and payment and it has never reached them and we are adding another number on that backlog! What are we going to do with that large number? We must appreciate that these guys went to the bush, among other things, because of poverty and now when they come home and have no specific programme to address that concern, I am afraid in the long run they might - why come home if the reason for which you went to the bush has not been adequately addressed? I wish the line ministry could also have that in mind.

My last concern is on the issue of prison welfare. Each of us here is a potential prisoner. Yesterday we heard over the radio, and today we read with dismay in the media the fact that one member who used to be with us is in prison. You will not appreciate the suffering of prisoners until you have the chance of being there; that is an opportunity. 

In this country there was once a minister. Whenever prisons put forward demands and requisition for resources he could say, ‘why should you care for these prisoners?’ But at the end of the tunnel, when it was his turn to go to Luzira, he turned to the commissioner and said, ‘can you bring me a blanket?’ Yet, the other time when he was in a position of authority, he did not appreciate that these were human beings that also needed support! So- (Interjection)- I am not going to mention the name of the minister. These are Ugandans; they know themselves. We need to provide for the welfare of the prisoners.

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up.

MR WADRI: Last but not least is UPDF. My concern is about the welfare of the UPDF. You cannot expect these sons and daughters of this country to fight and pacify this country when they are not sure of their next meal. I think there is something fundamentally wrong with us as a country. These are people who are responsible for the lives and property of this country and we cannot even fund them; we are able to even charge Shs5000 per T- shirt! Does government know that revenue? Is the Treasury aware that the Ministry of Defence is collecting money from its soldiers? And how is accountability for those funds done?

Mr Speaker, I would have gone further but since you have told me that time is up, those are enough for the time being. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Before I hear from the Member for Moroto County, I welcome, on your behalf, 50 pupils from Bulawoli Primary School in Bugabula North Constituency. You are most welcome!

MR ALEX OKOT (Moroto County, Lira): Thank very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to congratulate the committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for the good report they have given us. However, I would like to seek some clarification, especially from the Minister for Defence. 

On the issue of security, we know very well that the programme “Operation Iron Fist” is supposed to uproot the LRA from the Sudan and completely destroy them. But to our surprise, and I am sure also to the surprise of government, the “Operation Iron Fist” has been a programme to trans-locate the LRA. They have trans-located from Sudan to Uganda, and they have trans-located the problems they were causing from Sudan to Uganda. 

The government vowed to continue with the military option, but it is 16 years that government has continued with the military option and I want to say that it has failed.  Why has it failed? Because it has not tackled the root of the problem, and the people in the North are saying let us tackle the root of the problem, not by a military option, but through dialogue.  

There is a problem why the LRA exist and that problem cannot be tackled through armed struggle. That problem can only be tackled through peace, reconciliation and dialogue. So, we are really requesting the government to make sure that this second option is taken as a strong point in fighting the LRA.

The second problem is that usually when there is a big issue like the Karimojong and LRA, or any other struggle, the President, who is the Commander in Chief, has to go there. But we know very well that Uganda has a machinery and the machinery is invested in the UPDF. Are they trying to tell us that the machinery is not able to work without the Commander in Chief being in the field? Is it useless machinery? Should we get another one?

Mr Speaker, Uganda has been talking about modernising the army. What we have noticed is that a good number of soldiers have been taken out for training, we have noticed that a few of them are looking fat - those who have got good training. Is that what we call modernisation of the UPDF?  

We have heard from the report, a report which is so shameful to our country, a country which is talking about modernising the army everyday, that soldiers are begging for food. I come from an area where LRA rebels have attacked. When we go to talk to the soldiers, they tell us, ‘we are hungry’, and everyday we hear the army is being modernised! Is that part of modernisation when the soldiers go hungry, when they have only one pair of uniform, when they walk in slippers, when they are sick they are not given medical treatment? 

We are seeking this clarification: These are the people who are supposed to guarantee our security, is this the way they are going to guarantee our security when they are hungry? So please, could we get that clarification from the honourable minister; what does he mean by modernisation of the UPDF? It seems we have failed to understand it.

On the issue of the Karimojong, the problem of the guns in Karamoja is a very big socio-economic and actually a life problem. With these guns, the Karimojong are killing each other; the Karimojong rustlers are killing the neighbours. There is a plan to disarm the Karimojong. Government, in the first phase, disarmed some Karimojong and left the others with the guns. Automatically the reason for having the guns is to fight, to steal cows and to kill. So, those who do not have are at risk, and they are not protected. So they go and buy guns and they re-arm themselves.  

Is the government really serious about this programme of disarmament? If it is serious, then the disarmament cannot be partial and discontinuous. It must be continuous; otherwise we may say the government is not interested in the lives of those citizens who live in the surrounding areas or of the unarmed Karimojong. If the government is serious, let it tackle this problem seriously and continuously. Or maybe since the Commander-in-Chief of the UPDF has got himself away from that area, that is why the programme has stopped. Do we need the Commander-in-Chief to go back? Then we will need the Commander-in-Chief to go in all the parts of the country to make sure that the programmes of the government of Uganda are running well! Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JOHN AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues who have thanked the committee for the job well done. There are a few issues on which I would like to seek clarification in this report, and will I emphasise others.  

On page 9, I am pleased the committee has pointed out the issue of construction of security roads. This is very important, and I would like to inform the ministers of Defence and Internal Affairs, since these are security issues, which pertain to both of them, that this point should not be left to remain in the papers because right now we know that all the national boundaries along the Karamoja line are very prone to external attack, and yet we have there roads, which were constructed during the colonial days and these roads need to be opened. I hope it will not be like the situation we had during the construction of dams where everything about Karamoja was put on paper and nothing took place.  

There is, on page 10, an issue of constructing 145 unipots for the Police.  As we speak now, I am sure the Minister of Internal Affairs is well aware that in Kotido, although it is an old district, we do not have a Central Police Station, a tangible and well-facilitated CPS. So, when I see in the report, “construction of uniports” in a very hot area like that one, I begin to wonder whether it is part and parcel of the purchases to construct these things in our hot Karamoja. So, I will need some clarification on that.  

Further in this report on page 14, it is a very dangerous experience to see that as much as we have the commitment from some government forces to see that sensitisation in Karamoja is made a success for the disarmament exercise, Radio Karamoja, which has been on paper, has not taken off. And yet when we talk of insecurity, we are all aware of the circumstances under which we developed Radio Gulu.  I thought in the very manner we set up Radio Gulu, the government should make all the possible commitment to see that Radio Karamoja takes off. I am so dissatisfied and I am sure the people of Jie are not happy that the Minister of Information, who went on air committing himself that the government was doing everything possible, did nothing. So, I want the Minister of Internal Affairs to give an explanation on that.  

There is an issue of corruption, which has not been pointed out in this report. One of the problems we should identify, as legislators of this House, is corruption. There is rampant corruption, which has made everything very difficult to take place. I would like us to make sure that the issue of corruption, just like the Operation Wembley, Operation Iron Fist, should be rounded up in the same manner.

There are, of course, issues of lack of commitment. Most of these things we have seen and we know our priority is security. So, I would like to emphasise on these points. I am emphasising all these issues because if there is lack of commitment, we shall have a lot of nothing to do in this House. So, I would like to ask all of us, especially the Ministers of Defence and Internal Affairs, to make sure that a lot of what we are going to pass in this report comes into play.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a few issues to raise but before that, I want to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the job well done.

Mr Speaker, I want to refer, first, to the Karamoja Disarmament Programme. I thank the government for the effort so far made in this programme because we are aware that the guns in Karamoja are not only a detriment to the neighbours but more so to the Karimojong themselves. Indeed, for any meaningful production to be realised, security is a prerequisite. We are now lamenting that there is a problem of famine in Karamoja; it is partly because the local people have not had time to engage in any agricultural production because of the insecurity.  

Mr Speaker, continuing from where my honourable colleague has just stopped, we have a problem of accountability because of corruption. Up to now, we do not know how much resources have been sunk into the Karamoja Disarmament Programme and in any case, what is the impact?  

I read with dismay from the report that while 60 LDUs per sub-county were recruited to help in provision of security for the region, the few LDUs who were recruited were again transferred to “Operation Iron Fist”, leaving the area virtually to nobody to provide security. I am also worried to hear that there is re-armament going on in certain parts of Karamoja while others remain unattended to. That kind of scenario is likely to perpetuate internal conflicts within Karamoja because once one particular sub-county or so are armed while the rest have not been attended to, I think we are heading for a problem. If there is any re-armament or any recruitment of LDUs, an effort should be made to have all the sub-counties equally covered. Otherwise, I think there will be a problem within Karamoja, and it will spill over to the neighbours. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Ministry of Internal Affairs, especially the NGO Board, in containing briefcase NGOs. I think there is need for the NGO Board to go further to scrutinise the activities and programmes of other NGOs. I am sorry to say that these two NGOs, COWE and Kawaala may not be the only ones. We have a number of NGOs, which come with very sweet proposals on paper and do the reverse on the ground.  So, I urge the Ministry of Internal Affairs to carry on with their vigilance to weed out briefcase NGOs from our country.

I want to comment on the lamentation page: I will call it a lamentation page 8. The problems in the UPDF - in fact we were laughing but at some stage I think there is need for us, as a nation, to feel ashamed of the challenges that are faced by our forces. Really, my understanding of UPDF now is that for as long as we have a rotten procurement system, however much money we appropriate to the force, it will go into waste. For as long as the procurement system is not streamlined, we shall continue watching the kind of scenario we had on the 26th of January at Kololo Airstrip. All the UPDF women actually lost their boots during a goose match because they were not fitting, and they continued with the goose match in bare foot. It was very embarrassing!

Mr Speaker, if the moral integrity of some of the officers in the UPDF who are vested with the responsibility is not checked, I think we are really heading for a problem. There is need for us to have a streamlined procurement system. If anything, I would advise that the Minister of Defence crosscheck with the officers in the system and see how to restructure it. Things are getting out of hand, and it is a shame. 

I want to join my honourable colleague, hon. Wadri in deploring the status of our prisons, leave alone the morale of the prison staff and, as usual, the vote that is allocated. It is a service, which is taken as a priority.  I think there is need for us to have a new model. I was happy to be updated that the latest model of Prisons in Uganda is model 1962. I do not know when is the next model, maybe there is an architectural design going on for the next model. So, we implore the Ministry of Finance and the whole government to reconsider giving adequate facilitation to the Uganda Prisons Service.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to begin by joining my colleagues in thanking the committee for this clear report. I have three comments to make. The first one is on page 10. 

I note from this report that the mandate of the Ministry is to maintain internal peace by enforcing law and order throughout the country. 

At this point, I want to commend the Police for the good work that is being done. I also want to find out from the honourable minister why, about a month ago, all the Police posts were withdrawn. In the case of Gomba County, which happens to be a very big county, we had Police posts maintaining peace, and for a long time these areas were very peaceful. But a month ago all these Police posts were withdrawn. 

I understand one of the arguments was that these posts were not strong enough to defend themselves in cases of attack, but with the small force, they had been able to contain the situation for a long time. By withdrawing them, you are saying you want to save the lives of the three policemen and give up the lives of about 10,000 Ugandans! They were few in numbers but doing a good job. 

The other argument was that they did not have enough funds to recruit Special Police Constables, but then I understand there are so many of these local defence people who were trained and then laid off. I was wondering whether the Minister of Internal Affairs could not find a way of re-employing these LDUs as SPCs so that they can reinforce these Police posts and maintain security in these areas. 

The second point is on page 13. I note that the two NGOs were closed, but I am particularly interested in COWE, which appears at the top of page 13. In their report, two reasons have been given for closing COWE. The first one is that they operated in many districts. I do not know whether it is a crime to do a bigger job than what is assigned to you. Because, if the argument was that by opening branches in many districts they committed so many crimes and that is why they withdrew the license, I would really appreciate it. But the mere argument that they were given a few districts and yet they opened in many, I think it is not convincing enough for one to withdraw the license on those grounds. 

The second reason the committee gives is that they opened a micro finance institution without permission. Well that is understandable, but then it would be much of a crime if by opening it these people had swindled money. But then we discovered that the people who are actually members of the COWE NGO came and demonstrated at Parliament here. They were actually against the whole idea of closing the NGO. There were also other demonstrations, which these people carried out.  If this COWE were doing a bad job, would people really come forward to demonstrate and demand that their organisation be reinstated? I want the honourable minister to throw more light on this.  

As for Kawaala Children’s Home, I have nothing to comment because I do not know much about it. 

Now, Mr Speaker, on page 17 -(Interjection)- I am winding up. I understand that the Prisons people are not able to train people because funds are not available but at the same time, I understand that the Ministry of Public Service did set aside salaries for people that would be recruited. Why don’t you do things in an orderly fashion? Why don’t you use the money that was set aside for salaries to train some prisons officers and then look for the money for the salaries later on?  

Mr Speaker, you must have read in the papers on several occasions that prisoners are escaping. I think one of the reasons is that they are under-staffed. Can we afford to go on when our prisoners escape just because there is money for salaries but there is no money for training? Why don’t you turn this money to training first, so that we get the necessary manpower? With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, I thank you and I support the motion.

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula county South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this rare opportunity to contribute to this committee report. I am at great pain to say what I am about to say, because I see a failure of this House to do justice to policy analysis. 

I will not thank the committee for the report because I continually see a degeneration in the quality of the report in this House, and it worries me because we post these reports on the Internet. If we continue degenerating in quality, I think we are going to become a laughing stock internationally.  For me, I am looking for a robust institution that is able to oversee government, which has the tools and the capacity to deal with a challenge of a ministry like Defence, a ministry that has been given a lot of money over the years. But whenever a report is written and read to this House, it is a catalogue of lamentation. How much money does the Ministry of Defence need to defend us? How much do you need to do your job? Because, really, this lamentation is becoming a routine that anybody listening to us will say, ‘oh, there they go again.’ We are becoming irrelevant to the people we lead!

Mr Speaker, I am saying this because we are a self-regulating body. We are above everybody and nobody will talk about our shortcomings, and that is why I am doing so because it is in our collective interest to see that this body remains respectable. 

Mr Speaker, I am worried. Was this report about policy analysis, or was it about clarification of policy, or is it about responding to press reports? Everything that has been raised in the press is what has found its way in the report. Why have they, for instance, not looked at the policy of NGO registration and de-registration, and stuck only on those two, other than what we read about in the newspapers? Is that the job we are paid to do, Mr Speaker? I would think not! We are doing injustice to this nation by treating policy analysis like the usual thing and therefore not giving it the weight it should have!

I am worried about the constitutionalism of what we are doing. The Constitution is very clear. In Article 208, it talks about the UPDF; it goes on to its functions in 209, and in 210 it talks about Parliament making a law to regulate the UPDF. And today we sit here, and by coincidence maybe, that law is tabled called NRA Amendment Bill.   Do we still have NRA in this country which we are amending? And we all sit here so comfortably like we are doing a good job for this nation! Mr Speaker, who will stop this House from doing injustice to this nation?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there was a law which was enacted before 1995 whose title was that one. That law was saved provided you adjust it by making an amendment. But the title of the law, which was there in 1995, is still the same title on the statute books. So they are trying to adjust it by making an amendment. I think that is the title they used. But, I think the point that you brought about - I do not know whether you completed it, you said that the committee’s reports are lamenting and this is not good enough. What should be the position to take on this issue? I think you need to help the committee to know what to do.

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been lucky to serve as a Member of Parliament for Bugabula South for a second term, and I know for sure that in the 6th Parliament there was an undertaking by this very government –(Interruption)

MRS ATIM OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think the point the honourable member is raising is a very important issue.  The Minister of Defence made a statement in this Parliament to the effect that a comprehensive law to regulate the UPDF would be brought before Parliament within a very short time. This statement was made in the 6th Parliament and now we are one year and some months old in the 7th Parliament, but we have not yet seen a comprehensive law regulating the UPDF. This is a very important point, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I agree with her, but my question was about saying the committee is only lamenting. In this situation where the committee report is on the deplorable condition of the UPDF and needs remedies, what else should that committee do?

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, you are giving me a job of the Ministry of Defence, which I had not actually –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, what can the Parliament do? Parliament is not the Ministry of Defence, but it has gone and seen these conditions and it is reporting candidly about what is happening, and making recommendations. What else do you expect the committee to do? That is the point you should clear.

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I expect the committee to offer a policy option. If for 17 years this has failed, how else should we shift to make something work? I am expecting the expertise of that committee - all the lieutenants with all sorts of titles - the would-be expertise, which is not there. So, if there is no expertise in the people who sit on that committee, where is that expertise? 

For me, it is a worry that we will have to overhaul an entire structure to make it work. Lamenting is not what we were sent here to do; we were sent here to find solutions and I would like to see the committee finding the solution.

THE SPEAKER: You mean the committee should dismantle the structure of the Ministry of Defence?  

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, that is an option, because if you have something that has not worked this long, you should disband it like you disbanded the co-operatives and you are bringing them back.

MR MAYENDE: Thank you, hon. Musumba, for giving way. Mr Speaker, since I need to be advised on this, and hon. Musumba seems to know the way forward, can I request that she joins us on that committee?

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much. Actually, I sympathise with the committee chairman because he has the highest proportion of absentee members. I am really worried about the content of the report because it leaves out many of the crucial constitutional things that have been left hanging for a long time. 

I want to look at the Department of Immigration. I was expecting that we would be told about the process of citizenship. How far are we? This was a constitutional requirement, Mr Speaker. We keep repeating ourselves every year. Isn’t there someone in government who monitors and tracks the performance of the Constitution?  Is there nobody in government really who is able to advise that “You know we are late on this one”? So, I would like to see, for instance, in the part that was left out, i.e. the Department of Immigration –(Interruption)

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker, I have been following with keen interest the submission by the honourable member on the Floor, but as far as Immigration is concerned, there is a new specific Act that was passed in May 1999, on immigration citizenship law; there is a law already in existence! I do not know why really she cannot make herself clear about Immigration and the Constitution. We operationalised the provision of the Constitution by making an Act of Parliament here in 1999.

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Sir. But you know what I am talking about. We were supposed to get national IDs, and it has been the subject of talk between the Electoral Commission and the Minister of Finance. All these things of who will take this big deal and register Ugandans as citizens of this country. That you have not done, you have not done! (Laughter)

I would like to see more monies spent on Immigration because it is the face of Uganda. When you enter into our country, the first people who say, hello, are at the Immigration and their work methods have never changed. They probably have never seen a computer in their office, except the time when they give us passports. What is happening?  Have we run down on finances so badly that we cannot afford at least a computer at every entry point to track who is coming in and who is going out, and also to develop a computer aided mechanism? This makes us look modern, because you cannot talk about modernisation as a theme of our presidential manifesto when immigration, which is the entry point into this country is not modernised!

I am hoping that as a co-opted member of defence, I will be able to make more contribution in the committee.  Thank you very much.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I thank also the committee for trying to do a good work on Defence, but Mr Speaker, my worry starts from Page 4, where we have “Operation Wembley.” My worry is the mechanism put in place to check the people who are being arrested.  

Yesterday, in my constituency, this is what happened, and this is where my worry stems: Operatives believed to be coming from “Operation Wembley” went and tracked down the LC I of one area in Bwaise II Parish. They told him that they had come for the person believed to have been shot and wounded, and they alleged that he was a thief.  

The chairman went with them and when they found the person, he told them, “I know this person and he is suffering from what we call, cellulose; these are not bullet wounds”.  They roughed him up, but when they later discovered that the chairman was telling them the truth, they went away.  But later, it was discovered that the lady who reported that person owed him Shs35,000 in rent.  So, this is my worry: Many innocent people are going to be arrested in fake and dubious ways like that one.

The other time I was on radio, one Deus Katongole had been arrested over a petty quarrel with a certain lady who knew somebody highly placed in “Operation Wembley”. If he had not raised an alarm, you never know what could have happened to him.

In relation to Page 4, it seems the Police are being watered down and these operations are coming up.  We are not giving enough capacity and money to develop –(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you honourable member for giving way.  I am just seeking a small clarification.  Apart from that instance which took place in your area, what is your comment on Wembley?  Has it done some work as far as eliminating theft in this area is concerned?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you for that question, but I remember in the 1970s, the Public Safety Unit was put in place to curb the same, but where did it end? It took innocent people like you, honourable.  

What am I trying to arrive at?  Let us equip the Police; let us give it the capacity. But it seems these operations are taking over the roles of the Police, and the Police are not given enough money.  So, the modus operandi, the methodology employed will kill the whole thing, and we should not identify the whole operation with an individual. Well, some good work has been done, but again other people may exploit it. 

On Page 6, where they talk about the constraints and lack of banking facilities in some parts of the country, I think the committee should have come out with some tangible and solid recommendations on what should be done. What about the areas, which are not accessible, what are we going to do?

You remember when one Byakutaga went with Shs1.5 billion, and recently, hon. Winnie Byanyima talked about another billion on somebody’s account; how are we handling such affairs? How are we going to approve monies when facilities in some parts of the country are inoperative?  Mr Speaker, I seek clarification on that one.

I am worried, again, when it comes to the conditions in the barracks where they say the sewerage systems are non-functional and water systems have broken down.  Sincerely speaking, what is the relationship between the Ministry of Defence and other sectors like Ministry of Lands, Water and UEB? Is the money not there?  Is the barracks not accessible? Are they not co-operative because they are soldiers? They are people; they are your brothers; they are your sisters; they are citizens of Uganda, but to see that even the basic services are not there in the barracks causes worry! And we are approving billions and billions of taxpayer’s money and nothing is done. I would not be surprised next year to be told the same story that there is no water.  I would wish for these barracks to be modern, like they are saying they are modernising the army. I pray that these soldiers are given the basic services that they need.  

On page 9, point 3 says, “The construction of security roads should be offloaded from the Ministry of Defence…” I thought this was the work of the Ministry of Works. How are the tenders given out? I think this is a conflict of interest, and it will water down the performance of the Ministry of Defence, because it is like indulging in business. I do not know how the tenders are awarded and how the work is carried out, whether it is the soldiers or otherwise.   

I remember one time the President bought 54 trucks for the Police and we made our contribution. There is nothing that has come up here apart from telling us the money is being cut further. What is the recommendation of the committee?  How are you going to facilitate and equip the Police such that “Operation Wembley” ends and we have a powerful and formidable Police force? My people of Kawempe and I would be grateful to get the clarifications answered. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have to explain the way forward now because many are interested in this topic. Definitely we will have an opportunity after the debate to have full debates on some of the policies, but now I am selecting by regional representation, so that each area is represented. So, when I get somebody from Teso that is it. 

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are considering the budget of the Ministry of Defence and Internal Affairs. The honourable Minister of Defence should know that he is not in Bombo headquarters, he is in Parliament, and when the Speaker is talking, members are expected to sit down and not talk. 

I am saying this because when you were answering hon. Eresu, the honourable minister walked to talk to the clerk. Since you were talking, I could not raise a point of order. So, I thought he should learn some of the parliamentary etiquette.

I am happy that hon. Simon Mayende has presented this report and he is beginning to see the reality some of us have been struggling to show some of the new members. I am glad you visited the barracks and you have brought this report, which is shocking.

I was worried, I see here only three UPDF representatives. For such things to be happening to your constituents and you do not bring them up, I do not understand! I cannot have such a thing in Kashari and I keep quiet for this long. What are you doing here? Is it because you are told that you keep quiet and listen? How are you assisting your constituents? (Interjection) Mr Speaker, I will take on any information as long as my time is considered –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: He has given you his time. Please give the information.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, we are now discussing the policy statement of the Ministry of Defence and Internal Affairs. The Minister of Defence is in the House and he will be able to respond to some of these issues the honourable member is raising. 

On the other hand, in the UPDF we know the challenges facing the economy, and we cannot expect to live beyond what the economy can be able to provide for the country, including the Ministry of Defence. With that, Mr Speaker, the honourable member has been informed.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, I imagine the House had heard – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The thing is that hon. Katirima is a member of this committee. He is the one who made this report, which you have lauded.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, I see here that the honourable Lt Col Katirima and the honourable Lt Gen. Tumwine did not sign the report. So, I do not know if they own it or not. (Interruption)

MR ONZIMA: I thank Maj. Kazoora for giving way. The truth of the matter is that when the honourable minister of Defence and his team appeared before our committee, all the Army Representatives were conspicuously absent. All of them! (Laughter)  

Mr Speaker, after that meeting with the Minister of Defence, in fact the Army Representatives have not been attending the subsequent committee meetings. So, these people are just there by name. As the President rightly put it, they are listening posts. They are not supposed to raise any issues but just to represent the Army by way of sitting in this House. Thank you.

MR MAYENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank you, hon. Onzima. I wish to put the record straight. I am the chairman and I do attend the meetings as the chairman. Often some members of my committee members inform me and apologise for not attending. They give reasons and often I inform the members present. However, it is unfortunate that hon. Onzima is standing here to say that honourable members did not attend subsequent meetings. That is not true.  

Secondly, on the day of the meeting with the minister – (Interjections) – yes the attendance book can be brought here and it will show that some members have indicated their absence with apology, and I have notes from them. But more importantly, may I inform members that not all members representing UPDF are on the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee; not all of them – (Interruption)

MR SEBALU: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the chairman of the committee to come here and start discussing his workings of the committee when we are debating the report and the outcome of the report? Whether the members attend or not, is that part of the report?  

THE SPEAKER: It is in order for the chairman of the committee to correct the wrong information. Otherwise, it would go on record as put by hon. Onzima when the chairman knows a different matter. So, I think he was just doing his work.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, I was a member of the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee in the Sixth Parliament for the five years. We were mandated also to probe in these areas – the causes of this war and problems in the north, and we went to the north. 

The majority of the people then told the committee that government should negotiate with the rebels. The last witness of the committee was His Excellency the President. He pleaded with the committee to give him one year and he would have solved that problem. He said he had identified the weaknesses in the UPDF and that he was now going to tackle them. The command structure, the equipment, and all that - and we did. We gave him the benefit of doubt. Of course, you remember, Sir, that there was a minority report, probably today we may say that that minority report was right.

I also remember that the honourable Lt. Gen. David Tinyefuza appeared before that committee. I wish that tape could be played to this House, because he said it all, although it landed him into problems He said it; he said that by the time the Commander-in-Chief goes to the frontline, what are these Generals doing? They all should be in Luzira -(Applause). That was what Lt. Gen. Tinyefuza said, and very many other things. Yesterday I saw him here in full combat, but it was not the debate on the Floor, so I did not ask him.

On the question of welfare, recently I saw pictures of rebels in the newspapers. They were looking well with new uniforms, better than the UPDF, which asked hon. Otto to buy gumboots. Surely, and you are in government!  

Mr Speaker, we have heard stories - I do not know if the honourable Minister of Defence is aware that soldiers’ salaries are cut so that the money is used to rehabilitate barracks or build new ones. And this is very reliable. I am sure you know that I have got a barracks in my constituency.  

Now, when they said in the report - that is why I said that the report is shocking. Imagine losing somebody and this person is put in a mortuary, waiting for another one to die, and another one to die, and another one to die in the same region – (Laughter)- to go and be buried!  No wonder, Mr Speaker, you could have read when they took a rotten body to Luwero to somebody’s home, buried it and did all the rituals. After some months, the real son now came and the family took off thinking that they had seen a ghost! That is how bad the situation can be. Surely, as leaders of this country, if we cannot be concerned about such matters, what else can we be concerned about? 

Lastly, I do not in any way support anyone breaking the law of this land, but we should also take into consideration the rights of the other members of the family who may not know.  Arresting a suspect, and then you torture the family, you take their property; you grab their cars! 

I can see Lt. Gen. Elly Tumwine shaking his head. He knows these things. We also went through them. You know what I am talking about. At one time we engaged in a struggle and I do not think you would have loved your family to be tortured. They did not know! 

Yesterday, Mr Speaker, a lady came to my office crying! The lady is a friend of hon. Miria Matembe. She failed to get Matembe and she came to me. She told me that this Maj. Sam Mwesigwa who was reported in the press as having been arrested, now was brought from Makindye in an army truck and taken to his home. They beat up his two children - kids of six and eight - telling them “show us where your father puts the guns?” And they just took everything in that house. This lady told me, “let anyone of you come and see this house.” It cannot be the UPDF; it cannot be this government doing this. We can do things in a better, neater manner! We cannot! Surely, what do these children know?  

The other day, another man, Manenero, died in CMI. He was just taken to Ndorwa to be buried and relatives could not be allowed to give speeches.  You must behave better, and we can do that. 

I appeal to the minister and to government to be very calm; there should be no panic. Hon. Mbabazi, there should be no panic. We have Intelligence and we can do a better job. Otherwise, you will cause more problems by punishing people who are not connected and who do not know anything about these things. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the work they have done.  

I will start on page 17 about prison farms I have a prison farm in my constituency - unfortunately the Minister of Internal Affairs is not listening - called Isimba Prison Farm. In line with Government policy, this farm has been selected to produce most of the food for all the other prisons. Unfortunately, no funds have been extended to this prison farm, to the extent that they now are using convicts to guard their gardens. 

These convicts have now become a security problem to my people. Recently, an innocent Akabway was hacked to death and we suspected that these prisoners had a hand in that. Then a month later, in June, another person was attacked.  Fortunately, he was strong enough and he hurt this person. When they traced the attacker, he was found inside Isimba Prison. We checked the records and found out that this one was a convict. 

I do not know what the ministry has to say, because previously the wanainchi would be used to guard these crops but now you are using convicts who have nothing to lose, and eventually they come and kill innocent civilians!  

In the same vein, I would like to commend our honourable colleague, hon. Kayanja, for his “Wembley” operations -(Applause). For us in Masindi we are saying, “please, come quickly to beef up the Police.” There is a lot of insecurity as I talk now, and we believe if hon. Kayanja came to Masindi, there would be relief. I urge him to continue. 

Honourable members, we should not condemn “Wembley” per se, there are others who are not even under “Wembley” who are giving useful information. In my constituency, somebody reported someone who has been terrorising the people. Unfortunately, police was very far. The people chased this person, got him and by the time the Police came, the boy was just ash. Maybe if “Wembley” were there in time, they could have saved this boy’s life and he would be there for hon. Elly Tumwine to try -(Laughter).  

Seriously, government has to re-organise itself concerning the UPDF. I have lived not so long on this earth, but I have seen how armies operate. It is important for the soldiers to have morale. And how do they get this morale? One, by gains at the battlefield, and two, when their welfare is catered for. 

I was here when Amin’s soldiers were being fought and they really fought to the end. I was here when Obote’s soldiers were being fought and I saw how they were demoralised and defeated in a short time.  

On page 9 you are talking of salaries, which have not been paid. There was some increment; is this going to be considered as arrears to these soldiers? Because they have been complaining and they thought they deserve this increment!

Lastly, Ugandans should develop a culture of maintenance. There is a huge barracks in Masindi district called Masindi Army Barracks. Half of it was given to Police; it is now a Police training school but if you go there, you will cry. Yet this barracks could house so many soldiers, and we would not even need to build any somewhere in the west!  So, much as you are planning to build new barracks, rehabilitate and maintain the existing ones. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just sent a note to the chairperson of the committee. We shall continue with the debate with two or three other people but I was making a proposal to the chairperson of the committee that in view of the interest that has been exhibited on this report, after we have dealt with the budget this week, we give members an opportunity to contribute.  

I do not know whether the committees we set up, the one of hon. Nshimye and the one of hon. Kamuntu, have their reports ready. We intend to start debating these reports if they are ready. 

I think there are a number of issues, which have to be raised on Defence and Internal Affairs, but because of time we cannot raise them now. I propose that maybe next week, if these other reports are not ready, we give a full day to members to make their contributions, so that they can be taken into account in streamlining Defence.  

This, I undertake to do -(Applause) - so that next week we will again have a debate, not associated with the budget, but just policy matters of the Ministry of Defence.  

With this, I want to give opportunity to the honourable Member for Mityana North. Do you want to make a contribution, if you do not, then I will give hon. Sebalu the chance? After that we will come to Pallisa.

MR GODFREY KIWANDA (Mityana County North, Mubende): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. One of my first comments is on Internal Affairs and it concerns the Police.  

When I went to my constituency, I found most of the police posts being merged. There were about seven police posts, but by the time I went back, there was only one police post. 

These police posts have been playing a very big role in development, especially in small towns and villages, by combating insecurity.  The police posts have helped us so much in even reducing mob justice, which people resorted to when the police was very far. So, I would like the minister to clarify on this. When are we regaining these police posts in our constituencies, because this is retarding a lot of development?  

Another issue is about the Local Defence Forces. Last week, you must have read in the press about the murder of one of my constituents by one local defence person in the process of mobilising for graduated tax. So, the training given to these people should be proper, because when I went to the scene to see what exactly happened, there was nothing that Mr Kamya must have done to cause this man to fire live bullets in his chest.  

Another issue on local defence - some of these people have been retrenched. They have been sent home with the skills of handling the gun. Some of them have not been paid their retirement benefits, and some have not even been paid their salaries. Such frustrated fellows going out with the skills of handling the gun, I think if it is not well handled, this might create more insecurity in our country.

I would also like to join my voice to those of other members to commend the work done by “Operation Wembley.” Actually, the operation has done some good work though in the process there could be some mistakes carried out here and there. But we still commend the work being done, and those people who have been using Busunju-Hoima highway could be my witness. We could not even spend two days without getting highway robberies on that route. But today, we get almost two weeks or a month without having this on our route. So, this is very good work being done.

Last but not least, Mr Speaker, I want to talk about COWE. I think the minister should come out quickly with a report concerning this organisation. They went throughout my district collecting money, especially from the orphans and widows, and people are crying. When you listen to radio programmes, one after another call, people are asking about COWE.  I think the minister should do this expeditiously in order to save the situation, otherwise, people are getting worried about their monies. And when the COWE people are invited on radio, they are saying that it is the ministry, which is limiting their activities, yet they are capable of paying their clients. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, as I have told you, this report will definitely be debated next week. The only motion I am going to put for us to approve is their recommendation as far as the budget is concerned. But next time, we shall continue with this debate.  

So, I propose that we get somebody from Pallisa, hon. Opange, and then the ministers can answer. Next week I will definitely give you an opportunity for a full day to deal with this.

MR MWANDHA: Can we say that even if the other two reports are available, we start by discussing Defence before we go to them?  Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: There is no problem.

MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join the rest of the honourable members to thank this committee for the elaborate report. 

Mr Speaker, most members have raised problems on COWE. Pallisa people are always asking when their money is going to be refunded. In Pallisa County, Shs47 million was collected. What is surprising is that COWE was allowed to operate in three districts but they went on to open up their offices in 13 districts! But the RDCs representing the President were the ones who were inaugurating this COWE in every district they were going to!  

The people of Pallisa County have always been over-exploited. I take this opportunity to ask the minister concerned to tell us, on behalf of the people whose money was taken, when this money is going to be refunded. There is already a planned peaceful demonstration in Pallisa regarding this money. So, honourable Minister, we need to get the information so that we go and tell the people of Pallisa and those outside Pallisa, so that they know when the money is going to be refunded.  

As far as NGO registration is concerned, is there an inventory release to be distributed to Members of Parliament and the district leaders so that we guard against these briefcase NGOs that go to the districts exploiting people? There is an NGO here in Kampala called Kampala Mission Moving Project, PWDs, P. O. Box 117, Kampala. They went to Pallisa and collected Shs3000 from the disabled people. I took the initiative to check in the registry and I did not see this type of NGO. So, honourable minister, is it possible for us to get the NGO inventory release so that we assist you to track down these briefcase businesses?  

As far as Defence is concerned, in 1986/1987 people from the eastern region lost their property during the time of insurgency. The Ministry of Defence went to Pallisa to evaluate and audit the damages and losses. Papers worth six billion are in the Ministry of Justice awaiting payment. My electorates are always asking when they are going to be paid this money. 

When you refer to page 6 of this report, on ex-servicemen, among the planned activities in the Financial Year 2002/2003, the ministry is going to acquire and document records of ex-servicemen for purposes of processing their dues. Mr Speaker, in 2001 when we were looking for votes, an announcement was made. People sold their property in order to go to Bombo to be registered.  I am surprised to hear again that the records are not there and they are just going to document them!  

I want to inquire from the Minister of Defence about these ex-servicemen. Ex-servicemen are different from the veterans; these are people who fought in KAR, Uganda Army and these are people who are ailing. They sold their land, they are expectant, but you are now saying things are in the pipeline. When are we getting it? 

Among the achievements of Defence on page 5, sub-section 5.6, they tell us that the Allied Defence Forces (ADF) banditry activities in western Uganda have been paralysed. This is worrying us because the other day, his Excellency said they had wiped out ADF. Now the report is saying they have been paralysed. Are they trying to tell us that ADF is still a problem in western Uganda?  

As far as the welfare of soldiers is concerned, if you want to get good output from what you are expecting, that means you have to use a very innovative system. Soldiers are not well catered for; the uniform is not there. You know, when you announce that the salary of a civil servant has been increased by 10 per cent, people start budgeting. You can imagine what happened to these soldiers; they started budgeting and they did not get this money!  

Last month I lost a relative who died in the north.  He had taken two weeks in Mbuya mortuary. Pallisa Hospital sent an ambulance to collect the body, but they were denied. Fortunately, I came to hon. Kayanja, the overall boss of “Operation Wembley”.  But what amused me, the body was taken at night and buried without the community inspecting. Mr Speaker, this is very terrible! The Minister of Defence should explain why. What is the problem?  When somebody has died, he has died. People in our culture are supposed to view the body before burial, and if anything, even bathe the body. Why can’t the people be allowed to bathe the body? (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that among the Iteso, it is taboo to bury a body after dusk, and I think what the Army did is definitely a taboo. Thank you.

MR OPANGE: Thank you for the information, and those taboos are many, but for the issue of time, I would have also emphasised it. Thank you for that information.  

The other issue is the tender system in Defence. Mr Speaker, Shs13 billion has been put on the development budget under Defence when we have very little money on the recurrent budget. I think we should revisit this and see to it that the Shs13 billion should be reduced and taken to the recurrent budget so that these soldiers, the combatants, can do a good job (Interjection).

THE SPEAKER: The recurrent budget is small!  

MR OPANGE: They have allocated the Ministry of Defence Shs13 billion on development budget.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, are you saying the recurrent budget is small?

MR OPANGE: No, as far as the explanation goes, they are not able to first of all pay salaries for these soldiers and they are not able to provide them with food. So we could reduce on the development budget so that the recurrent budget goes up. Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, the development budget should be used for construction. The recurrent one is different.

MR OPANGE: Mr Speaker, as far as the welfare of the civil servants is concerned, their salaries are always in the recurrent budget. The development budget is for purposes of reconstruction. My question is, ‘why do we deny soldiers the best welfare?’ We need security for all. Why don’t we reduce the development budget in order to achieve better results from the combatants?

On prisons, the rate of escaping is so high. My question is, can the Minister of Internal Affairs not institute a hotline so that we help tell you where these people who escape are. We know them. They are out there but even when we tell the prisons’ authorities from where they escape, where they are, they are not ready to collect them. So, Mr Speaker, the insecurity in rural areas is so bad, people, who escape from prisons go back to terrorise locals. Even when you report to the prisons where they escape from, no action is taken. This one is a result of inadequate human resources. The Prisons Department should be facilitated and they should have enough manpower to handle issues. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbaale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, on page eight, point (iii) says, “Drugs in barracks are grossly inadequate. This forces soldiers to move on foot for long distances to neighbouring health centres.” 

I took time to read the ministerial policy statement and I see it contradicts this. It says that the Ministry of Defence continues to spend large parts of its budget on health services on the general public, which is within the catchment area of the various military health units. It says it is the public benefiting and in the committee report, the soldiers are moving to the public health centres? I want clarification on it.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. May I first of all thank the committee for their report. We had discussed most of these things that are contained in this report, except one or two, which I will bring out in the response. I thank the committee members for supporting the budgetary propositions to assist the Ministry of Defence achieve the objectives set out in the policy statement. Let me first comment on issues on which we did not touch base with the committee, or where we touched base. I need to give some explanation. 

When we go to page eight, there is an issue that most people have talked about, the one of uniforms Although we did not discuss this matter in our interactions with the committee, it is indeed a big problem as everyone has noticed. 

The reason why people do not have enough uniforms is simply because we do not have enough money to buy enough uniforms What we have been discussing with the Ministry of Finance is the possibility of advancing us sufficient amounts of money to buy uniforms in bulk. As you know, Mr Speaker, we run a cash budget. That means we spend according to revenue collections. 

The Ministry of Finance releases one-twelfth of the budget every month. Sometimes what we do is wait until we accumulate enough money to buy in bulk, because obviously we cannot buy one-twelfth of our requirements every month. We are discussing it with the Minister of Finance to see whether there is a way of handling some of these bulk purchases –(Interruption)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the point the minister is trying to make concerning the shortage of funds to cater for some of those important materials required in the Ministry of Defence. I would like to know from him if he took the trouble to study the audit report dated June 2001. It covers some of the aspects of your expenditure. If you look at that report, Mr Speaker, you wonder whether the Ministry of Defence deserves all they are asking for. I just want to cite a few examples to clarify this point. 

On page 127, there is a total figure of Shs249, 000,000, which was paid within one month for telephone bills of individual officers’ residences. Number two; there is a sum of Shs200, 000,000 paid for medical bills for services abroad. And in one case an officer got Shs27, 000,000 but never went for medical treatment. 

I am just trying to draw the attention of the committee and of the minister to this. Did they take the trouble to study the audit report?

There are even other cases. For example, we have been told that our dead children pile up and rot until they grow to a number big enough to justify transportation home for burial. 

I have also read in that report that there is an expatriate who is supposed to render services to the Ministry of Defence who earns Shs120, 000 per day for transport allowance! He signed a contract for two years and he has so far been paid over Shs90 million, just for transport allowances. With that Shs90 million, one could buy a vehicle for this expatriate and also have some leftovers to carry the dead bodies of these children home! 

So, Mr Speaker, I want to know, from both the chairman of the committee and the minister, whether they took the trouble to audit their own actions. Are they sensitive to the fact that this money does not belong to anybody but the poor taxpayers? Thank you.
 
MR MIKE SEBALU: On the issue of uniforms, I am very concerned about the fact that our soldiers go without a single set of uniform. Their work demands that they have several pairs, for them to do their work well. I am wondering whether the issue that was raised some time ago when undersize uniforms were bought, could be having an impact on this? Were those uniforms used or just kept? Did they create a deficit in terms of what is needed? I urge the minister to help me with this because it is very serious. When you look at how some of these people are dressed, you would not believe it. And when the minister confirmed that there is no money for their uniform, I even felt more concerned. So may I get clarification?

MR MWANDHA: Would the minister inform the House whether the army uniform is made in Uganda or whether it is ordered from outside? At one time I was aware that NYTIL was making army uniforms Perhaps the minister could arrange for better terms with them so that we get some uniforms for the soldiers. Is it imported or made locally?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I do not have those details that you are reading at hand. Therefore, I do not have immediate answers for them. I can, however, assure you that our expenditure in the Ministry of Defence is according to the budgetary provisions that would have been approved by yourself. 

If there was expenditure for the transport of an expatriate of Shs90 million, then perhaps that would have been according to what you approved. I am not in a position to respond to those details now, because I do not have the answers. I will easily give it when we talk next week, or if you raise a specific question then.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, next week you will be required to be here when we are dealing with the –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, if you raise a specific question, we are ready to offer oral answers. 

I read about undersize uniforms in the newspapers. I am not aware of it at all -(Laughter). It is a fact that we have not imported undersize uniforms; not in my time in the Ministry of Defence. I challenge anyone who has information to the contrary to raise it.

MR KULE MURANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was one of the members of the committee that probed this problem. We actually went abroad to where these uniforms were procured. Unfortunately, some of these were undersize and others were over-sized. Some were distributed to members whom they would fit, and of course the rest were wasted. So we probed this and we saw that many unfit uniforms came in and were given out. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I thank you for that information. Of course, I do not know what period the honourable Member is talking about. I am only referring to the time since I became Minister of Defence. 

We are handling the issue of lack of uniforms together with the Minister of Finance. We want to be able to purchase uniforms in bulk. Not only uniforms but also other things.  

On that page, it is reported that some officers print T-shirts and force soldiers to buy them. Yes, this was raised by the committee, to the Minister of State for Defence. I responded and informed the committee that the culprit who had done that was arrested, made to give up the money and punished. This was an act of a single man, an officer of the UPDF. I want to correct the impression that this is a practice of many officers of the UPDF. It is not.  

On the question of drugs, I will respond in general terms rather than responding to individual questions. It is true that drugs are not adequate. Again it is because of constraints of the budget. If we had enough money, there is no reason why we would not have enough drugs. In the past there had been a problem of stealing of drugs. This has been handled effectively. Drugs used to be stolen in transit but now we have adopted a system, which the Ministry of health uses, of a kit. From the source, the kit is sealed and it is only opened at its destination. This has considerably reduced the stealing of drugs. Of course as the hon. Madada was saying, the inadequacy of the drugs is exacerbated by the fact that we also treat civilians who live in the neighbourhood of barracks. This is done where there are no medical care centres of the central government in the area.

It is true the barracks have been run down because of neglect for a very long time. We have also been fighting in many ways over the past years, and it is a situation that we are trying to cope with. About six years ago, we started a programme to rehabilitate these barracks but what the chairman talked about was the construction of five new barracks, including one in Kakiri. On top of that, we also have a programme, which actually started some time ago, of rehabilitating old barracks. For instance, we started rehabilitation of Simba Barracks in Mbarara and the barracks in Gulu, and things like that. 

We had arranged with the Chinese government to give us credit and in fact we engaged a Chinese company to carry out this rehabilitation. Even Bombo was done by the same company. The idea was that they should begin with the Division Headquarters and go down to the lowest units. Unfortunately, this programme was interrupted by financial constraints and by the two per cent ceiling of our budget.  

The Minister of Finance and I plan to approach the Government of China again to see whether we can resume this exercise. We would like to see whether we could rehabilitate these barracks within the conditionalities of the donor community, the World Bank and so on.

The committee addressed the issue of payment of salaries by the 28th of each month, but the delays talked about in the report do not reflect the situation in the whole force. The committee, as the chairman said, visited only two units and as you know we have 45 battalions so we have 45 barracks. The two are not exactly representative of the bigger picture. I am sure that the committee is right in the cases they cited, but this is not representative of what happens everywhere. In fact, money is released by the 28th of each month, and it is supposed to reach the beneficiaries as quickly as possible. There may be exceptional cases here and there, and of course there are explanations for that.  

For example, when we were doing the headcount, we experienced these delays. We were trying to fight ghost soldiers and instead of paying through the banks, we had to change the system. This caused delays, but the delay was not regular. It was because of that particular exercise.

It is not true, as hon. Cecilia Ogwal and the committee are saying, that we keep bodies for up to eight months before transporting them for burial. Well, this is news to me. How do we keep the body for eight months? We do not have the capacity to keep them, unless of course they rot and we carry skeletons. It is news to me that that kind of thing is happening. 

One of the things we have been trying to do is to develop capacity so that we get fridges for keeping these bodies. We also need to increase the capacity to store these bodies properly. We do not have room to pile up bodies in; we do not! But obviously I will be happy to get better particulars on this. I will get more information on it and if it is happening we will definitely attend to it. There is no doubt about that.

The Army Council, in its sitting in February this year, recognised that there is a problem of burial of dead comrades. If each soldier who died was transported immediately, you can imagine how many trucks would be required to move around the country transporting bodies to conform to cultural norms It is not practical. It is obviously not possible within the Defence Budget limits for us to achieve that.

There had been an earlier decision that when someone dies, you preserve the body for some time before transporting it home. And then because people kept dying, you find that you had to transport more than one body on the lorries, in order to deliver them in one direction. This has become a problem. It is not manageable. And our cultural norms do not even allow for bodies to stay for long before burial. So, the Army Council decided that we are going to revert to the practice of all militaries in the world. We will bury all our dead in military cemeteries. In fact, we already have one military cemetery where soldiers who die will be buried.

We are still flexible –(Interruptions)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, will this be the case even if the relatives of the deceased would have the capacity and are willing to take the body and bury it according to the norms of that particular community? In other words, is it going to be compulsory? And will the families be informed about this?

MR SEBALU: Will that apply to all categories of soldiers, the whole rank and file?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, it will apply to everybody. In answer to what hon. Mwandha has asked, we are still flexible. If the family can manage the process, we will be ready and willing to hand over the body.

There are many questions, which were raised, I want –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I am sure you have noted some of these questions. You will give detailed answers next week. We will have a day assigned for this report then.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes; that is exactly what I wanted to say. Mr Speaker, there are very many questions that have been raised by individual speakers, which obviously deserve responses from the ministry. I hope that next week when we come to debate the general questions about Defence, we will be able to retrieve the Hansard so that I do not only depend on my notes while answering them. And if we could get it in time, we can give full and comprehensive answers. Otherwise, I thank honourable Members for supporting us.

I will also answer the question of the court-martial then. It is one of the questions that was raised, and which I had intended to answer. I thank you very much.

MR MWANDHA: I think it would be nice for the minister to brief the House on the on-going negotiations between government and the LRA. This is a very current issue and it changes all the time.

THE SPEAKER: No. Although we are very much interested in it, it can still be answered next week also.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Thank you very much, honourable members. I have brief remarks to make as I deal with the general issues that have been raised by the members. 

First is the question of welfare of the Prisons and Police Services. I thought it necessary that we should bring this out to the House so that it is known. I have been visiting both the barracks of the police and the prison establishments and I find that we should bring this to the attention of the House, without hiding it so that we know. When we are coming for more resources you know that there is a problem that we are trying to solve.

Second, there is this famous COWE, which I think we should deal with and finish. COWE was originally licensed to operate in the three districts of Mityana, Mpigi and Mukono. Each NGO has a certificate giving the area of operation and what they are supposed to do. The certificate of COWE was for three districts, as I said, Mpigi, Mityana and Mukono. 

As the name says, they were saying they are supposed to help orphans, the elderly and the widows, that was the reason why it was given a certificate. Later on, we found that it had gone to 13 more districts beyond their three districts. And somebody was saying why are we punishing them for being very hard working? Mr Speaker, if you do not operate within the law, then what happens? If you get people to do something under the law you should abide by the law. If you want to expand, you come back and apply to the board to give you more areas. COWE did not do it.  

Secondly, COWE went and registered something called mini co-finance something, which they were not allowed to do. The NGO board cancelled their certificate and appealed to me - I have got a file. I found that they were trying to expand so fast because they were targeting some money outside the country of about US$9 million. That group which had wanted to give them more money had said they should involve religious people, so COWE said, ‘yes, we are supported by the Bishop of Namirembe, Ssekadde.’ When we contacted the Bishop he said, “I do not know COWE at all.” They were actually telling lies. There was another religious person who was named but when we contacted him he did not know anything about COWE either.

So, when they appealed to me, I read the file and maintained the decision of the board. But when there was pressure, I decided to revisit my decision. I put up a committee to investigate COWE and find out what animal it is. The committee did not give us a recommendable position. After this committee’s investigation I sent the copy to COWE saying “can you come to meet us at the ministry to answer these charges?” In fact, the last appointment was Tuesday last week and they never turned up. The people who turned up said they are beneficiaries of COWE, I said “where is COWE, I want the executive.” They never turned up last week and my decision is that we shall maintain the position of the NGO Board. But under the law, they can go to court to challenge our decision.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I think we should not plead for people who are outside the law, it is not correct. If somebody is outside the law, we must really be firm. Let me take this opportunity also to share two or three examples where people are outside the law but we get pressures from honourable members here. 

When I was dealing with the Police after the Sebutinde Commission, we were definitely going to discipline those officers and what do I get, telephone calls from the honourable members saying “that son of ours, really if you touch him the politics of the Movement is going to be spoilt. The Movement will be unpopular now if you touch that person” (Laughter).

MRS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. I am concerned about the position the ministry has taken against COWE. I also appreciate that they did operate outside the law, but now among the 13 districts COWE operated in, one is Nakasongola district and several people paid the membership fee. These people are now coming up to claim for the repayment. In that position, honourable Minister, can you clarify to me what is going to happen? How are they going to be repaid? Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, arising out of the experience of the way COWE appears to have swindled very many unsuspecting Ugandans, has the Ministry of Internal Affairs learnt any lessons from it? What measures are they taking to ensure that we do not have similar situations?  Thank you.

MR KATEGAYA: Mr Speaker, I had not finished the steps I have taken on COWE.  As I said, in terms of the law, they can go to court, but I am also aware of the people who have been swindled. What we have done is to freeze the accounts of COWE at the moment pending how to legally intervene in the matter. Because, in the long run, if we wanted to be callous we would say it is shauri yako, if you want something that is wrong. But that is not my point. 

My point is to see how we can mitigate the losses of those who paid money. But that one can only be after they have gone to court, that is if they are going to court. They are going to court to challenge the decision of the Minister. I will have to wait for the court decision if they go to court. But we have frozen the accounts of COWE for the time being. They have some money on their account and we have frozen it.

About the experience, hon. Mwandha, I talked to the NGO Board, I think their problem is the capacity to monitor. What is supposed to be done by the NGO Board, the RDCs do it on behalf of the board. But even if the RDCs are doing so, the board is supposed to follow up and even get the reports from the RDCs. But I think there is some laxity on that one. There is also excitement about NGOs; I do not know why people are so excited about the NGOs. So, we shall use the experience to see how we can have regular reports on these NGOS as they operate.

The third common issue, which was raised, is that we have closed some police posts. We have done it for two reasons: one, some of these so-called police posts were really security risks, because if you have two policemen without a radio, without transport, they are really just a mirage; they are not effective and they are a target sometimes. They can be a target of these thugs who have been attacking some of these police posts. So, we are doing it to organise so that if we open them up, they are well equipped, they have transport and they have radio communication to their headquarters.

Fourthly, again the much talked about “Operation Wembley” and what is the role of the Police?  Mr Speaker, there is a committee overseeing this operation. The newspapers have just picked up Col. Kayanja but he is merely the operation’s commander. There is a committee under the chairmanship of the Inspector General of Police, and composed of the Director of CID, Elizabeth Kutesa, the CMI, ISO, and other senior Police officers. In fact the Deputy to Kayanja is a policeman called Magala who is supposed to do the technical work as they go along. 

So, the Police are not sidelined as some papers are saying. But we are also taking into account the fact that the Police are not well equipped to carry out these operations. Otherwise, if it were so, this problem we are talking about would not have risen. But Operation Wembley is definitely under the committee led by Inspector General of Police.

Hon. Mutumba said there are some false accusations. Yes, we know that and it is our people here. You know there are professional information peddlers in this town, and we know them. Mr Speaker, we had a meeting last week and we agreed that “Operation Wembley” should confine itself in two areas: the armed robberies and murders. That is all, but not to go in UPE exercises and counterfeit and all that because we think the more they go in more areas, the danger of false accusations and the rest. So, we agreed they should confine themselves to two areas, armed robberies and those who are carrying out murders. So, I think that the danger of false accusations will be reduced.

Hon. Salaamu Musumba raised a question of immigration. I can assure you that there is – we have started computerising the headquarters of Immigration. We have put computers in Busia, Entebbe, Arua and Mbarara and next year we are going to continue computerising in Immigration.  

Secondly, we are going to have a new machine for making our passports. At the moment we have a problem that people go and get a passport, slip in a photograph, get a visa go to London, send back the same passport and substitute a new passport with different photographs. We want to eliminate that because it has caused a problem. If one has looked at the passports, like in Britain or in America, the picture is within a page. It is absolutely not tacked in as ours! So, we are going to do it, I think by next month, to make sure that the passports cannot be substituted, as it has been the case. So, we have some plans on the way.

I noted a few individual contributions. Hon. Aachilla was concerned about Radio Karamoja. Yes, we need it there and we have told the Minister of Information to do something, but I think the problem again is funds. 

Hon. Aachilla, I can assure you that when we are putting unipots, we shall consider Kotido’s weather so that we do not give you unipots in a hot place.  

Now, the question raised by hon. Okot, and I think Dr Epetait, that we are disarming one Karamoja area and leaving others. That is not true. There is no deliberate policy to just disarm one group of Karimojong and leave the others armed. But we have had different levels of co-operation. For example, the Jie have been very stubborn in surrendering the guns. We have to have another way of handling them.

Also, Mr Epetait has raised a question of how much money we have spent on the Karamoja disarmament exercise. At least from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, last year we spent Shs2.6 billion on the Karamoja disarmament exercise and this July we have also spent Shs30,000,000. I do not know the Defence part of it but the figures could be available next week, Mr Speaker.

Now, on the allegation by hon. Maj. Kazoora on what happened to Maj. Mwesigwa’s family, I would like to have more details and then we can follow it up to find out what happened.  

Hon. Mrs Matsiko, the question of prisoners guarding our farms is not unique to Isimba. We are doing it in Ibuga, Bufulubi and Rwimi and it is done in pairs because we cannot bring outside people to guard these farms If they are indisciplined, we can look at it, but the idea is that the prisoners are the ones who guard these installations and even the farms And in the process those who guard earn something at the end of the day. It is not for nothing. In the prison we have a kind of earning process such that by the time the prisoners leave, they have earned some money, which they can use when they are out of prison.  

Mr Speaker, I think that is the part and the issues I noted, and I thank you very much for the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much!  Now, the Chairman will be here next week again to – unless you have something on the budget aspect, otherwise, I am going to put the question.

I put the question to the motion that we adopt their recommendations in respect of estimates of the relevant ministries.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

VOTE 021	- MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs232,311,497,000 under Vote 021 - Ministry of Defence be provided for as recurrent expenditure.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 121 – MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs13,756,554,000 under Head 121 - Ministry of Defence be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 022 – MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs5,725,156,000 under Vote 022 - Ministry of Internal Affairs be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 122- MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs1,160,000,000 under Head 122 - Ministry of Internal Affairs be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 038 – UGANDA POLICE FORCE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs65,510,542,000 under Vote 038 - Uganda Police Force be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 138- UGANDA POLICE FORCE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs3,950,000,000 under Head 138 - Uganda Police Force be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 039 – UGANDA PRISONS SERVICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs18,271,480,000 under Vote 039 - Uganda Prisons Service be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD - 139 UGANDA PRISONS SERVICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs1,412,000,000 under Head 139 – Uganda Prisons Service be provided for as development expenditure.


(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the following Votes and Heads and passed them without amendments:

• Ministry of Defence: Vote 021 and Head 121

• Ministry of Internal Affairs: Vote 022 and Head 122

• Uganda Prisons Service: Vote 039 and Head 139

• Uganda Police Force: Vote 038 and Head 138.
 
I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. I beg to move

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much -(Applause). Honourable members, I sincerely thank you for sitting all this time, and for the work you have done. We now remain with only one Committee and two ministries, namely Local Government and Public Service. With that we shall have completed the process and then remain with the passing of the Finance Bill, the Appropriation and Supplementary Appropriation Bill. And I am sure we are going to adhere to the programme as set up by the Budget Act and that will be good for us. 

I understand that the Minister for Finance has now got the Finance Bill for first reading. You can present it.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Finance Bill, 2002 be read the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of the House, which should report by Friday.  

Now, honourable members, as I had told you earlier, we shall debate this Defence report next week. So, do not be worried.  But before we end, there is an announcement I want to make. 

You remember our chairperson of the Defence Committee lost a sister in Canada, Ms Florence Nabwire Ouma. The body has arrived and there will be a funeral service at All Saints Cathedral, Nakasero, tomorrow at 11.00a.m. Burial will take place on 31 August at 12.00 noon in Bunyandeti village, Buhehe sub-county, Busia district at the home of Justice Ouma. Those of you who will be able to go to the cathedral should attend. 

With this, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00p.m. when we shall receive the other report.

(The House rose at 6.13p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 29 August 2002 at 2.00p.m.)


