Friday, 23 August 2002

Parliament met at 10.19 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there will be a slight amendment to the Order Paper. After item four, there will be another item five, which will be a ministerial statement from the Minister of Defence. So, the Order Paper will be sequentially amended. Thank you.

MR MUGAMBE: We do not have the Order Paper, Madam Speaker. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENVIRONMENT) (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My Ministry would like to make a ministerial statement on what Government has done in the case of pastoralists who settled in the wetlands and forests in the districts of Kumi, Soroti, Katakwi and Kaberamaido. This is a follow up of a resolution of Parliament that was passed, in which Government had to take action within 30 days. 

I have prepared a ministerial statement, which is written, and it will soon be circulated. I will be very brief in my intervention.

First of all, following Government’s knowledge of this issue of settling of pastoralists in those districts I have mentioned above, Government followed a logical sequence. First of all, it made sure that the law was followed. To do this, physical inspections were done to find out what was on the ground. 

My ministry, which is responsible for wetlands, undertook to do inspection within the area. This followed the visit of the National Political Commissar who went to meet with the district leaders to study the problem, and also meet with the pastoralists themselves. 

A team of inspectors from NEMA went, on the 27 and 28 June 2002, and met the district leadership with whom they went to inspect the different locations where the pastoralists had settled. Within Kaberamaido these areas are Achwali Forest Reserve and Atigo Forest Reserve. Within Soroti the wetlands are Abuket and Awoja wetlands. Within Kumi the wetlands are Agu and Kodike.

Madam Speaker, there was an extensive survey of the number of people who are occupying these wetlands and also the number of animals that these people have. Within the document, I have a table which shows the population of animals together with the population of people and the number of households that are within the area. 

A total number of 102 households are found within the wetlands and forest reserve, which totals up to about 660 people. The number of cattle totals up to 422, the goats are 215 and the sheep are 52. 

There have been harmonised meetings, which have been conducted by the National Political Commissar, involving the different ministries that are concerned. These are the Ministry of Environment, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. We have met to try and further study this issue. The meetings have all involved the district leadership, LC V officials, ministers from the Teso region and Members of Parliament.

Following the drawing of the attention of Government to this issue, Government did commit itself to handle this problem of pastoralists, within six months. This was a period that we thought was reasonable in order to find a solution to this problem. And Government continues to make efforts to do so. The period that had been given by Parliament was very short and we could not meet the deadline of either resettling these people or being able to find alternative land.

Let me give a kind of summary of what Government has done. It has assessed the problem on the ground in all the districts and found that for us to be able to fulfil the decision of Parliament and also the commitment of Government, it will require the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) to issue out restoration orders of the wetlands. That way, they can be vacated and repaired where damage may have been done. 

NEMA is working on this, but knowing that the people who are involved are of different tribes and therefore different languages, the eviction orders that are going to be issued need to be translated into the different languages. So, this work is going to be translated into Atesot, Kupsabin, Runyankore and Luganda, before those eviction orders can be given out.

Government, as I have said, continues to look for land where the settlers, or the pastoralists, can be re-settled. In the sensitisation of these pastoralists, we have tried to stimulate them to purchase land for themselves so that they stop nomadism. They need to settle once and for all.  

We have also sensitised the pastoralists about the possibility of the El Nino rains. We are telling them that we are chasing them out of the areas that they are occupying because these are plain areas, which are likely to be flooded by water during the coming rains.

We have also appealed to the district leadership, and to the people in Teso generally, to be tolerant and recognize that the people who came into Teso are Ugandans and they are trying to make a living. So, we are asking them to live with them until Government has found a solution.

From time to time, we shall be updating Parliament, as we progress during the course of these six months in which Government promised to handle this issue. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start off by thanking the minister for the good brief and the statistics. Things are well laid out. The only point on which I need clarification is the point on translation. 

The honourable minister said they are going to translate the eviction order into different languages yet when they were presenting that problem, it seemed these people were coming from one particular region. I do not know where these other languages have come from now. Does it mean that this group is growing? Is it changing every day? That is where I need clarification. Thank you.

PROF. LATIGO OGENGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for fulfilling his commitment to inform Parliament on the progress they are making on this issue. I also thank him for the clarity of the statement.   

I would however like to express one concern, which was noted in passing in the actions to be taken, in regard to El Nino. If the weather people say El Nino will be heavy, it is quite clear to me that within the next month or so, floods will forcibly displace these people. That means they will be forced to move to areas where even their presence will become more contentious.  

I would like to know whether the minister has taken cognizance of this possibility in maintaining that we try to resolve the problem in six months. Other than that, we will have problems when El Nino breaks out. Thank you.

MR PATRICK APUUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for this statement. I would however like to find out from the minister whether the Government has any promise regarding the pastoralists in Uganda. We are talking of pastoralists in Teso and they are my neighbours. 

The Karimojong are neighbours of the Teso community and the Government has made it very clear even in the Ten Point Programme that Karamoja has to benefit from that programme. Water should be taken to Karamoja, but time and again Government has not fulfilled its commitment to do that. 

There are dams being built in Karamoja, but the shoddy work, which is being done on the dams in Karamoja, is surprising. It is what causes the Karimojong to always move into Teso and into one of the wetlands of Awoja, in Soroti. Is there a policy to protect the pastoralists in Uganda? I would like the minister to clarify this to me and even inform this House about the policy of Government on pastoralists.

DR JOHN ESELE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this update on the situation of the settlers in Teso. I would also like to thank the Government for the positive action that it is taking.  

The people of Kumi have resolved that they will wait and listen to what Government is saying. They however still insist that Government needs to re-settle these people. 

I would like to request the minister, while translating the messages, to include the language of Kumam. The people of Kaberamaido speak Kumam, not all of them speak Ateso. Thank you.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you honourable colleagues. Hon. Mugambe, the translation group is expanding and that might be the reason why the translation is required. Actually, I think there was some misconception from the very beginning. The reporting of the issue looked as if the only people who were occupying the wetlands were either Banyankore or Banyarwanda. 

When NEMA went to find out about the people that would be evicted and to take this census, it was found that there were Iteso, Sabiny and a number of other tribes. Although the reporting of the matter was as if the people who had come from Masindi were the only ones settled there, that was found to be untrue. 

So, NEMA cannot effect the eviction by only re-settling Banyankore and Banyarwanda. The eviction, if it is to be done, must encompass everybody. This is why we have even discussed with the district leadership. The district leadership should know that it is not only the people from outside that are to be evicted. Room must be found even for the people who are indigenous to Teso, because even they are violating the NEMA law.
 
On the issue of El Nino raised by the Professor, yes we have made the people aware of the danger, as I stated in the statement. We have even discussed with the district leadership, to see if alternative dry land can be found where these people could take refuge should rain exceed what could allow them to stay within the wetlands. We have made this clear, and I have said Government is continuing to look for land for the same. 

But we have also appealed for tolerance from our people in Teso. If catastrophe strikes, like we expect the El Nino to do, everybody might end up moving into areas where they are not supposed to be. 

We might even find the people of Bwaise moving away from Bwaise if the El Nino becomes intensive - as is predicted. I think Ugandans will take refuge among Ugandans, just as you see people in Europe doing. These floods have defeated even the Europeans! 

On the issue of whether the Government has got a policy on pastoralists, we do, and that policy belongs to the Ministry of Agriculture, so I should not be the one to elaborate on it. The normal policy however is that Government should encourage people to settle permanently. 

At one time we had a minister in the Government who was concerned about anti-nomadism and trying to stop people from moving from place to place. The issue would be that people should settle in one area. So, Government is trying to build dams in Karamoja so that they do not move about. 

It is a pity that the Member for Bokora says the work that is being done there is not up to standard. I am however sure that this work is going to be rectified where mistakes have been made. Government would prefer if people raised their animals within the confines of their land. 

I will take care of Dr Esele’s concern, the one he has raised about translation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, last week I did promise Parliament that I would issue a statement on the security situation in the country, especially in the northern region. I am making this statement in fulfilment of that promise. 

Some aspects of the statement are a repetition of what I already told Parliament recently, when I answered the question raised by hon. Ronald Reagan Okumu. I repeat them in response to the Chair’s ruling then that I lay my answer on Table, and also update that information.

Madam Speaker, the members are aware of Operation Iron Fist and its mission, because I have stated this many times here. The mode of the operation was that it was conducted in phases. 

The first phase, which started on 18 February 2002, was in hot pursuit of the bandits who had attacked Agoro and fled back into Sudan. This phase saw the complete destruction and capture of LRA camps in Southern Sudan namely, Bin Rwot, Lubanga Tek, Lalar Kampaco and Odek. A number of weapons, small, medium and heavy were recovered. 

Phase two involved pursuing the enemy who had fled to the neighbouring areas of Magwi, from where they were hit, leaving many dead bodies and casualties before they decided to flee to Acholi hills and Imatong Mountains, near the common boarder with Sudan.
  
Phase three was launched purposely to follow the enemy in the rocky and rugged terrain area of Imatong where Kony had thought he was not reachable. UPDF was able to flush him out, killing and inflicting many casualties. He had no rest hence he fragmented his troops into small groups and sneaked to the low lands for safety, food and drugs. 

In phase four, the LRA, with a group of about 500 under the command of one Vincent Otti, sneaked into Uganda purposely to kill, abduct, loot food and drugs. Another group, also of about 500, under the command of Kony, came following the first one. On the way, the group was attacked at Owiny Kibul bridge, on 5 May 2002, killing 74 in number, including the LRA’s Chief signal Officer, the self styled Lt Col Lumumba. 

Kony then fled back to Southern Sudan. He later sneaked back into Kitgum after the battle at Agoro where again the LRA lost many of its officers, including senior commanders.

The current phase is now dealing with counter insurgency inside Uganda against groups commanded by Kony, Otti, Tabuley, Nyeko, Achelam Ceaser, Matata, Opiro, Odongo and Lapanyikwara. 

This phase involves the zonalisation of the UPDF to protect internally displaced people’s camps, roads, health centres, trading centres and schools. The recent formation of a new division, the 5th Division, with its headquarters at Corner Kilak in Kitgum is in line with this concept. Meanwhile the 4th Division will remain mobile and pursuing the enemy. 

Some few mistakes that had been in existence, made by a few commanders, have now been rectified and there is improved performance in the fight against Kony as exemplified by the recent achievements.

As a result of the intense pressure exerted on the enemy by UPDF, more women, children and other abductees are being released. For example, on 8 August 2002 there was contact with the enemy in Adwar sub-county, Lira district. Seven enemies were killed, two of the abducted were rescued, and five sub-machine guns were recovered including three rocket-propelled shells, three anti personnel mine-fuses and several rounds of SMG and G-2 ammunition.

On the same day, the enemy attacked Kabedo-Opong in Bugantira sub-county near Gulu Municipality. This attack was repulsed. One enemy was killed and two SMGs, one RPG, one RPG bomb, one 82-millimetre mortar, one tripod and one base plate were recovered.

On 14 August the enemy attack on Corner Kilak was repulsed. 

On 15 August 2002, the enemy attack on Kitgum Matidi was repulsed and resulted in nine rebels being killed. One prisoner of war was taken, two reporters, seven sub machine guns, one PK machine gun and loose ammunition of SMGs, and 12.7 millimetre anti-aircraft guns were recovered. 

On that same day the UPDF, using gun ships, pounded the enemy positions on the ground, led by Vincent Otti. It killed and injured several bandits, including Otti himself, who was reported injured. The number of their casualties is yet to be established. The UPDF ground squads have found six dead bodies and mass graves on the scene. 

As I told the Defence and Internal Affairs Sessional Committee, we had been rather cautious in the use of our gunships because the bandits were known to possess anti-aircraft missiles. Having captured all of the missiles except one, and having installed reasonable protection of our aircrafts against missile attack, we have now brought into use these gunships.  

The fourth addendum to the protocol between the Republic of Sudan and the Republic of Uganda was signed on 14 August this year, and has been extended to 14 September this year. Uganda will continue to operate in Southern Sudan and to coordinate its military operations against the LRA remnants in Kit Valley with the Sudan People’s Armed Forces.  

Due to intense pressure by the UPDF, Kony has again sneaked back into Southern Sudan and is currently in upper Talanga trying to establish his new headquarters at a place called Katiri.  His sickbay unit and some of his commanders are expected to join him there. 

These terrorists are trying as much as possible to avoid contact, but with improved performance and vigour, the UPDF continues to gain more and more achievements against them. And we will remain in Southern Sudan to deny him the possibility of re-establishing himself there.  

Madam Speaker, if I may highlight some of the achievements of this Operation Iron Fist:

All the five camps in Southern Sudan, which were Kony’s safe haven, which I have mentioned many times before, were overrun and a number of arms and ammunition and supplies were captured. These weapons, at the request of the Sudan Government, were handed back to the Sudanese Government.

LRA fighters so far killed are approximately 275, including the Lumumba I told you about and Raska Lukwiya.

Abductees, returnees and defectors were rescued or received. 

I have listed in that statement, on page 3, 4 and 5 as well, the full list of people killed and weapons recovered including 582 sub-machine guns. I would like to invite members to look at those details.

More enemy casualties died in the rocky and rugged Imatong and Acholi mountains where UPDF flushed out Kony and his fighters. Kony’s choice of these locations was meant to use the terrain as his defence. This option has failed.  

The LRA has been denied capacity to attack UPDF defences, and that is why he has resorted to wrecking havoc on soft civilian targets especially the IDPs. This will also fail since UPDF has deployed and continues to deploy to protect these camps.

The LRA has been denied public mass support in the northern districts of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader. He, however, still enjoys publicity and support from some members of the political class and some NGOs. Kony’s capacity, however, continues to diminish by the hour.  

The other achievement of course has been improved relations between Uganda and Sudan.  I would like to say, Madam Speaker, that we have no doubt at all that the Sudan Government is committed to co-operating with Uganda to bring to an end the usage of Sudan as a base for terrorist activities against Uganda.

Even in the face of some problems in the field such as the weather conditions of Imatong and Acholi hills - it is a rainy season there now - lack of infrastructure for the supply of logistics and for fast movement of troops, the UPDF still has demonstrated its capacity to effectively operate against the terrorists successfully.  

Let me briefly comment on the question of peace talks with LRA.  Whereas the Government policy on resolution of conflict is well articulated and known, that conflicts should be resolved peacefully through negotiations; and whereas Government has stated in clear terms that it is ready to negotiate with Kony bandits, and indeed has in the past engaged in negotiations with the Kony bandits, our intelligence clearly shows that LRA is:

using the talk of peace to improve its image; still killing civilians, for example, at Mucwini where 58 people were killed on the morning of the 25th of last month; still abducting children; 

dividing its force into small units and spreading in all the districts of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader with the objective of attacking soft targets; making efforts to reorganise its logistical supply lines. 

The Government has extended the hand of peace through the amnesty law, provided the LRA regroups at Owiny Kibul, Panyikwara and Aswa Valley where they will be provided with food.  The emissaries who are mainly Bishops have not, to my knowledge, brought back a reply on this.  

In West Nile, the situation is peaceful. The bulk of UNRF II has now come back and is camped in Yumbe District. A total of 191 officers and 1,764 men have already been documented with a view to integrating them into the UPDF. There is the list of the things they have handed over, including 357 sub-machine guns and three general-purpose machine guns and so on.  

As I said, the relationship with Sudan has improved tremendously following: 
 The signing of the protocol at the beginning of the year.

 Co-ordination of military operations against the LRA by our UPDF and the Sudan People’s Armed Forces.

 Exchange of visits by both the presidents of the two countries and the ministers of defence. I have been to Sudan many times. The Sudanese Minister of Defence was supposed to have come here because his President came; I hope he will come soon. There have also been visits between top leaders of UPDF and SPAF plus the diplomatic visits.

Regular meetings between liaison leaders in Gulu and Juba. We have Sudanese senior officers who are permanently stationed in Gulu for purposes of liaison as we have our own in Juba.
 We have opened our embassies and upgraded the status of these embassies to ambassadorial level. And we have agreed to deploy military attaches in each other’s capitals.  

Uganda fully and strongly supports the IGAD framework for the resolution of the Southern Sudanese question. We are happy that on 20 July this year, a memorandum of understanding was concluded between the SPLA and the Sudan Government in Kenya. 

This Machakos Accord hopefully, will be an entry point to a comprehensive agreement that will bring to an end the long civil war that has been raging in Southern Sudan for decades. This is essential for the stability of the region.  

The actions to be taken by the UPDF include: 

 Continuing to exert more pressure on this enemy to deny him time to plan and commit atrocities.  

 More work to be done to enable easier and quick deployment of UPDF in the north.
 
 UPDF shall remain in the Imatong Mountains and the Acholi mountain ranges and LRA’s former areas in Kit valley, as the LRA will definitely re-occupy them if UPDF leaves. 

In the west, as I have said many times previously, the situation is calm following the defeat of ADF. There are remnants of ADF in small groups inside Congo, and that is why we are maintaining a permanent presence in the western slopes of the mountains of the Moon, the Rwenzori mountains, until this matter has been resolved or until the Congolese question itself has been resolved. 

In the east and the north-east the disarmament exercise has gone on well. We have so far received guns both voluntarily and by forceful means, totaling to 9764, as listed out in detail, district by district. 

In the central region, the months of May and June were characterized by grisly murders in Kampala and its suburbs. This scourge of gang-style murders and armed robberies has been a source of insecurity.  

The existing close operational co-ordination between Police, intelligence services and other security organs, especially “Operation Wembly”, will certainly eliminate this crime wave. Several armed robbers have so far been arrested and several guns recovered.

The incident in Wakiso District, where vehicles were burnt by a group claiming to belong to the renegade Itongwa’s National Democratic Front, is being studied by the intelligence services and the Police. 

Most of the suspects had been arrested for armed robbery previously, but were released due to the weak laws that we have against such a menace. They are now to be tried by a military court martial as provided for under the NRA Statute. 

I will be launching the Military General Court Martial, Madam Speaker, later this afternoon. It will not be as you read in papers only for trying the Wembly group, it will be for the whole army, for all the offences, but they are definitely going to handle the question of the suspected armed robbers.  

On the DRC, the conflict between the Hema and Lendu in the Ituri region continues, and it is of concern to all of us. UPDF has had to act at the request of the monitors in Congo to restore calm in the town of Bunia.  

The withdrawal of all the remaining UPDF soldiers in Gbadolite, Beni and Butembo has been ordered by the Commander in Chief, because our security concerns have been largely catered for. We were ready to withdraw the force in Bunia as well, but the UN has urged Uganda, and Government has accepted, to remain while arrangements are being made for an alternative force to take care of the safety of the people in the region. 

The UPDF will be deployed to cover the common Uganda-DRC borderline, as I have already said, in the Mountains of the Moon.  

On 15 August, Uganda signed a protocol with DRC to, among other things, normalize diplomatic ties negatively affected by the four-year-old conflict in DRC and to handle our security concerns.  

In the case of Rwanda, we recently hosted a delegation led by the Minister for Defence and we signed a memorandum of understanding in which confidence building measures between UPDF and RPA were covered. This will be followed by the summit between the heads of state in the future, to review the implementation of the London understanding by the two leaders. 

Liaison officers of both countries are to be deployed at several entry points on Uganda-Rwanda border that is, Katuna, Bunagana, Mirama hills and at Kanombe and Entebbe air ports.  

In conclusion, there has been tremendous improvement in the security situation in the country with the defeat of ADF internally, and recently improved relations between Uganda and Sudan, which had hitherto assisted and armed ADF and LRA. People should be assured of their safety.  

The operation will achieve its mission very soon.  The UPDF concept of zonal units to protect IPDs, roads, health centres, schools and trading centers, and mobile forces to react quickly in pursuit of the enemy will wipe out the enemy as it did previously.

The disarmament of the Karimojong warriors will result in the return to normalcy in the region since many guns continue to be recovered by both voluntary and forceful means.

Enhanced co-operation between Police and other security agencies, coupled with intensified co-ordination in operations against these gang-style murders and armed robbers, is yielding good results in eliminating the escalating state of insecurity which had gripped Kampala City and its suburbs. 

Uganda has now improved relations with DRC, as we are confident the Lusaka Cease-fire Agreement is being implemented. 

And finally, I should have said that of course, the relations between Uganda and Rwanda are also on course towards the restoration of normalcy as well. I thank you very much!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much! We can have a few clarification and contributions.
  
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. 

It is known that I supported the retired Col. Kizza Besigye during presidential campaign, specifically because of the programmes that Reform Agenda was advancing. I believed that they were good, and to some extent, President Museveni who won the election has implemented most of them.  

But, several youth have continued to call me and ask me what they should do in the state of fear they have continued to live in; I have received telephone calls. And the minister stated here in (d) that there are persistent reports of recruitment and training by Besigye, Mande and Kyakabale’s group of Redemption Army, and the intelligence services are following this. 

What mechanism are you using to follow this? And if you establish some facts, how do you handle them, because several youth have told me they are terrorized. Some of them have gone into hiding in order to avoid a situation whereby because of unemployment, people find themselves using this opportunity to improve the situation.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, allow me to ask the minister, when are you going to come out specifically with facts about the operations of Besigye, Mande and Kyakabale, so that the country can know? Those who supported him, over 3 million people, should now know how to de-link themselves from him - those who love peace but not war. When are you going to come out with this statement, so that we stop operating on rumuors but we see facts and we take positions as Ugandans who love peace?  

On Operation Wembly, I would like the minister to state what action he has taken in relation to Mr Muhumuza who was allegedly killed under the custody of ISO and his body dumped, and Mumenero who died in the hands of CMI.  

Lastly, I would like to ask the minister to clarify to us clearly whether the Government is not violating the Constitution by using the General Court Martial to try civilians. And what category of civilians are those - those you find with guns or those who are collaborating? 

The minister should clarify so that this country, in the 21st Century, is not recorded to have again applied extrajudicial means in handling civilians, something that the NRM stood against when it was fighting.  Thank you.

MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Erute North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too would like to thank the honourable minister for his statement about the security situation in northern Uganda and in other parts of the country. 

With your indulgence, Madam Speaker, allow me to inform this august House that this morning the rebels were now only 14 miles away from Lira town. They are occupying my sub-county, where the World Food Programme was held last October.  

However, I wanted to reiterate the statement by His Excellency the President that “let those who wish to join the long road to permanent peace and sustainable development waste no time in futile debates”. 

I think this is one of them, and we people in Lira decided to fall out of the long road, because we knew that when we left Dar es Saalam for Kampala in order to chase Amin, some of us found ourselves in Luwero. After Luwero, we came back to Kampala and again we found ourselves in Kigali. Very soon, we will find ourselves in Kinshasa, and soon we want to reach Juba or Khartoum and maybe in future we may want to reach Nairobi. So, this is a very long road in which the people of Lango found that they could no longer remain on that road. 

And when we decided to say “no” to war, we knew the Movement Government was going to protect the people of Lango, their property and their lives.  But here is a situation whereby the honourable Minister for Defence says that there has been tremendous improvement in the security situation in Uganda without saying “except maybe in serious areas”, like we have been stating. 

We, therefore, demand to know why especially the northern part of Lango sub-region has been suffering, and no mention has ever been made about the suffering of the people. Yesterday, these rebels were in Otwal sub-county in Oyam North, and our army, I am told, decided to hide but later followed. 

How come that these people sneaked way up to my constituency this morning, and now they are attempting to reach Lira? The situation in Lira now is tense, according to the report I got this morning.

So, if this is the situation in this country, where you can see that in some parts there is peace, in others there is war, and then corruption and poverty. And in other parts, we have the rebels up to the level of terrorists. How long are we going to live in this situation if we are talking about permanent peace? 

If we need permanent peace, I suggest that we go for national reconciliation, because people who are fighting should have their agenda. If you want to consult me, honourable Minister, please do so, because I now know very well that after Kony, there is already another group. 

It started from the late Tito Okello, handed over to UPDA and then it came to Lakwena and then now to Kony. I wonder if you are aware that after Kony there is going to be peace. If you are not aware, why don’t we talk peace now? Without talking peace now, we are wasting time, and this is going to be on record. Thank you very much.

MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Defence for bringing out a very detailed statement for the first time on the state of security in the nation. 

For the first time, I want to thank him sincerely. He is my friend, I do not hide words; I want to thank you! If only you were doing this before, maybe we would have told you a few things. I want to ask him a few questions.  

On page 5, he says: “He however still enjoys publicity and support from some members of the political class and some NGOs.” This talk of politicians supporting Kony when we know certainly that the Members of Parliament from Acholi have risked their lives and led a delegation of peace-seekers to Kony and still continue to seek peace! 

Who are these politicians who are supporting Kony? Why do you not come out and state clearly who they are? There is always talk of northern politicians giving support to Kony. Who are these northern politicians? 

Yesterday I was at a funeral service where the Rt. hon. Prime Minister made a passionate appeal for peace. But I was flabbergasted by the sermon from the Archbishop of Uganda, my own Archbishop, who almost stated the same things that the Minister is saying, “northern politicians.” Who are they? If you know they are supporting Kony, why don’t you arrest them?  Why do you keep on talking things that you cannot prove? Arrest them! You have the laws in your hands.

Two, on the same page, it says: “Government policy on resolution of conflict is well articulated and known, that is conflicts should be resolved peacefully.” Perfect! But you know when you are talking peace you must be seen to mean peace. 

If you say you are talking peace and you state conditionalities; if you talk peace and say, like you are saying here, that Kony is still doing this, it is good, but why don’t you keep it to yourself because this is now public knowledge. Are you sure that after saying this, the guy is going to come out and talk peace with you? Are you sure that he will say you mean peace?

Page 6, West Nile: the Minister does not tell us how far the peace talks with this UNRF II have gone. You do not tell us. As far as we know from statements from the press, we are told these people say they have not surrendered. They are just observing a cease-fire. And it is a contradiction in terms; if you can talk peace to UNRF II, why can you not do the same to Kony? 

Kony also says, “let us have a cease-fire”, you have had a cease-fire with the West Nile fellows but you cannot have it with Kony. Now Kony is walking all over the place as if he is in his compound. Yesterday he was in my constituency - I am saying this because I am hurt - he was in my constituency in Ocwal, this morning he was in his constituency, and you say he is attacking soft targets! There is an army detach in Ocwal, I talked to their commanders. When I went there, they were nowhere to be seen; are those soft targets? 

Disarmament of the Karimojong: You say it is going on well and you have achieved much, but we are told you are re-arming the Karimojong; we have been talking to Members of Parliament from Karamoja. Why are you re-arming them, so that they have another crusade in Teso? Is that the peaceful situation you are talking about in the east? 

On Operation Wembley, I have seen today, and I am really grateful to whoever did it, that you have stopped this stupidity of “shoot on site”. You cannot do that, you are a lawyer; you cannot! How many innocent people could you shoot and kill –(Interruption).

MRS SSEBAGEREKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to address and point to the minister? I think it is parliamentary practice for the Member of Parliament to address him through the Chair.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Commissioner has a habit of gesturing with his hands when he is talking. So, that is the way he talks - (Applause).

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, you cannot, as a lawyer - I cannot really find words - as a sane Government - and I think this is a sane Government, that is why I am here - close your eyes for about six months when people are being shot and killed for whatever reasons; you cannot! 

We have law courts for that. I think there is a maxim in law, which says, it is better to let a few guilty people free rather than to hang an innocent person. How do we know that innocent people have not been killed?

And this thing about court martial, if it is a law, we must revisit that law! Civilians cannot go before a court martial; a court martial is meant for soldiers! We cannot be a sane Parliament and allow that court of law to exist in our statute books. If it exists in law, I promise you I will bring an amendment to that. We cannot have it; it is a shame to us! 

As I stated before, I admire the Minister for Defence and I am really grateful that he brought this statement this time.  Thank you, Madam.

MRS LOYCE BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very pleased with the minister for the detailed presentation of his statement, and more so because we received it as he was presenting it. I hope from now on this will be the method of work according to our new rules. If this had been done during the ADF war, perhaps that war might have taken a shorter time.

My first concern is, the minister informed us of the number of rebels and enemies that have been killed, but he briefly talked about other causalities. We are green about the civilian causalities, except on page 5 where he talks about 58. Are there only 58 civilian causalities who have been killed on our side? Are there any UPDF causalities, or it is not in our norms to mention them because maybe it arms the enemy? 

I would have loved to know how we are being affected on our side. Last week I was in my constituency and the people in my constituency are concerned. They are losing some of their sons in the war in northern Uganda, and they are not being informed. The respective families that are losing their sons at the battlefront are not being informed, and they are very much concerned. So, I request the minister to clarify on that.  

My second observation is on peace talks. I am happy Government is very clear, and I support them, that we pursue peace talks through negotiations and through dialogue. When I read this statement, it is being left to the Bishops. I do not know how far the Bishops can go, because I think there are some levels where the Bishops cannot competently negotiate with the rebels, especially when the rebels begin to make demands. 

We know very well that these rebels are in categories, one category is in Uganda and other categories are outside the country, especially the leaders. Let me use the scenario of Kasese. 

We are talking about ADF and Kabanda who is from Kasese still having a few people following him in the DRC. But we know that beyond Kabanda is Mukulu, who is not from Kasese; he is living outside the country. He is enjoying himself and just leaving Kabanda there. After five/ten years, he will come again with his programme and recruit people especially the youth who do not have any economic empowerment.

My question, therefore, is, does Government have any programme to talk to the rebel leaders in western Uganda and northern Uganda who are living in the diaspora? We know that for LRA also there are some people posing in London collecting money, sending money and advising. What are we going to do, because they are the ones who are supporting Kony and perhaps making him fail to surrender? 

If it was done for the east, if it is being done for West Nile why is it not done for LRA and why is it not done in the case of Mukula? (Interruption)
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, hon. Mukula is getting worried about continued reference to his name; the person is Mukulu.

MRS BWAMBALE: Hon. Mukula is not living in the diaspora; he is here with us. So, I am talking about Mukulu. I beg his pardon.  

Number three, on reintegration of the civilians and the children, especially those who were abducted, the minister talks about 300 abductees and 238 children. 

I am concerned because my constituency has experience in the reintegration exercise. The problem is that the Amnesty Commission does not have enough funds to truly reintegrate these people who are abducted and those who return. 

There is a clear plan for the combatants, those absorbed in the army; they are given a package. But the abductees are just given some psychosocial lessons, little cash and a little package and they go back to the villages. A few months later, they begin to think about escaping, so that we have a recycled insurgency. 

Can we vote enough money for the true re-integration of the people who are abducted and the children who come back, especially the children? Some of these children are students from primary schools and higher institutions; can Government undertake a responsibility to put them back to school? Because, the problem is that the day they wander in the population, they will think about escaping. 

We have had quite a few in Kasese who were resettled and then after sometime, we can no longer account for them, which means they were not fully re-integrated.  

What about the victims, the people whose houses they burnt; they are never considered! What is the Government policy on the victims of the rebel activities? That is the question, Mr Minister, and I need your attention.  

There is a live situation in Kasese of settling the abductees and giving them a package as I asked. But the people who moved from the mountains into the valleys after the ADF had burnt their houses and eaten their food and killed their people, are still living in the population and nobody is caring for them. 

And each time we come up asking for assistance, we are referred to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, which itself is a disaster; it is not prepared! It does not have resources. So, you find that there is no true reconciliation - (Interruption)

MR BASALIZA STEVEN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think hon. Bwambale is forgetting about Kabarole, Bundibugyo and Kibale region. So, it is the whole region. I wish you could include us also. Thank you.

MRS BWAMBALE: Madam Speaker, I am addressing the Rwenzori region and that has always been my approach. Whenever I stand up, I address the Rwenzori sub-region. Maybe that is why I should add -(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been disgusted several times when many of you degrade the Department of Disaster Preparedness, which is in my office. That department has done a lot to help people who are in problems.  But as you know, Uganda is disaster prone and so scarcity is a problem afflicting us.  We have set up disaster committees at the district level; we have worked with WFP to assist people who are afflicted by disaster.  

My plea is that you should not underestimate us, because you are going to demoralise us and we might lose morale.  We are trying our best though the problem is national. We are short of resources.  

But we are also trying to re-skill people so that they do not call problems disasters. Whenever some people have problems, which they can handle, they tend to rush to us and we try to give them the skills to manage. But when people’s internal capacities have been impaired, then we have to come to your rescue. 

People like hon. Aporu - I do not know whether she is here - have been, for example, to Acholi where again we have been discussing the whole question of escorting food and other requirements, and her life has been at risk. And when you call us disastrous, incapable, you are very unfair and you might demoralise us. I want to appeal to you to be understanding. I thank you.

MRS BWAMBALE:  Thank you very much.  I have only two points left, and when I hear the Leader of Government Business getting disgusted, I am happy.  Because that means he is going to come up with a policy here in this House on disaster preparedness.  When he gets angry, he will come with a policy and we shall allocate resources according to the policy. That is what we are talking about.

My last two observations are a request to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This House budgeted money for the opening of our Consulate General’s office in Goma.  We budgeted some money, over 300 million I think, but to-date this office has not been opened.  

With rumours that ADF may be trying to forge allies with the Monday’s and the Kyakabale’s and the rest of that group, at least in my constituency, the Rwenzori region will not allow that and we shall fight it up to the end. We request that we be provided with administration in that region through the Goma office and also a Congo office in Kasese District, or the Rwenzori region for that matter. 

As I sit down, I thank the NRM Government for having established a mountain brigade in Kasese District to occupy the strategic mountains of the Rwenzori, and above all, for giving us the first military leader with a high rank, Lt Col Muhindo Mawa. Please give us more so that the people can give you more support.  Thank you very much.

MR PATRICK  AMURIAT (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for a statement well presented.  However, I have got a few concerns and questions that I would like to direct to the honourable minister.  

In his statement presented before this House this morning, on page 5, number 6, the exact sentence that was read by the honourable commissioner Ben Wacha, the minister states: “He however  still enjoys publicity and support from some members of the political class and some NGOs.”  

Hon. Ben Wacha directed questions pertaining to the political class and their support for Kony.  I would like to put a few questions with regard to the allegation that some NGOs actually do support Kony. 

As far as I understand the operations of NGOs, first of all, they are registered by Government to operate in this country and Government regulates their activities.  

My question to the Minister is, now that Government knows these NGOs- I presume they actually know these NGOs that are offering support to Kony – what is it doing to stop them from offering further support? What administrative measures are being taken to ensure that such NGOs no longer operate?
 
The other issue I wanted to address is the disarmament in Karamoja region. We all know how this country especially the neighbours of Karamoja, have suffered the wrath of Karimojong warriors. 

Recently, Government embarked on a disarmament process of Karamoja. It surprises me that when the war in the northern part of the country escalated, LDUs who had specifically been trained to handle the disarmament were removed from their positions in Karamoja and taken to fight in the north. This was reported in the newspapers and nobody from Government came to dispute that report, therefore, I assume it was a correct report.  

The LDUs, realising that they were deployed for a purpose for which they were not trained, deserted and went back to Karamoja. It took just a whistle to re-deploy 200 of them who walked 250 kilometres on foot back to Kotido. I do not know the relationship between the regular UPDF and the LDUs who are trained for a specific role so that they may be taken to the warfront to fight a rebellion -(Ms Alaso rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let us try to keep the debate brief; we have so much business today.  

MR AMURIAT: It could have been helpful to me, Madam Speaker. Whereas Government undertook the role of disarming the Karimojong, I was seriously disturbed and my constituents were thrown into panic, when we got to understand that certain sections of the Karimojong community were actually being re-armed.  

This has not only caused panic among the neighbours of Karamoja but also within Karamoja itself. I do know that there are clans within Karamoja which have been terrorised as a result of this re-armament in Karamoja. This defeats the purpose of disarming, and therefore, money that has already been spent could have merely been poured into the drain. So, I would like an explanation from the minister with regard to this particular item.

Lastly, in his report, the minister seems to make us believe that all is well between Rwanda and Uganda. However, lately, there have been disturbing reports in the newspapers. The Chief of Military Intelligence, a member of this House, was reported to have alleged that some people were trained in Rwanda, came through Uganda and went to the north to address Kony’s operations.  

In reply to this, in yesterdays Monitor newspaper, somebody from Rwanda, speaking on behalf of the Government of Rwanda, did implore that these were Uganda’s problems and Ugandans should solve their own problems. I see this as a breakdown in diplomacy between our country and the Rwandese Government. I would like an explanation on this kind of rhetoric from the Minister. I thank you

PROF.  OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader):  Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me opportunity to inquire on the minister’s statement. I too would like to thank the minister for providing a comprehensive statement on the security situation in this House. 

However, looking through the statement, I get very concerned, and I would like to ask the minister - what is the take-home message from this statement?  

I am exceedingly concerned, because when I read through it I see no change in the Government stand on the conflicts in this country. Yet for us we know that statements were made, assurances were given over the years, and at the end of it, we go through the same circle of conflict - Government response, shifting attention and then renewal of conflict. Where is the assurance that this time this statement is different? I do not see it!  

Looking at the information that the minister provided, there is no doubt that the minister wants us to see that the army has done very well in addressing this conflict. 

I am, however, very saddened that the gross era that resulted in severe loss of life, large displacements of people, and loss of property resulting from this latest incursion by the LRA, which to us was a fundamental problem that we predicted and alerted Government on, has been brushed aside in the minister’s response, on page 2(e), as merely a mistake of few commanders. 

I think when issues that are grave are put lightly like this it disappoints many of us who depend on the ministry to provide security to all.  

Secondly, the information that was provided stops on 15th of August. From 15th of August up to date, what has been happening? It is a bigger interest to us to know what the situation is now than to enumerate what happened a long time ago. And it becomes very disappointing when honourable members, rather than the minister concerned, inform this House about the security problems of what happened in Lango yesterday and this morning. What kind of impression do we get? It is very disappointing.  

The minister, on page 3, talks about the missiles that were captured by the LRA and have been recovered, except one. I do not know when the capture was done. But as far as I am concerned when I look at the list of records of things that were recovered - unless these things are put in names that I as a civilian is not familiar with - if you go to page 4, on weapons recovered, there is no indication of a single missile taken. And Government was trying to put in place reasonable protection against missile attack. I wonder whether it was a typographical error that some missiles were not included.

Lastly, I would like to go back to an issue that was very ably talked about by the hon. Ben Wacha, and this is on page 5, item 6.  The statement reads: “The LRA has been denied public mass support in northern districts of Gulu, kitgum and Pader. He however still enjoys publicity and support from some members of the political class and some NGOs”.  This statement, to many of us who come from Acholi, is very painful!

We do not know how to assure this country and particularly the Ministry of Defence that we support their effort to end this war. We do not know how to reassure them! Right from the Sixth Parliament, there was a peace initiative. Members of Parliament and political leaders of this country went all out to mobilize people. 

Right here in this Parliament, the Parliamentarians have gone out of their way to help Government. I would like to ask the Minister of Defence, what do you want Parliamentarians to do to reassure you that we support Government effort to bring peace to our people who have suffered so much? 

When will you stop insinuating that our people support this war, when it is our mothers who are killed; our daughters who are abducted and raped; our brothers and sisters and our children who are killed; it is our properties that are being destroyed! (Ms Alaso rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already declined information from other people.

PROF OGENGA: Madam Speaker, the people we are dealing with are traumatized; people who can kill the way they kill, that is not an Acholi way of life. Check the books, you will find our records.  We are not killers.  

When people have reached the stage where they can kill the way Kony rebels kill and you incite them by abuse, by disparaging them, you actually do not want this war to end. Most of those guys need counselling; that is what happens when they are to return or when they are rescued. 

The most important thing that Government does is to counsel them. In all the messages regarding this war, if only Government could strive to counsel these guys to see the way of peace instead of provoking them to remain belligerent and destructive to us, this country would have seen peace a long time ago.  

Therefore, I end by begging the minister that please, let us change our stand on this war. Let us not create conflict where it does not exist between you and political leaders of this country, so that peace and real peace returns to our land. Thank you very much.

MR PATRICK APUUN (Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for ably bringing up this statement, and I agree with him entirely.  

I would like only to comment on the Karamoja aspect of disarmament. Karamoja supports the disarmament entirely, because since Amin took over, we have not been at peace both inside and outside Karamoja. We have never realized peace. What you see in Karamoja is curfew hours; you cannot walk at night. It is a very bad state of affairs.  

As we went in for disarmament, we all accepted it, Members of Parliament and also the communities in Karamoja. Voluntary disarmament was welcome in Karamoja. So many guns were returned within four days. Eight thousand guns were returned!  

When it changed to forceful disarmament, it turned into something like a war; it turned into torture. It turned out that people who had handed in the guns were vulnerable to raids. And right now we are being asked, as Members of Parliament, to go and ask again for more guns, because those who handed in their guns have not been protected; their animals were raided by those who had retained their guns.  

I would like to find out from Government whether we can again go on voluntarily rather than forceful disarmament.  It has hardened the situation. People are re-arming themselves. People are buying guns. And the Kenyan communities have not been disarmed by the Kenya Government. So, we are now in a dilemma as to what are we going to do in Karamoja.  Are we going to succeed or fail in disarmament? 

I would like the Government of Uganda to talk with the Kenya Government so that we can also disarm those people in Kenya. We are already vulnerable to those who are in Kenya, the Turkana, and they are taking our cows.  

Some people who are in Pokot are taking our cows, let alone the inside cattle rustling where some people who are holding the guns are rustling from others and they are not protected. Why can’t the Government also create a zone where these people who have handed in the guns can be protected with their animals?

What I see is that the army commanders who are on the ground do not listen to the stakeholders. I would like the minister to get those members of the UPDF out. We want new leadership to assist us in the disarmament exercise. 

I am requesting the minister to withdraw those in the command, because they are even taking animals and we suspect that some animals are here. I have repeated this several times. Can the Minister investigate that matter? Why do you go and impoverish the people of Karamoja again? Instead of taking the guns, you are taking cows. Is that logical?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS RUTH TUMA (Woman Representative, Jinja District): I would like to thank the minister for the detailed report he has given us, and I would also like to sound my support for the efforts the Government is putting in to make sure that the war in the north is put to an end. I would like to thank His Excellency who has taken time off to be on the front line.

I thank the Bishops who are dialoguing. They are risking their lives doing their pastoral work at the frontline and helping us to solve the problem, which is making us wonder whether Uganda is under the Movement or not. But we know we are under the Movement Government and we are going to be supported by the Movement, and the Movement is going to see that the war is won.

My concern, Madam Speaker, is about the displaced people.  The hon. Bwambale talked about it. These people have been displaced and they are lacking many things. They don’t have drugs, food, shelter, clothing and they have lost hope. Everybody in the north is traumatised! What is the Government doing about that?  

I am also concerned about the number of children who are not going to school, especially those in examination classes. Is Government doing anything to make sure that these children sit their exams? 

I am also concerned about the well-wishers. We do not know what to do. When are we going to be asked to put in our efforts? There are many people who have been asking some of us wherever we go, what they can do to help. They would like to come in. I do not know whether it is the Department of Disaster Preparedness, which should ask the well-wishers to come in, but they are there waiting. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very important debate. I know that next week the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs will be reporting. I have noted nine names of the members who have shown willingness to speak. 

Let me read out the names: hon. Otto Odonga, hon. Johnson Malinga, hon. Vincent Nyanzi, hon. Margaret Ateng, hon. Kibanzanga, hon. Anifa Kawoya, hon. Alaso, hon. Sekikubo and hon. Kithende. We shall give these people priority during the debate on Defence and Internal Affairs. So, let me ask the Minister of Defence to respond.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable members for expressing themselves and raising the issues they have raised. I will not answer everyone since some members raised the same issues; I will only respond to the issues.  

Hon. Ekanya asked about the reported recruitment into the People’s Redemption Army (PRA). This was a group started by those people I listed, and it was announced publicly. As you know, Kyakabale and Mande announced in a press conference in Kigali some time ago that they were starting a war against this Government. 

So, Hon Ekanya was asking about the reported recruitment into the PRA: “What mechanism have we put in place to follow these reports?” He said that some youth, especially those who identified with Reform Agenda, have a fear that when we talk about recruitment and so on, maybe they are not safe.  

Madam Speaker, we have a duty as a Government to inform the public about what is happening, because as we all know this was a public pronouncement; a declaration of war against this Government by these two officers. 

It is a fact that we have been discussing very closely with the Rwanda Government. One of the things we agreed on was that, we should establish a mechanism between the two governments to follow up these matters. That is why I have been saying that we are reasonably satisfied with the way our relations are going with the Rwandan Government, because we both use this mechanism. We agreed that it would not help to engage in these actions publicly. 

Obviously, it does not make sense to go public, if I may echo the words of my good friend, Ben. Going public sometimes may complicate matters rather than solve them. So, we are not going public on this. But I want to assure you that we have a mechanism for handling the question, especially of using Rwanda in the case of the PRA or Uganda in the case of those who are against the Rwandan Government, to sort out our two governments.  

I would like to assure those who supported Col. Besigye - the two million he mentioned who voted for him - that they are as safe as any Ugandan. They are even free - like you are - to express their political opinion, even if it is different from the political opinion of the leadership now. 

We keep a very close eye on the activities of those engaged in treasonable acts. You are not likely to be caught by our scanner if you are nowhere near them. So please, feel confident and secure in expressing your opinions in this country, if you do it politically and within the law.  

The question about Muhumuza, I am not very familiar with. I am familiar with a gentleman called Manenero, and I have had occasion to tell the public about this. It is true that this gentleman died in the hands of the CMI. 

A post-mortem report said that there was some brain damage. Since the body did not exhibit any outwardly injury, the doctor was unable to say exactly what could have caused this. It was possible that it was a fall, but it was also possible that someone caused him the injury. As a consequence, I did instruct for the institution of a detailed inquiry into this matter. 

I have again been on record to say that should we find that members of the CMI caused this injury and therefore the death, the law will take its course. There is no doubt about that.

Hon. Ekanya like hon. Ben Wacha and someone else, raised the question of trying civilians by General Military Court Martial. Hon. Ekanya says this is extra-judicial. Of course, hon. Ekanya, a general court martial is a court and therefore, its actions cannot be extra-judicial. 

“Is it in violation of the Constitution or the law?” Not to my knowledge.  

Hon. Ben Wacha says he is going to challenge the law in the NRA Statute, which provides for the trial by court martial of all those who use military means to commit offences. All we are doing is obeying the law as it was passed by this Parliament. If you have grounds to believe you can persuade Parliament to change that law, bring an amendment through the normal channels and the law will be amended. 

I will soon be presenting a comprehensive bill under Article 210 about UPDF generally, and this is an area which is going to be covered. So, I want to give you adequate notice to prepare, because we will be proposing to expand the list of things which if done by civilians, will be triable by military courts. 

The idea here is that if someone employs weapons that are meant for military use, then he has invited himself to be tried by military laws because that is what governs the use of these weapons.

Hon. Charles Angiro raised the question about rebels being 14 miles from Lira town today, and he said that the UPDF unit went into hiding. I think it was hon. Latigo, on the same point, who asked the question, “how come the minister did not raise this point?” Because his statement stops on 15th! 

Although this statement is dated today, it was actually prepared for presentation last week. You remember when hon. Okumu raised these questions and I responded. Subsequently, there was a statement from the Second Deputy Prime Minister about the situation following the Acholi Pii attack. The questions on defence were raised and I promised Parliament that I would give a comprehensive statement about the security situation generally. 

So, I prepared it then, but I only got time to present it today. Consequently, you will find that some of the incidents that happened since that time are not captured in the statement. 

But it is true that Otwal was attacked by these rebels. It is not true that the UPDF unit hid away. In fact they did engage these rebels and 13 were killed in a place called Agoro, which is 3km away. Reinforcements were sent from the mobile unit in Lira to pursue.  

Even this morning as we were meeting here, I was aware that the UPDF was in the process of handling the group in a place called Ogur. I have no doubt that by the end of the day, we will receive a report, and I believe that they will be handled very effectively. As I said, others have been handled in this report.  

On the question of reconciliation and peace talks, I think the statement is clear. This Government is the first government in the Republic of Uganda - if I am not mistaken - which introduced the question of resolving political differences via peaceful methods. This is what we have done. I do not have to go through it. 

The idea of being broad-based, the very concept of the Movement, is based on that. We negotiated with everybody - you remember UPDA, UPA, everyone. Anyone who was willing to talk, we have talked to them. 

We talked to hon. Aggrey Awori – he is not here today - and you can see he is enjoying. He came back after all the things he did and we forgave him. So, anyone who doubts our commitment to peaceful resolution of political questions should only look back and see how we have handled this in the past 16 years.  

Incidentally, I was quoted in the newspapers one time. My good friend, hon. Ben Wacha, told me - sometimes I miss out on some of things - that I was quoted in the newspapers as being opposed to Kony talks. Anyone who knows me would know that, that could not be from me. 

I happen to be one of those who believe in resolving things via negotiations rather than by violence. When we apply violence, it is in response to those who have used violence to make a political point. When we apply violence in return, usually it is to put pressure on them to go to the negotiating table. And whenever they express a readiness to do so, we are always ready.

I have told this Parliament before, and I would like to repeat this, I was the first person who led a Ugandan Government delegation to secret talks in Rome between the Government and the LRA. This was under the Sant’Egidio Community of the Vatican. I led that delegation in December 1997.  So, I would therefore, be the last one to oppose resolution of these problems through negotiations. 

But I would like to repeat that this idea of a ceasefire, which hon. Ben Wacha was talking about is something that we tried under the leadership of the former Minister for the North, Mrs Betty Bigombe. Not only did we declare a ceasefire, but we also allowed the LRA to occupy an area and gave them our commitment that we would not attack them while negotiations were – (Interruption)

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, the minister may have forgotten that during that ceasefire, His Excellency the President gave an ultimatum of seven days saying, “if you do not come out in seven days, we are going to attack.”  Maybe the minister forgot that part.  

MR MBABAZI: No, I did not forget it. In fact I was coming to it - (Laughter). During the negotiations, hon. Betty Bigombe - you know she was a very courageous woman like many Acholis - went into this area to negotiate with Kony himself. But as they were doing that, we picked information that Kony was using this to recruit. He was recruiting! He was telling those who had abandoned his force that upon successful completion of the negotiations, there would be a peace package. 

Remember at that time we had started the reduction on the force of NRA then and people were going home with a package. So, he used this to attract the people who had deserted him back into his fold. 

We picked information that he had in fact been buying ropes in order to cross rivers and pangas to cut through bushes. He had established contact with the Sudanese, and we had no doubt at all that Kony was actually preparing to fight rather than to negotiate peace. 

As a consequence, President Munyankole –(Laughter)- I wanted to say President Museveni being a true Munyankole. Let me repeat it so that you hear my point. President Museveni, being a true Munyankole, decided to give Kony seven days to demonstrate either that he was serious in negotiating for peace or if he did not, fighting would resume. 

The concept of the President is that he never wants to hit anyone in the back. That is why he gave him seven days. If it was some other people - Kony was there, we had a force around, he was talking to Betty Bigombe - we would have dealt with him. But as you know, we do not believe in that method. So, the seven days were precisely to fulfil the President’s philosophy of not hitting someone in the back; you must give them adequate notice if you are to hit them. That is what happened.  

We have engaged many efforts - our friends, the Jimmy Carter Centre for Peace Resolution, even the Sudan Government itself, President Bashir, the Libyans, the Canadians and Sant’Egidio community in Rome. There are so many people who have tried to bring about peaceful negotiations with the Kony group, but all of them almost without exception, were frustrated by the response of Kony. 

But we consistently held the position as a Government that if it is possible to talk to them we will talk to them. There is no doubt about that.

Hon. Ben Wacha asked about the political class supporting Kony. But I am going to make a correction, I did not say the political class of northern Uganda, my statement is clear. The insertion of “northern” is yours Ben, not mine. I said, “He however enjoys publicity and support from some members of the political class...” Of course, the political class in Uganda, the whole of Uganda. 

Again, hon. Wacha wants me to specify. In the last 16 years particularly the President, but also the Government in general, have found it beneficial to treat the question of security in these terms. 

I can tell you of one religious leader who was clearly a supporter of FOBA. He was giving them material support and keeping some of these people in his home. He was invited by the President quietly and told, “Please, we know what you are doing. We think it is not good for you and for this country. We would like to urge you to stop it”, and he stopped it. He continued leading us very well as a religious leader and eventually FOBA collapsed. 

So, when I don’t come out to name names, it is not because we do not know who is doing it. It is because we do not feel we should be that confrontational. We always leave room for people to change their minds. Unless we have taken a position that we are going to move against you for the action in which you are involved, we would like to make this as private as possible. We come to you, talk to you and tell you that we know about your activities, and we ask you to amend your ways.

“Why do I say we talk peace and still list those things I listed on page 5, which Kony continues to do?” I think it is my duty to inform you; like what hon. Angiro was talking about or what you talked about the people in your constituency. I am saying exactly what you are saying. This is a statement of fact. 

So, I would like members to know that as we are ready to talk peace, to go through negotiations, these people are engaging in certain activities and it is our duty to inform the country about them. That is all I am doing.  

“How far have the peace talks with UNRF II gone?” Well, Madam Speaker, these were being handled under the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Internal Affairs. I would like to leave the details to him.  

“Why not handle Kony the same way?” We cannot because UNRF clearly indicated, when they were in Juba, that they were ready to talk, and they came into Uganda with our knowledge. This was an arrangement.

THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR & SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Thank you very much, Minister for Defence.  Madam Speaker and honourable members, it did not take a short time to come up with a peace process, which is now taking place in West Nile with the UNRF II. 

The Government sent some envoys who met the UNRF II in Nairobi, in Juba and several other places including Khartoum, before finally the UNRF II came back to West Nile. 

Secondly, the community including the elders and the leadership of West Nile, together with the Government worked very closely with Laropi Obongi Peace Initiative, which was appointed by His Excellency the President to have constant touch with the UNRF II. That is why finally, the UNRF II left their base in Loto and returned to west Nile. 

My appeal to the House is that when your mother is ugly, it is you who must make her beautiful. You can never buy another mother. You can mistake a father, but you cannot mistake a mother. Uganda is our mother; it is our country and we shall never get another mother. It is our collective responsibility to see how we can make peace in this country. 

I went to Gulu and Pader together with all the Members of Parliament from the northern region, and I want to commend their effort when they joined me. We went to hon. Oulanyah’s constituency, the sub-county next to where Kony is, and I want to say it here that the people of the north really want peace. They are crying out for peace. 

Government is stretching hard because it wants to bring peace to the north too. It is working together with the people of the north so that we can have peace in northern Uganda. 

I found my own stepmother in Alero camp and came with her. Actually, last Saturday when I lost my child, I went with her for the burial. The people at home had not seen her for nine years. She disappeared with my little sister who was just two months then; this girl is now nine years. She cannot speak a single word of Lugwara. At home she and the small children were using sign language to communicate with each other.  

Members of Parliament from the north have already agreed with all of us and with Government to work for peace. It is time we talked one language. We should get out and talk to our people. 

Initially in West Nile, we used to call those rebels our sons, the orphans. But my people say that now we are like the pig; when it is fed up with the heat of the sun, it goes and throws itself in the mud. That is what happened to us. When the heat was too much for us, we threw ourselves in the mud. Later on, we shall wash, that is when we can have peace in West Nile. 

I think we have goodwill from everybody and the publicity should go in that direction. This is collective responsibility. If your mother is ugly, it is you to dress her up and make her look beautiful. You will never get another mother. Thank you, honourable minister, for giving me permission to give this information. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I think I have answered most of the questions raised except two. One is a question of re-arming the Karimajong. The other one is what hon. Latigo raised about how the Acholi political class does not support Kony.

The others that remain will be handled accordingly. Like the many good questions raised by my hon. sister, Loyce Bwambale, I will pass them on to the relevant offices. 

The question on the Goma Consulate, I will definitely pass it on to the Minister of Information. As for the re-integration of abductees and the funding of the Amnesty Commission, I do not have the answer to such questions. I however undertake to pass them on to the relevant offices. I have answered most of the other questions asked so let me answer these two remaining questions. 

The Karimojong being re-armed - (Ms Bwambale rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we continue like that, this debate will not end. I have already said that next week we are going to have the debate on the report of the committee handling the Ministry of Defence. We can substantively debate these matters then. So, I appeal to you to bear with us.

MRS BWAMBALE: I am sorry, Madam Speaker. I asked about talks going beyond the boundaries of this country and the honourable minister has ignored that aspect. The leaders of the rebels are not living in the country. What are we doing to avoid a recycle of these attacks? The leaders are still at large and nobody is talking to them, nobody is addressing them.

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I was specific when I answered the question about talks, and I also included those. 

On the question of re-armament in Karamoja, I would like to state definitely that we are not re-arming the Karimojong. The frontier sub-counties especially as hon. Apuun was saying, have become vulnerable to attacks by those other groups that are still armed. 

Because we did not have enough force for the UPDF to assure adequate security, we have intensified the policy, which everyone knows, of creating either volunteer forces or vigilante groups in those areas. We have 23 sub-counties that we are –(Mr  Malinga rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have really explained to you that there will be time next week to further handle this. Please, let the minister finish and we go to our budget. Hon. Mallinga, you are on the list for next week and the minister will be back.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Let me finish this now. I will take the information both next week and even after here. Madam Speaker, I was saying that because of this problem, especially in the frontier sub-counties, a decision was taken to build up the volunteer forces that are under the command of the UPDF. So, it is not the same as people who had arms unlawfully, which they had been misusing. 

Of course, Mrs Tuma, I will take up your question to the relevant people, like I said in the case of hon. Loyce Bwambale.  

“How can the Acholi political class reassure Government that they do not support this rebellion?” I am on record, Madam Speaker, for having stated our very deep appreciation of the Lango Political Group’s position, for instance. They sat down and in very clear terms condemned, not only the rebellion but also Kony and his acts against the people. 

I have no doubt about their sincerity. I believe them, and of course they abandoned the rebellion, you all know that. Even if these people, like they did yesterday, go into Lango, I have no doubts that the political leaders there do not support that rebellion. 

The other day I stated very clearly that I was happy about the Acholi Parliamentary Group’s position, and especially my good friend, hon. Nobert Mao, for coming out - for the first time in the case of Mao - to condemn those activities. I think that is the trend that we all need to follow so that nobody has any doubts. 

Of course, I know many political leaders in Acholi who do not support Kony. And I have said so in this House. There are people who do not support the activities of Kony. We know that. But I think consistency in condemnation is what we should aim at. Because what we had noted in some cases was condemnation of Government. Kony kills people and they do not condemn Kony but instead condemn Government only and that is all. 

I would like to state very clearly that, if I may repeat the point I made in answer to hon. Ben Wacha, we would like to handle this as privately as possible with a view to harmonising our position. I definitely would not like to take a confrontational stance. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a request for a Resolution of this House authorising Government to borrow from the International Development Association, the sum of special drawing rights US $21.7 million for a project for Protected Areas Management and Sustainable Use (PAMSU). I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The bill is to be presented to the appropriate committee for consideration, on behalf of the House.

MOTION FOR ADJOURNMENT TO DISCUSS A DEFINITE MATTER OF PUBLIC IMPORTANCE

MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion under Rule 41(b) of this House. The motion is: 

This House notes with concern the judgment made by the Kasithna State in the Republic of Nigeria to sentence to death by stoning a 30 year-old Nigeria woman, Amina Lawal; and urges the Federal Government of Nigeria to intervene to save the life of the lady. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This issue was debated yesterday and you made a ruling that it should be re-drafted. A lot of consultation has been made and a motion has been drafted, taking into consideration sentiments that were raised by various groups. 

The most important issue in this motion is that of life and death. It touches on the fundamental human rights, the right to life and the right to choice. 

Taking into account and recognising that Nigeria as a country is a signatory to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Violence, and the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, we feel that this sentence is a little bit too harsh and contravenes the concept of fundamental human rights, which are universal, inherent and inalienable.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this motion does not belong to me. This motion belongs to the Uganda Women Parliamentarians Association. 

Therefore, when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister raised concern, I had to consult with various groups that brought this motion, and I moved on their behalf. After consultation, we still felt that we should express our concern on this matter and pronounce ourselves on it. Madam Speaker, I want to end here.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you know, this matter was raised yesterday and we have been grappling with it. What I can say to you is that the matter is already being handled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, using diplomatic methods. (Applause). 

In any case, when you pass a resolution you ask the Government to take charge. So, in Luganda we say, “Osindise asitamye.” What does it mean? It really means that when you push someone who is already squatting, they fall easily. Anyway, this is not necessary because the matter is at hand. 

I want to inform Members of Parliament that this is a very important issue and it concerns all of us. It is a matter that is very dear to us so we cannot take it lightly. But if we take measures, which might be injurious to our relations with our neighbours, then that is not good. And if you take measures that are not measured, there is a danger of someone also pointing out that you have no political hygiene in your polity.

There is also the danger of dividing us along religious grounds, as I mentioned yesterday. I met many Members of Parliament who are Moslems and they were saying, “we believe in Sharia law. You Christians or none-Moslems, are you not aware of our dear beliefs?” So, the matter is extremely intricate. 

I suggest that you take it that we have picked up this matter and it is being actively pursued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, through diplomatic channels. I thank you.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for what he has just said. I am glad to note that Government is in support of what we have just expressed, we as Uganda Women Members of Parliament.

What I would like to state here is that we would like to compliment Government’s efforts. And I believe as Parliament we are not barred from expressing displeasure or expressing any other emotion that we feel touches on the interest of women and humanity at large.

I would like to note a few things, in addition to what has been stated. First and foremost, when we look at our Constitution and in particular Article 79(3), it states: “Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote the democratic governance of Uganda.”

The Constitution states, under Objective 28(i) that: “The foreign policy of Uganda shall be based on the principles of- 

(e) opposition to all forms of domination, racism and other forms of oppression and exploitation.” 

We are talking in the context of the Africa Union, we are talking about social justice, and we are talking about human rights. 

I have just talked to the Imam of Parliament, hon. Lartif Ssebaggala, who happens to be a good friend of mine, and I told him that we are expressing displeasure. I told him that I have read the Koran from cover to cover. There are other crimes, for example that of drunkenness, where a person is supposed to be flogged in public when convicted. I asked him how many people have been flogged in public. 

There are other statements in the Koran. For example, a woman is not supposed to lead a nation. But I told him we have Benazir Bhutto in Pakistan, leading an Islamic country. What I was trying to put to him was that with civilization and globalisation, some of these statements in the Koran have been amended so that they can be in touch with the times. They have been amended by practice and court. 

What I would like to say here is, when you look at this particular woman involved, there are several issues to consider. Like hon. Amongi has said, there is the issue of life, and secondly is the issue of discrimination. What action has been taken against the man who committed this crime along with her? 

Then the third issue is that of the child. You are going to kill a woman and leave a child behind. Remember this child is not even two years old. Really, does this punishment fit the crime? This is the essence of the whole matter.

What we are saying is that we do not want to politicise this. We do not want to make this a religious issue. We are talking about social injustice and merely expressing displeasure about it. Since this is in conformity to what Government has already engineered, Madam Speaker, I see no reason for us to hesitate to put this on record. This is our heartfelt sentiment on this particular issue. 

It is not only a sentiment, but we are also talking about human rights. If we keep quiet, as it is said, silence means consent. We would therefore like to put this on record, and in conjunction with Government, express displeasure and appeal to and urge the Nigerian Government to intervene to save the life of Amina Lawal. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a contrary view. I support the motion but I want to just give a word of counsel to the movers of the motion. 

International law is a matter of community and a matter of friendship. It explains why international organisations like the League of Nations failed. It also explains why Article 4(g) of the African Union Charter has a contradiction with Article 4(h). The sovereignty of a country overrides every other existing law we are talking of.

So, Madam Speaker, I would like to submit that this motion was a little untimely because they have just completed this case at the Federal Court. A comment in a national newspaper yesterday, which I gave to the mover of the motion, clearly shows this is going to reach a point where there is going to be a fall-out between the religious and national authorities. So, even if Parliament is to voice its sentiments about this particular case, I still believe the timing would matter.

I was yesterday consulting Moslems in the House, and it seems our position would be attacking the lady who strongly believes in the Sharia law. I have a strong belief that at this moment as we talk, the appeal is still going on in the Kasthina State, where they still operate under Sharia law.  

Hon. Byamukama said it is social injustice to stone that lady. I think that under the Sharia law it is social injustice to behave in a manner in which the lady did. Yet the court exonerated the man! So, Madam Speaker, I would say the timing of this particular thing would matter. 

Then secondly, in international law there is what we call the implementing hand. How do you implement the decisions you make and not just talk about them? I would believe, as the Prime Minister said, we need to have an implementing hand and not only add our voices to the already existing ones. 

So, I still make my special appeal to you members of this House, not in the spirit of opposing the motion per se but to tell you that the motion is not timely. Religious authorities in Nigeria are still handling the matter. It has not yet reached the final stage of appeal. When it does, Nigeria will have to challenge itself in international society and consider whether to volunteer its sovereignty or international image for the Sharia law. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really, I do not think that you should mislead the House, hon. Odonga. We can express an opinion on a matter. This is not a directive. It is merely an opinion about a matter and if the state says that they are engaged in the same thing, well and good. But even the state cannot ask the Government of Nigeria to enforce anything. I am sure they only say, “please, do something about it.” So, this is just complimentary.

DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, I have some information, which might be useful. One is that the Nigerian Government itself is opposed to this act. In fact, the Federal Minister of Justice has condemned it. So by expressing ourselves thus, we know that the Nigerian Government is actually supporting us and we shall be supporting the Nigerian Government.

Secondly, this woman, Amina, committed this act before the law was actually put in place. She has a baby who is about two or three years, and this law was implemented in that state after she had divorced and had a baby outside marriage. Of course, they are saying, “look, the law of God has always been there,” but what I have said is also a fact. Those are enough points I think. (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The other thing is that if we had been afraid to speak against apartheid because we had no capacity to fight against it, South Africa would not be free today. Let us be consistent.

MRS LOYCE BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing this motion to be brought up on the Floor. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for allaying our fears. I would like to express our own solidarity with Government and give the whole support of Parliament to Government for the move they are going to take together with us.

We in UWOPA and the whole House are expressing concern about life, but most importantly, we are appealing that there be a fair trial. We are not trying to appeal that the ruling be stopped at this material hour. We do not have the means to do that, and we know that Nigeria is a country on its own. It has its national integrity. 

But this has given us an opportunity to be proud of our own Constitution. I would like to quote from our own Constitution, Article 33(6), which talks about the rights of women. It says: 

“Laws, cultures, customs or traditions which are against the dignity, welfare or interest of women or which undermine their status, are prohibited by this Constitution.” 

Praise God! If this happened in Uganda, we would have a provision for all people of Uganda to come up and say, “eh, some law somewhere is undermining our dignity.”

What we are trying to do is to appeal to the Government of Nigeria for a fair trial. I am happy that this morning when I was listening to the BBC, the Minister of Justice indeed said that at this stage, the Government is going to intervene and ensure that there is a fair trial after this. So, we are just supporting the minister. 

In what spirit are we doing it? It is the spirit of African Union. We know that we belong to the African Union and we know that we are Africans who live in Africa. For anything happening in Africa, Uganda and the Parliament of Uganda should be alert, watch and point out issues that we think are going in the wrong direction. 

How about as human beings? How are you feeling about this, honourable members? Supposing this woman was your daughter, your mother, your sister, would you not request that she receives a fair hearing? 

How about the man with whom they committed the act, why was he let free? The women of Uganda would be happy, at a later stage, for a DNA test to be carried on the child and this man who was let free, to ensure that he did not use any lacuna in the law to get off the hook and leave the woman alone on the rope to be hanged. 

So, Women and Members of Parliament, I appeal to you because we feel that we should have this woman’s human rights protected. She should have a right to be heard, a right to be defended and a right to be protected by the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. 

And we appeal to other laws that oppress one gender, not only in Uganda, not only in Africa, but also in the whole world, that all discriminative laws against the female gender should be scrapped.
 
Finally, as I sit down, I wish to request that the human rights activists in Uganda and our colleagues in Nigeria get concerned about this, and that this woman gets a fair trial and a fair hearing. I thank you very much.

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Having heard this matter debated yesterday and it is 1.00 O’clock now, I would like to move according to the rules of Parliament that the question be put.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the motion as moved by hon. Amongi be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

VOTE 013 – MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs53, 748,489,000 under Vote 013 – Ministry of Education and Sports - be provided for as recurrent expenditure.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 89,353,691,000 under head 113 – Ministry of Education and Sports - be provided for under development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 014 – MINISTRY OF HEALTH

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 34,738,737,000 under Vote 014 – Ministry of Health - be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 114-MINISTRY OF HEALTH

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 130,513,915,000 under head 114 – Ministry of Health - be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 019 – BUTABIKA HOSPITAL

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs2,500,000,000 under Vote 019 – Butabika Hospital - be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 119-BUTABIKA HOSPITAL

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs29, 200,781,000 under head 119, Butabika Hospital, be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 023 - MULAGO HOSPITAL

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs18, 072,000,000 under Vote 023 – Mulago Hospital Complex - be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 123 – MULAGO HOSPITAL

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question that a total sum of Shs2, 196,915,000 under head 123 – Mulago Hospital Complex - be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE – 024 MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question that a total sum of Shs28, 819,000,000 under Vote 024 – Makerere University - be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 124 –MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question that a total sum of Shs7,861,362,000 under head 124, Makerere University, be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 030 - MINISTRY OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs5,771,056,000 under Vote 030 – Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 130 – MINISTRY OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs10,438,628,000 under head 130, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 032 – HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs1,288,000,000 under Vote 032, the Health Service Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 132 – HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs40,000,000 under head 132, the Health Service Commission, be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 036 – UGANDA MANAGEMENT INSTITUTE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs400,000,000 under Vote 036, Uganda Management Institute, be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 040 – EDUCATION SERVICE COMMISSION

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs1,610,997,000 under Vote 040, the Education Service Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 140 – EDUCATION SERVICE COMMISSION

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs149,790,000 under head 140, Education Service Commission, be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 042 – MBARARA UNIVERSITY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs5,799,002,000 under Vote 042, Mbarara University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 142 – MBARARA UNIVERSITY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs517,100,000 under head 142, Mbarara University, be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 044 – ITEK

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs3,166,000,000, under Vote 044 of ITEK be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 144 – ITEK

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs197,000,000 under head 144 of ITEK be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 046 – MAKERERE UNIVERSITY BUSINESS SCHOOL

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs2,907,000,000 under Vote 046, Makerere University Business School, be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 0Q1 TO 0Q9 – REGIONAL REFERRAL HOSPITALS

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs16,206,419,000 under Votes 0Q1 to 0Q9, Regional Referral Hospitals, be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply report thereto.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the following budgetary proposals of expenditure for the fiscal year 2002/03 and passed them without amendments: Votes: 013, 113, 014, 114, 019, 119, 023, 123, 024, 124, 030, 130, 032, 132, 036, 040, 140, 042, 142, 044, 144, 046, 0Q1 to 0Q9.  I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Zachary Olum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope members have had a chance to read this report. This is a very simple report, so I am not going to read verbatim but I will lay emphasis where I believe we need to pay more attention. (Interruptions).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Ministers concerned, please come back. Colleagues have supported you to pass your budget, please come back and give support to other people. (Laughter and Applause).

MR OLUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for calling the ministers back! The committee would like to appreciate and thank the Minister and the officials of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry and affiliated institutions who gave us very valuable information.
   
The committee made the following general observations on the ministry: 

• The ministry is still grossly under-funded and as a result, it is not able to carry out its mandate and functions effectively.

• The ministry is in arrears with practically all international organisations it is affiliated to, and the sum of money is about 809,500,000 dollars. Worse still, the medium term expenditure economic framework for this financial year does not address this problem. 

• There is inadequate manpower in almost all the departments of the Ministry, thus compromising efficiency in the discharge of its functions.

• The ministry lacks a planning department, which would otherwise be very helpful in forecasting and streamlining its day-to-day operations.

• The ministry is inadequately marketed, thus creating lack of awareness about its functions and the need to elevate it to a core status.

• The ministry does not appear to have a tangible policy framework that it follows. 

• The committee acknowledged the ministry’s planned use of the new Sector Wide Approach (SWA), which is being advocated for by the Ministry of Finance, and we encourage them to finalise those studies as soon as possible.  

The recommendations are on page 3, and I believe it is very important that we go through these recommendations. They are as follows:

• A review of the current status of all sectors of the ministry should be expeditiously done, and a white paper should be written showing the way forward for each of the sectors.

• The Ministry of Finance should increase its budgetary allocations to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry to enable it to effectively discharge its functions. 

• The Ministry’s arrears with the various international organisations should be settled so that the country can fully benefit from them.  

• The Ministry of Public Service and Local Government should expeditiously review the staffing levels of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry and provide more manpower to its departments. 

• The Ministry of Tourism should develop its policy analysis unit into a fully-fledged planning department, so as to improve on its efficiency and effectiveness in the formulation of projects, evolvement of policies and provision of data for monitoring and evaluation purposes.

The tourism sector is a very important sector and we have made some observations on this sector: 

• It was observed that the Uganda Tourist Board is currently carrying out various activities to improve Uganda’s competitiveness as a tourism destination; however, the publicity made for such activities is not adequate. 

• The ministry has embarked on full integration of tourism in the global mainstream as one of the means of improving the country’s image as a desirable tourist destination as well as improvement of security in the major tourism destinations. The committee, however, noted that to boost tourism, the entire country needs to be safe.

• The committee acknowledged the importance of tourism promotion, citing its gross contribution to Uganda’s foreign exchange earnings and the fact that each tourist bed creates between seven to eight jobs. 

The recommendations are very clear. One of them, which we should really emphasise here, is that the ministry should improve its publicity with regard to marketing Uganda as a tourism destination both nationally and internationally.

When we look at the wildlife sector, it is a very diverse sector and environmentally important, covering conservation through protection, preservation and sustainable development of Uganda’s diversity. 

The committee further noted that Parliament has successfully passed the Wildlife Protected Area Systems Plan (WPASP) in the last session. The object of this sector is to maintain an efficient and effective management to uplift the conservation and integrity of protected areas and wildlife within and outside the protected areas in the country.

Madam Speaker, the next section is very important, that is trade sector. The committee made the following observations: 

• We all note that there is a slump in Uganda’s exports. This can be cited from the decrease in the level of traditional exports from 434 million dollars in 1996 to 211 million dollars in 2000. 

• Uganda lacks both the quality and quantity of produce that would be competitive for export on the international market. 

• We have this very much-hyped African Growth Opportunities Act, and the committee is very concerned about the need to coordinate the activities of AGOA.  

We are indeed very happy that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is spearheading the secretariat. We would like all the activities as much as possible to be co-ordinated, so that we can get benefits out of this opportunity. 

Later on, I will mention something about the need to coordinate the secretariat and to provide resources to this secretariat so that it will be able to serve the needs of the various people who are engaged in the activities of AGOA.  

Presently, we have presidential advisors in the President’s Office or the State House who are also helping to promote this activity. The committee feels very strongly that the ministry should spearhead the secretariat so that all the actors work in one direction for maximum effect.

The recommendations are quite clear. I have already mentioned the need for the ministry to strengthen the secretariat and the funds to be provided for.  But also, when we talk about AGOA, we should not forget the other trading organisations like COMESA, the East African Community, the European Union - Everything But Arms (EBA); they should also be promoted.  

The co-operatives sector, Madam Speaker, is very important, and the committee noted with great concern and interest that the Government is now putting in place a programme to re-activate the co-operatives in the whole country. 

However, we are a bit concerned about the lack of concentration and co-ordination. Some activities are in the Vice President’s Office and some are in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. But we believe that this being a very professional activity, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry should co-ordinate the activities in the Vice President’s Office to enable them benefit from experts who are within the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.  

We have on page 10, a sub-sector in charge of the Uganda Export Promotion Board (UEPB). The statutory mandate of UEPB is to facilitate the development, promotion and co-odination of all export related activities. I think all these have been reported in the previous years. 

But we believe that the new approach by Government to merge three bodies, that is the Uganda Export Promotion, Uganda Investment Authority and Uganda Tourism Board is a welcome idea under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.  We urge them to expedite this merger as soon as possible, so that there is real co-ordination and more effectiveness.

The Uganda Industrial Research Institute is a body which is carrying out research at the moment on the various aspects of technology and capacity building in agro-processing ceramics. A report on the bill to institute it is currently being perused by the committee and will soon be presented to Parliament.

We have the Uganda Wildlife Authority. This organisation has pre-occupied us in the last session, and we only brought out some of the points that we believe are important.  

First of all, the new board consists of nine members to oversee the activities of UWA.  

Secondly, there are some local community problems regarding the demarcation of the boundaries. A new technique is being used at the moment, which is called Global Positioning System, to mark boundaries of protected areas. But in the past, we were able to learn that some of the local communities did bribe some of the surveyors so that a stone, which is placed one metre here, could end up 10 metres across to give more land to the people who paid the bribes.   

We have urged the ministry to work with Uganda Wildlife Authority and local communities so that they can really harmonise this situation, so that we do not have upheavals between the ministry and the local communities.   

The Wildlife Education Centre is in place. It is very important for the conservation and preservation of our wildlife, and we urge members to visit this particular place so that you can also appreciate what is going on.  

Management Training and Advisory Centre is a very important centre, which was established initially as an ILO/UNDP project in 1965 and by an Act of Parliament in 1969.  

This is one of the only bodies that is able to raise funds for its operations up to the level of 95 per cent. So, this is a very important body. 

The committee also noticed that they have a lot of professional people in different areas who could be used as consultants for various ministries, in order to be able to save very vital resources that may be spent on expatriate consultants.  

Madam Speaker, I wish to invite members to amplify some of these points that we have raised. The committee will be very happy if they can give us some comments and recommendations.

The committee thus recommends that the following amounts for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for the financial year 2002/2003 be considered and approved: For the recurrent expenditure, 3,256,000,000/= and for development expenditure, 36,392,767,000/= 
Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity to present this report, and I hope that we should be able to go through it.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you chairperson of the committee.

DR YEKKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I rise on a point of order. According to our Rules of Procedure, Rule 153(1) says, “Each Sessional Committee shall consist of not less than fifteen and not more than twenty-five members…” I see the people registered here are only 14. Is it in order for this committee to have less than 15 members?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we were constituting these committees, we invited you to volunteer. In fact when the first list came out, they were less than 10 members on this committee. We again gave you time to fill up this committee. Now, really, what can the Speaker do in these circumstances? 

I see no problem. This is a fully constituted committee. The leaders were brought to this House, we agreed on the chairperson, the vice chairperson and the membership. We approved the membership of this committee! Let us proceed with the debate.

MR BYABAGAMBI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want clarification from the chairperson of the committee on his recommendations for the recurrent expenditure and development expenditure.  

The money he has written down is beyond the national income of this nation, maybe even beyond the amount of money which is budgeted for in the United States of America.  Where are we going to get a recurrent expenditure of 3,256,000,000/=? I need some clarification, although I do not understand this one. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OLUM: Thank you, hon. Byabagambi. If you heard what I read, I read 36 billion. Ignore what is there, but I read it correctly and you will see the answer soon. It has been corrected in the presentation.

MR SIMON D’UJANGA (Okoro County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a very good report, and I would like to also commend the chairman for the manner in which he delivered it.

I have got only two observations to make. The first one is about tourism. I agree with the committee that aggressive public relations should be done. If members can watch CNN, you will see that there are so many countries advertising themselves as tourist attractions. But in Uganda, we have not adopted that culture yet.  

So, I entirely agree and encourage Government to take on this publicity very seriously, especially on international fora. 

In that connection, I have observed that one of our neighbouring countries has been claiming exclusively, the mountain gorillas and they have done a very good on the international media.  I have watched many programmes portraying the mountain gorillas as exclusive natives of a neighbouring country. So, this goes further to strengthen this recommendation that we must also go on the international media to publicise ourselves.  

The other one is on Uganda National Bureau of Standards. This is on the second paragraph on page 12. It says: “…Uganda National Bureau of Standards has no capacity to carry out monitoring and inspection beyond its offices…” The sentence I am referring to is the following one, which says: “This has resulted in rampant cheating of the public by unscrupulous traders through the sell of poor quality and inadequate quantities of products for example cement”.  

Now, there are things the Uganda National Bureau of Standards can do even without getting out. I give an example; in the electrical appliances, most of the appliances are rated 220 volts on the market.  This is not right, because our voltage is 240. So, if you buy a radio of 220, the rate we see is 240 is an over voltage and it may blow.  

We can state that before any electrical appliance is brought in this country, we must make sure it is 240 volts rated, and this can be done.  But you find the market is full of equipment rated at 220 volts. Now, this is not necessarily that the traders are cheating, but they may also need some information. 

I would really urge Uganda Bureau of Standards to do something about this. It is not that the traders may want to cheat, but they may also need information. Madam Speaker, those were my two observations. I thank you.

DR JOHN YEKKO (Kween County, Kapchorwa):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for this report. I only have one comment about wildlife. On page 14, it says: “The committee observed that communities in some areas were not happy with the results of the Global Positioning System (GPS) used by UWA to mark boundaries of the protected areas.”  

Yes, people of Kapchorwa District, in particular the Beneti community, are one of those that were not happy with this GPS.  A background of what I am going to say is that in 1992/93, Government did demarcate 6000 hectares within Mt Elgon National Park, which was then a forest reserve, for people to settle. 

However of late, Uganda Wildlife Authority, using the GPS system, claimed that the 1992/93 lines are misplaced, and hence they wanted to re-draw the lines. They claim that more than 6000 hectares were given out.  

Following this, there have been a lot of issues coming up:  

One, there is resistance from the local population because they see that more land from them is going to be taken by Uganda Wildlife Authority. 

Two, people are arguing that in 1992/93, the machines which were then being used by the Ministry of Lands together with the forest department were the most advanced technology of 1992/93. Hence nobody should be blamed or suffer from the consequences of using the technologies which were available at that time in the country.  

Three, they are also arguing that this business of GPS being a machine can also be subject to manipulation. As they say, you put in garbage then you get out garbage. So, in 1992/93, is it the machines which were wrong, or is it the personnel who were wrong or both of them? In 2002, is it again the machines which were wrong or is the personnel or both?  

Four, how can it be proved beyond reasonable doubt that actually 6000 hectares is being marked out now. 

Five, with more advanced technology as it is expected, ten years later the GPS system may be outdated and a new one is put in place. Is Uganda Wildlife Authority going to come back with some other modern technology to say that the 2000 line, which was by GPS, is now outdated and they have to draw another line? 

Six, people are also arguing that with this land that is shifting lines by about 100 metres to 200, how much damage will it cause the environment? So, people are of the opinion that Government should sacrifice these 200 metres, which stretches for about 10 kilometres, and leave it to people as they are. Otherwise, it is likely to cause a lot of problems locally.  

We have approached the chairman and the ministry and the minister has promised to visit Kapchorwa. Maybe in about a weeks’ time, we hope we shall come out with fruitful and convenient deliberations.  Thank you.  

MR DAVID WAMBI (Budadiri East, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment very briefly on the report by first of all thanking the chairperson of the committee and all the members for having been very precise and to the point.  

My comment, like my brother Yekko from Kween, will also dwell on Uganda Wildlife Authority, and in particular on page 14. Here, I would like to comment on the mandate of Uganda Wildlife Authority. As properly stated, Uganda Wildlife Authority’s mandate is very clear, and part of this mandate is to manage, sustain and conserve these areas for the benefit of Ugandans and the world at large. 

My observations are in form of questions. The first one is that, maybe I should know from the minister whether the partnership of managing, conserving and sustaining our natural resources is being done in a collaborative manner, or rather is it being done with the collaboration of the communities living near these conservation areas? 

If this is in affirmative, why are the people of Mt Elgon being harassed, yet in March 27th this year a Resolution of Parliament was passed here? Parliament gave the people of Mt Elgon permission, especially those who had homes in the park, to stay until Government found an appropriate method or way of compensating them so that - (Interruption)

MS BWAMBALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for hon. Kibaale to state that it is only the people of Elgon who are being harassed by UWA? And he is aware and we have been talking together, that wherever UWA had opened boundaries in the country, all those people have been harassed and have been displaced, and the agreements we made have been violated? Is he, therefore in order to be so sectarian?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think he is much better informed about the people in the mountains of Elgon, but I know he did not intend to be sectarian.  Please continue.

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. Indeed, my sister from Kasese, hon. Loyce Bwambale, may be right, but I was not being sectarian.  

The truth of the matter is that Uganda Wildlife Authority uses very brutal methods of work.  It is a very crude entity of the sector. Uganda Wildlife Authority officials are applying double standards, and they do not value resolutions of Parliament.  So, Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter.  

If the Parliament of Uganda, elected by the people of Uganda, make decisions and Government, through its organs, fails to implement positively and rightly as agreed, then what are we doing? 

I would like the minister to clarify on Uganda Wildlife Authority violating the resolutions of Parliament, and here you are coming to say Parliament should pass your budget. What use is this Parliament? Why can’t this Parliament refuse to pass this budget if the other time it passed a resolution and you violated it?  Now you want us to kneel before you and pass this budget. 

I will even further urge Parliament to look very critically at this budget of Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.  First of all, the budget being too small is not the issue. Why should we even pass it, even if it is small, when it is not being applied for the use of the people of this country?  

I would like the minister to clarify on the issue of collaborative management of protected areas.  There is a policy in the ministry we are addressing now. This ministry has a policy or a component called Collaborative Management Policy; that is, the communities and the officials of the protected area work together to see that they sustain the resources that are available in that area. 

To-date, the Collaborative Management Policy has failed. The people of Mt Elgon and other protected areas have not benefited from the 20 per cent of the money, which is accruing from collections of visiting these areas. These monies have not been given to the people. So, can you clarify and tell us when this policy will come to benefit our people?  

Another issue I would like to raise is, it is not enough for the committee to observe that the communities in some areas were complaining about the GPS. They should have also made a recommendation. In passing, the chairperson mentioned that the ministries should go and work out modalities of negotiations and a peaceful settlement, but it is not written down here. That could have been from his sympathy; it might not have been the committee’s view. Why was it not written down? Why did it just come from your own mouth?

Madam Speaker, it is true the boundaries of the national parks have been heavily abused by either the communities or by the officials of UWA.  Therefore, I think the tracing of these boundaries needs further consideration and discussions. 

The committee chairman agreed that we should give some observations as well as recommendations -(Interruptions)- I am summing up and I would have requested for time, because this is the real heart of my existence. My people are suffering under the hands of UWA, and I cannot stand here discussing other people’s issues when my people are suffering. 

May I know from the minister when these communities will be compensated, so that they are properly settled? Has this been reflected in the budget? To the best of my knowledge, I have not seen this component.

Lastly, is the minister aware that his staff in UWA are either being called rebels or the Ministry of Defence is misusing them? Is he aware that the Ministry of Defence borrows the uniforms of UWA rangers to go and carry out clandestine activities and poaching in areas where they are not supposed to be? 

When our people see those uniforms, they do not differentiate between the uniforms of UWA and the uniforms of the Army. So, there is evidence that this ministry is being used to do the work of Ministry of Defence. Are you aware of that? Can you clarify?  This is happening in Mt Elgon area.  

Lastly, I would like to thank the committee for other sectors they have elaborated on very well, and for the very good recommendations. I urge the House that before it passes this budget, it should receive a proper explanation and concrete plans for the people they are evicting from the protected areas.  Thank you.

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I thank the committee and its chair for a good report.  But I think there is one thing the committee should have talked about. In the policy statement of the ministry, they are saying that Uganda National Council for Science and Technology should move from Ministry of Finance to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. I think that is a valid recommendation. I think the committee should support that.

Secondly, on page 2 at the bottom of the report, the committee observes that the ministry does not appear to have a tangible policy framework that it follows. I think this is a very serious allegation by the committee, because from the reports we got from Ministry of Public Service and so on, they say when they carried out functional analysis and restructuring, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry was the best. So, I do not know who is fooling who, as the song goes. Who is not speaking the truth? 

This is a vital ministry. I think it is four ministries that are combined: tourism, trade, industry and even co-operatives, because it used to be a ministry. So, we have four vital ministries combined and yet they are starved of resources. 

I don’t think I should appeal to the Ministry of Finance but to the Budget Committee, because we have changed the rules. The Budget Committee is the one which puts pressure on the Ministry of Finance so that this vital sector is allocated money. 

This ministry has some of the best brains leading it: a professor, so many PhDs as ministers, so many doctors, a Permanent Secretary with a PhD in economics. So, in terms of knowledge, the ministry is, in fact, bubbling with knowledge. But if you go to its headquarters, you almost cry. If you go to the projects, fantastic - we are going to pass another US$21 million. So, they are doing very fine. They have fantastic vehicles, fantastic offices and so on. 

I suggest that when the projects are written, they should put a small fee to support the headquarters since they are the ones co-ordinating. How can you have a baby who is well fed while the mother is starving? They will laugh at both of you.

I like this ministry, because as a member of the Committee on Science and Technology, which I thank the Parliament for establishing by the way, and I am also vice chairperson of that committee, this ministry is so vital. 

One of the reasons we are not developing is because we are not putting science and technology on the agenda. Our reader screen has not seen science and technology. Unless we see it on our reader screen we will not develop. This so-called modernisation is a song that has no meaning, unless you put science and technology on the development agenda. 

For instance, which technologies and sciences are vital in this ministry? Information is a vital commodity. My neighbour, Prof. Kabwegyere, who is not here, has a farm, which was on fire one time. We asked Radio West to announce that the neighbours should come and put the fire out, and they did. He was able to do it because of the mobile phone and the radio; all this is information technology. So, that is a very good story. 

In fact, I have given a seminar to this ministry and I am glad that the leadership of this ministry is listening, because you have what it takes to develop. All you need to do is to organise yourself and co-ordinate your efforts very, very, well. 

For instance, in community tourism, the community is involved in preserving the natural resources. They use it to develop and get commodities, produce crafts, which can then be marketed. The problem there is that market information is not flowing. The producer and the buyer of the crafts don’t have the same knowledge. 

So, he suggests that you create a simple web site and you put it on the Internet and everybody will know that you produce these products. You put their pictures, and before you know it everybody will be demanding. 

As a ministry, your challenge is – once you put it out there, there will be so much demand, but is your chain ready? Is your financing ready? Will the banks accept to participate in that chain with the packaging? So, the ministry should stop doing what it has been doing traditionally and concentrate on those areas where there is a potential for winning. 

I would say a lot, but it seems the “bell man” is not on my side. But your salvation is going to be information technology. Unless you do it, the resources you have are limited; the envelope is small. No matter what you do, no matter what you write, this man is not going to - as we used to say - kill an Indian to get money. Sorry to say that. 

The money is limited and you cannot get it from anywhere. We are borrowing, but there is a limit to how much we can borrow. If we can use what we have in a frugal way, we can go somewhere.

For instance, there is the 120 billion of AGOA. I think you should get a piece of that cake so that you can also use it. The AGOA money is being used to promote export and so on, but you are facilitating that. You should also get some of that money. Otherwise, if the resources in the sector were better used, they would be adequate, but you find the allocation is not very fair. So, I hope the ministry can work with us to promote prosperity in this country. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me ask the minister to respond.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE & ANTIQUITIES (Mr Akaki Ayumu): Madam Speaker, indeed I will be very brief. I thank everybody for the comments they have made about the ministry and the advice they have given. I take it that you are pointing to the ministry areas of improvement, and we take it very kindly.

On the issue of promotion raised by hon. D’Ujanga, it is true that we are not yet on the CNN, but we hope to start advertising there. At the moment, we are trying to make advertisements through other means like trade shows which we participate in and the Internet. 

In the case of the gorillas, however, we are fully booked and there are people lining up. So, the promotion of gorillas in Uganda is not a problem. Instead, we are trying to see how we can domesticate more gorillas so that we can bring in more people. What we have can only contain a certain number, and this number is full all the time. 

The capacity at the Uganda National Bureau of Standards is not lacking in human resource. The human resource is very good, but of course, because of what the committee has pointed out, the financing at the moment is not sufficient such that a few things are lacking. But the people are very well trained and given the resources they should be able to move much faster. 

Hon. Yekko raised a number of issues, which were handled during the passing of the resolutions of Parliament, but I want to mention only one thing very briefly. The GPS that is being castigated by those who live around protected areas has been proved to be the most accurate. Of course, human elements come in once in a while when people can manipulate it. But it is in the interest of everybody, the population around and UWA, to ensure that the machine is correctly used. But you cannot blame the machine per se.  

Hon. Kibaale raised very strong points. I do sympathise with him, because if you went to Mt Elgon area, you will find a lot of complaints. But I wish to believe that this is a complaint over competing on a limited resource. 

It is true that people would like to have more and more land, and it is a mandate of Uganda Wildlife Authority staff to ensure that they keep what they have. So, if you have collaborative management in human interactions, you will find that not everything goes well all the time. 

It is in the interest of the ministry and the people living around these areas to ensure that we continuously mend our fences as we have been doing, and do it very well. So, when he invites us to go back, we will definitely be going back. 

We have gone there several times. By the way, some people make fun of me and say I seem to be the minister responsible for Mt Elgon area because I go there too often. But I will continue going there so that this human element is put right.

The question of sharing the proceeds that accrue from gate collections in the national parks is being done where the money is being raised. In the case of Mt Elgon, unfortunately, apart from the Kapchorwa side, we are not raising a lot of money. And I would like to know if the little, which is being raised, is not being shared. 

This is something I will make a follow up on, because at least there is some little money, not too much, maybe too little to even be talked about because we are not getting a good number of tourists there. 

On the question of the boundary, this afternoon the Minister of Finance laid on the Table a resolution seeking to borrow some money. One of the uses to which this money will be put is rationalisation and demarcation of protected areas. This is a pregnant statement. 

What we are really saying is that we shall have to trace the boundary. We shall have to rationalise, we shall have to ensure that the people who are affected by this re-alignment of the boundary, based on the resolutions of Parliament, is properly done. When you pass this money, part of it eventually will be going for that. It covers the questions of compensation. 

It is sad to note, according to hon. Kibaale, that the uniform of UWA is being borrowed by the army to poach and carry out illegal activities. I will admit that this is the first time I am hearing about this. I have taken note, and I am definitely going to investigate. But in future, I will advise my colleague to tip me on a serious thing like that, so that although we are going to mention it in Parliament, we would have taken action to put things right. 

I will leave the issue of policy to the chairman. But I take it that nothing is too good to be improved. One recommendation is that we should improve on areas of weakness. The policy may be there, but the committee is advising, and we accept the advice, that we should try to do a little bit more than what we are doing at the moment.

On the question of community tourism, we are promoting very aggressively, community tourism associations along the protected areas, which are being visited, and it is bearing fruits.

Hon. Nkuuhe addressed the technical members of the ministry and actually all the political leadership, not once, not twice but three times on information technology. If I can recall, he commended the ministry for accepting and taking very seriously the promotion of information technology. I can only assure him that we are going to continue so that we do more than that.

Madam Speaker, I wish to thank this House for making these suggestions. We have a lot to improve, but we shall need more money as has been pointed out. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

VOTE 028 - MINISTRY OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the sum of Shs 3,256,000,0000, Vote 028 of the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry, be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 123 - MINISTRY OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a sum of Shs36,392,767,000 , Head 128 of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, be provided for as development expenditure. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the budgetary proposals of expenditure for the fiscal year 2002/2003 under Vote 028 and passed it without amendment. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, let me thank you for the tremendous work you have done the whole week, and especially today when you would have been doing other things. I wish to remind you that on Monday afternoon we shall be here to consider the report from the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. I wish you a very good weekend. Thank you very much.  

(The House rose at 2.06p.m. and adjourned until  Monday, 26 August 2002 at 2.00p.m.)


