Thursday, 29 August 2002

Parliament met at 2.19p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to, on your behalf, welcome our children from Bweranyange Primary School, which is in Bushenyi district. They are in the gallery. You are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda -(Applause). Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE SPEAKER: Since I don’t see the chairperson of the committee, I will suspend proceedings for ten minutes. I don’t know what has happened because I talked to her this morning. We need to dispose of the first matter first and since the Chairperson of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government is not here, we cannot proceed. I suspend proceedings for ten minutes.

(Proceedings suspended at 2.21p.m and resumed at 2.43p.m.)
 
THE SPEAKER: I am sorry this meeting delayed. It is known that we are supposed to start at 2.15p.m. We are dealing with a constitutional programme here.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, I have just learnt that the reason why Members of Parliament are not here is that they are attending an unofficial caucus called the Movement Caucus. I have also learnt that Her Excellency the Vice President is addressing it. I want to know, Mr Speaker, is it correct for our parliamentary work to be held up while the Vice President, hon. Specioza Wandira Kazibwe, markets herself as the leader of the “new co-operative movement”? Is this her personal programme, a Movement programme, a government programme, or parliamentary business? What is it exactly that is making us unable to fulfil our obligations here as Members of Parliament? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, as I have said, I do not know about this caucus meeting. I am not a member of the caucus and I was not informed of what is happening now. I am, however, unhappy that people are not keeping time. I adjourned the House yesterday to 2.00p.m., and we are dealing with a statutory programme, which should not be interrupted by other informal meetings. So I entirely agree with you, because this is official. If anything has to be said to Parliament, they can come here and say it.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Beatrice Byenkya): Mr Speaker, before us we have the report of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government. 

The committee interfaced with the various ministries that fall under our jurisdiction, that is, the Ministry of Public Service, the Ministry of Local Government, the Local Government Finance Commission and the Public Service Commission. 

The committee acknowledges the valuable input into these discussions by the respective bodies I have read above. We also extend our gratitude to the members and staff of Parliament, the press and members of the general public whose opinion in one way or another guided the committee.

The method of work is well outlined in the report. I will now go to Page 3 and talk about the mandate of the Ministry of Public Service. 

The Ministry of Public Service is the operational arm of government charged with the prime duty of developing policies and overseeing their implementation to the desired targets. This in effect underlines its position in spearheading the Public Service Reform Programme, whose goal is to create an innovative Public Service capable of delivering timely, high quality and appropriate services at minimum costs to the nation, thereby effecting good governance, economic growth and poverty eradication amidst Uganda’s population. 

The committee noted that the above could only be achieved when a number of factors are properly manipulated to give the desired results in the Public Service. It particularly emphasised the importance of the following, as reflected in the report. I will not go into their details because of time.  

We go to Page 4 to talk about the achievements of the ministry. The Ministry of Public Service was able to implement most of the committee’s recommendations alongside the policy targets that it had set for itself. In this regard, it notably achieved the following results within the framework of the Public Service objectives. The achievements of the ministry are numerous and I will not mention all of them. I will, however, highlight some of them:

a) The Ministry’s expenditure patterns fall within the requirements of the Commitment Control System of government. However, the committee noted that arrears incurred by the ministry are still persistent. 
 
b) Release of funds for salaries have been adequate and on time. Occasional delays are however being experienced in inter-bank transfers over which the ministry claimed it had no control. District Accounting Officers and Education Officers also cause delays.

c) Salary structures were revised upwards and approved by Cabinet. Circular Standing Instruction No. 2 of 2002 effected implementation of the new structures. However, the ministry ought to pay more attention to a reasonable increase of teachers’ salaries.
  
I wish to highlight (e): A number of regulatory frameworks for the Public Service were developed. This comprised of a draft Public Service Negotiations and Dispute Settlement Bill, the Revision of Standing Orders in accordance with the Constitution, the Local Governments Act and the revision of the Code of Conduct for public servants. The committee was informed that these would be widely disseminated.
  
I wish to highlight (g) on page five: Progress was made towards pension and pay reform in the Public Service. Knowledge of these reforms is also being disseminated to public servants. The committee was further informed that payment of pension arrears to pensioners born before 1930 was successful. However, problems are still being experienced due to delays in the clearing of cheques and the lack of a regular Pensions payroll.

h) Part-payment of terminal benefit to former employees of the defunct East African Community was effected. In effect, 2007 out of 2837 beneficiaries of the East African Community (EAC) have been paid. However, payments to the remaining 830 beneficiaries are subject to the release of supplementary funds by the Ministry of Finance to cater for variations in the exchange rate that was applied. 

Members might wish to be informed that the exchange rate being talked about was in dollars because the formula that was used to change the benefits of the people of the East African Community was in dollars. 

The committee would also wish to highlight (k): Procurement of vehicles for political and entitled officers is going on. Twelve vehicles were procured last financial year of which two were for the former President of Uganda, Mr G. L. Binaisa. However, the committee was informed that replacement vehicles for the two former Vice-Presidents, the first Deputy Prime Minister, political leaders and some entitled officers are urgently needed. The committee was further informed that many ministers and specified officers resorted to use of project vehicles in the absence of government procured vehicles.

(l) The site for H.E. the Vice-President’s residential complex was identified and negotiations commenced. The complex will comprise Plots 2 and 4 Kagera Road and Plot 5 Katonga Road. The committee was informed that each component would be procured separately at a combined cost of about Shs5.8 billion. 

Note was taken that the cost for acquisition of the properties is high and therefore unaffordable. The ministry was requested to halt any actions directed towards the procurement, pending further consideration.

(o) A policy on the Housing Loans Scheme for public officers was presented to Cabinet for approval. The scheme, which was intended for public servants who did not benefit from the sale of pool houses has been undermined by lack of clear policy on accessibility of funds accruing from the sale of pool houses.

Well, that is all the committee would wish to highlight about the achievements of the Ministry of Public Service. 

Key Planned Output for the Financial Year 2002/2003:

In the new financial year, the ministry expects to facilitate the delivery of services and the following need to be mentioned since they provide the bulk of the planned activities and, therefore, expenditure of the ministry:

The following are on going and need facilitation:

a)  
i. The review of the Public Service Regulations
ii. Acquisition and processing of records
iii. Restructuring of local governments.

b) Planned inspection of central ministries and local governments.

c) The Public Service Reform Strategy (2002-2007) to be launched and disseminated.

d)  Pay reform and improvement in pensions to be addressed.

e) Strategic business plans, budgets and medium-term frameworks intended to develop a clear categorisation of all authorities and agencies of government is to be undertaken.

f) There is the Results Oriented Management (ROM) to be introduced in Constitutional Commissions and Urban Authorities.

g) There is continued advice on human resource policies, systems and structures to be enhanced.

h) The HIV/AIDS concerns to be incorporated in human resource policies and practices.

i) Vehicles for entitled officers and;

j) Soliciting for donor support to implement reform and construction of a National Record and Archives Centre. The committee was informed that the Department for International Development of the British Government (DFID) has shown willingness to offer financial support.

The committee observed that generally there was inadequate funding for the ministry’s planned activities. 

Compensation for the Retired Public Servants and Other Related Matters: 

The function is managed by the Compensation Department, which is charged with the responsibility of:

(a) The Public Service Pension Scheme;The payment of terminal benefits for public servants in accordance with established laws and procedures;

(b) The compensation of former employees of the defunct East African Community, which will be concluded this financial year;

(c) The Retrenchment scheme in accordance with established laws and procedures, and effective this financial year;

(d) The Survivors’ Benefits of the Defence Pensions Scheme, which was transferred to the management of the Ministry of Public Service.

I go to the bottom of page eight, and read the second last sentence.

Arising from the above, the committee noted that:

1.The Survivors’ Benefits Scheme was transferred to the Ministry of Public Service without adequate preparations and no machinery to effect immediate payments. The situation is aggravated by the lack of detailed records from the Ministry of Defence. Payments are expected to delay until the records are put in order.

2. A meagre sum of Shs3.2 billion has been incorporated in the statutory expenditure estimates to cater specifically for 3652 widows and orphans who are to benefit from the scheme. This money will cover only two and half months in the financial year.

Further, to the transfer of pension and gratuity claims from the Ministry of Defence, the committee was informed that although gratuity arrears amounting to Shs91.2 billion have been computed for 37,000 ex-service men of various categories, no provision had been made for this purpose within this financial year.

The committee was also told that pension arrears have accumulated over the years and government continues to under-budget for this area. 

We were also informed that the cumulative pension arrears, as at 30 June 2002, were Shs103 billion. Out of this only Shs14.5 billion had been paid to 3,549 pensioners born before 1930. Only Shs6 billion has been allocated for the financial year 2002/2003, leaving a deficit of Shs82 billion.

The committee was concerned about irregularities in the payments of pensions and noted that names of some pensioners were deleted from the pension payroll. This denies them continuous monthly pensions. Such categories of unfortunate pensioners are only reinstated when they complain after attaching records of their pay slips for the past months.

The committee therefore recommends that:

(1) The Ministry of Public Service should liaise with the Ministry of Defence to transfer all relevant pension records.

(2) The pension payroll should be streamlined to minimise mistakes and omissions.

(3) Streamlining of the payments procedure should be undertaken to eliminate unnecessary bureaucracies and to ensure that all identified beneficiaries get their pay.

(4) The ministry should carry out intensive publicity campaigns, including the use of Chief Administrative Officers to disseminate available information up to parish level.

(5)  The department should make good use of the Statutory Expenditure provisions under Vote 305 of Shs58.97 billion in a manner that is consistent with the Pension Reform Strategy and according to the wishes of the bona fide beneficiaries.

(6)  The Ministries of Finance and that of Public Service should mobilise funds to complete the payment of all outstanding pension arrears.

The ministry has a Public Service Inspection Department but inspection does not take place. 

We move on to Records and Information Technology. This department oversees the preservation of national records and archives and for subsequent use. It also spearheads arrangements to operationalise the National Records and Archives Act, 2001, and co-ordinates arrangements for the design of the National Records and Archives Centre to be situated on Plot 8-10 Lourdel Road.

On page 11, the committee took note of the urgent need for government to commit more funds to the establishment of the National Records and Archives Centre as a priority area, and to attract donor funding to it.


Recommendations of the committee:

(i) The ministry should liaise with the Ministry of Finance to mobilise supplementary funds to purchase vehicles for political leaders and entitled officers in accordance with their terms and conditions of service. Government should consider bulk procurement of vehicles for political leaders since the use of project vehicles for non-project activities is strongly discouraged.

(ii) Having expressed concern over the abuse and misuse of official government vehicles by entitled officers and political leaders, the committee recommends that the ministry should carry out a study and report to the committee within three months.

(iii) The Ministries of Public Service and that of Finance, together with the Prime Minister’s Salaries Committee and other stakeholders should take immediate steps to enforce the prompt payment of salaries throughout the local governments by the 28th of every month.

(iv) The ministry should liaise with the Public Service Commission to forward to Parliament the Public Service Commission bill within this financial year.

(v) The ministry should revisit the procurement of the Vice-President’s housing complex, taking into account affordability, strategic location, security and suitability factors. The ministry should update the committee on progress being made in this direction.

(vi) The ministry should expedite the Public Service Disputes Settlement and Negotiations Machinery Bill and forward it to Parliament this financial year. The ministry should also take immediate steps to consult various workers’ organisations so as to receive their input to the Bill.

(vii) The ministry should ensure that future salary increments adequately benefit all teachers as well as university graduates employed at sub-county level.

(vii) The ministry should clear outstanding payments for the remaining former employees of the defunct East African Community within this financial year.

(viii) The ministry should adhere to expenditures within the Government’s Commitment Control System.

(ix) The ministry should liaise with the Ministry of Finance to formalise the policy on the Housing Loan Scheme for public servants who did not benefit from the sale of pool houses.

(x) The ministry should take immediate steps to establish a fully-fledged National Records and Archives Centre.

MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT 

The Ministry of Local Government is responsible for the co-ordination of local governments in their quest for effective service delivery in the decentralisation process. To fulfil this mandate, the ministry guides and mentors local governments, especially through capacity building, provision of technical advice and setting statutory requirements to be adhered to.

The committee observed that the above is geared towards the achievement of a democratic and participatory decentralised local government system that can sustain development through effective and efficient levels of service delivery.

I will not go through the policy framework; I will just go on to the committee’s recommendations on page 14. 

The ministry duly responded towards the implementation of most of the committee’s recommendations made last year, and made efforts to sustain them. The following, however, need particular mention:

(a) Government, through the ministry, implements a deliberate capacity building programme aimed at training local government personnel in various fields and in particular, financial management. These initiatives are going on under the Local Governments Developments Programme (LGDP1), Economic and Financial Management Programme (EFMP II) and funds from government’s own budget.

(b) In a bid to improve the terms of service for graduate employees at lower local government levels, the Ministry of Public Service in consultation with the ministry has taken into account the existing terms and shall address them after completion of the restructuring exercise.

(c) The ministry carried out a sample study of lower local governments and established a need to set minimum qualifications for LC III chairpersons. The committee noted that when a minimum qualification of ‘O’ Level is set for sub-county chairpersons and councillors at both LC III and LC V levels, the management of resources and development would be strengthened. This is subject to approval by Cabinet and Parliament.

The New Local Governments:

I will not say much about this, but there has been an outcry that so many local governments, especially as far as districts are concerned, are being set up and that some are nonviable. 

Graduated Tax:

The current levels of graduated tax are a manifestation of His Excellency the President’s wishes as reflected in his manifesto. They were set out in the Statutory Instrument No. 15 of 2002, reflecting a new graduated tax structure. The minimum was fixed at Shs3,000 and those who have attained the age of sixty with no gainful employment were exempted from payment.

The committee, however, noted that many districts, which continue to arrest tax defaulters, do not adhere to the minimum tax. It further noted that many taxpayers have resorted to paying tax to neighbouring districts, which have implemented the minimum tax. Cheaper and/or fake tax tickets were also reported to be on the market. 

The district that is really suffering a lot, in as far as taxpayers moving to neighbouring districts is concerned, is Kampala. Most of the people there are paying their taxes from Wakiso. We were also told that there are fake tax tickets in Mukono and some other districts. For instance, if you cannot pay Shs4,000, someone will come to you with a graduated tax ticket of Shs3,000. Whether those are recorded tickets or not is another matter.
 
The committee is of the view that the ministry should direct all districts to adhere to the Graduated Tax Statutory Instrument and to continue with efforts directed towards sensitisation.
 
The lower council elections are supposed to have taken place for most of the structures, except for the LC II and LC IV, which are administrative units. What we have to say is that the Electoral Commission should endeavour to dispose of this important exercise in order to complete the structure vital for democratic governance.

Capacity Building:

This has been going on, conducted by the Ministry of Local Government and some other concerned ministries. In the report we mentioned that so far 14 districts had been covered, but as per midnight yesterday, I got the communication that 32 districts have so far been covered. The intention is that by the end of this financial year all the districts shall be covered. 

The restructuring of local governments is on page 16. We shall get a report of how it is to take place. 

The Local Council Courts Bill:

There was an amendment to the Resistance Committee (Judicial Powers) Statute, 1988, and it is long overdue. We recommend that the Local Council Courts Bill should be tabled before Parliament within six months in order to decongest the courts down at the grassroots.

I will not talk about Development Planning and Management. I will instead move on to the various grants to the local governments. 

Grants to Local Governments:

We have the various grants to the local governments. Some of them are already known like the unconditional grants, the conditional grants and equalisation grants. However, the committee recommends that government should address the following in order to enhance the output of the grants:

(a) The grant should be spent within the Priority Programme Areas (PPAs). Local governments should however, be free to prioritise expenditure of the grant within the PPAs to ensure that its impact is monitored.

(b) The unconditional and conditional grants need continuous review to ensure that they are distributed in a free and fair manner that does not introduce inequalities in service delivery.

(c) Government institutions responsible for generating and managing data such as the Uganda Bureau of Statistics and the Population Secretariat should make effort to update relevant data on local governments and population programmes.

Recommendations:

1. Having noted that the ministry carried out a nation-wide study on the need to establish minimum academic qualifications for LC III chairpersons, the ministry is urged to prepare for approval a Cabinet paper on the need to set ‘O’ Level as the minimum requirement for chairpersons and councillors at both the district and sub-county level.

2.The ministry should direct all local governments to adhere to the new Graduated Tax Statutory Instrument in addition to adequate sensitisation.

3. The ministry should liase with the Electoral Commission to dispose of the pending local council elections to complete the structures vital for democratic governance.

4. The ministry should consider amendments to the Local Governments Act particularly to compel local government chairpersons who are petitioned out of office to vacate the offices until their appeals are disposed of.

5. Comprehensive capacity building workshops for councillors should replace the single day formats so as to enhance the benefits. Evaluation of the workshops should be regularly carried out.

6. The ministry and that of Public Service should improve the terms and conditions of service of graduates employed at sub-counties in order to attract and retain them.

7. The ministry should compel all local governments to strengthen their internal audit departments with qualified personnel in order to enhance accountability in the districts.

8. The ministry should direct all district local governments Public Accounts Committees to take action on the Auditor General’s reports and submit them to the respective stakeholders.

9. The Ministry of Local Government should compel local governments to enforce provisions of the Local Governments Act that require revenue sharing amongst all levels of local governments.

10. In view of monetary collections and expenditures at LC I level, the ministry should compel all LC Is to introduce a strict and transparent receipt and expenditure record of all public funds at their disposal.

Local Government Finance Commission: 

I will begin with the recommendations because its responsibilities have a vague idea of what it is supposed to do. The recommendations are that:

1. The commission should make regular studies on the tax levels of local governments with a view to widening the tax base.

2. The commission should expedite the establishment of the Local Governments Budget Negotiation Committee so that local governments can participate effectively in determining their budget priorities as stipulated in Article 193 (3) of the Constitution.

3. The commission should, in conjunction with the Ministry of Local Government, carry out appropriate studies on the graduated tax system so that the problems surrounding this tax are adequately addressed.

4. The commission should design the local governments database, reflecting the levels of service performance for each of them.

THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION

Mandate and Functions:

The commission has a central role in the management of the Public Service human resource function. It strives to attain, develop and retain an efficient and well-motivated workforce so as to harness the full potential of government’s responsibility in service delivery. In the performance of the above functions, the commission endeavours to:

(a) Streamline the Public Service employment policies;

(b) Advise the President in the appointment of specified officers in accordance with Article 172 of the Constitution;

(c) Make appropriate recommendations to government with regard to terms and conditions of service, Standing Orders, and training for the entire Public Service;

(d) Harmonise its working relationship with district service commissions.

Although in the financial year, the Public Service Commission responded to some of the recommendations of the committee, the problem as usual is the lack of funding. 

We shall go to Page 22, which talks about the qualifications of members of the district service commissions.

The Local Governments Act, as amended, raised the minimum qualifications for members of the district service commissions to ‘A’ level or its equivalent and a diploma.  

The committee however, noted that many district councils have defied the law and refused to appoint qualified people to manage affairs of their district service commissions. The Committee was concerned that district service commissions may handle their functions contrary to the standing instructions from the Public Service Commission, the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Local Government.

The committee is of the view that the Public Service Commission should adhere to Article 155 of the Constitution and section 55 of the Local Governments Act. Academic credentials of the candidates must always be forwarded with the names to the Public Service Commission for approval and appointment of only qualified people to the district service commissions.

Capacity building is one of the activities that is being undertaken by the Public Service Commission in conjunction with other stakeholders like the Ministry of Public Service and that of Local Government.

Policy on Job Adverts:

It is the commission’s policy to advertise all vacant posts in the local press so that Ugandans with the requisite qualifications can compete equally and fairly for jobs. Furthermore, the commission sends all adverts to all; that is, the district headquarters, the ministries, the departments, institutions of higher learning, and even Uganda’s embassies and high commissions abroad.

The committee was informed that in the last financial year, the commission resorted to credit facilities with the New Vision newspaper in order to clear the backlog of adverts. The commission was also assisted by some ministries, which paid for the cost of their adverts due to the urgency of filling their vacant posts. Furthermore, the Ministry of Finance made an undertaking to offset the domestic arrears arising from advertisement costs.

The committee also noted that the provision of Shs78 million for the entire financial year to cater for adverts was inadequate because the commission releases on average 18 adverts per year. It was noted that single adverts of about three pages cost Shs2.7 million per page and are supposed to run at least three times to ensure adequate publicity.

Policy on Civil Service Examinations:

The commission administers written examinations to facilitate the Public Service recruitment and promotion procedures. The committee was particularly interested in the confidentiality of the exams so that examination leakage does not occur. The commission assured members that it would address the committee’s concern to adequately prepare for the exams

Anomalies in Academic Qualifications: 

In light of the rampant use of forged academic papers and impersonation, the commission has stepped up scrutiny of original academic certificates, diplomas and degrees. To undertake this, the commission has established a close working relationship with UNEB, Makerere University and other major institutions of learning in a bid to avert the danger of employing impersonators. 

The committee further learnt that many culprits who are discovered are normally forwarded to Police while those already in service are dismissed and prosecuted thereafter.  

The committee was informed that some of the current secretaries and other lower cadre staff joined the service on forged documents. The commission right now is in the process of ascertaining the validity of their qualifications, and the verification exercise will commence this financial year.

However, the committee noted that the number of academic institutions that have emerged over the years offer substandard academic degrees, diplomas and certificates, which undermines the commission’s efforts. The Ministry of Education and the National Council for Higher Education should enforce the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act requiring the establishment of uniform standards.

Establishment of a Databank:

We were informed that the Public Service Commission endeavoured to form a databank so that the nation as a whole get to know which particular qualified people it has for a job. Apart from having the little logistics on their hand, the Ministry of Finance told them that they similarly were forming a databank. So, they just abandoned the idea.  Although – (Interruption)

MR BOGERE: Mr Speaker, my attention has been drawn to a wrapped object near you. Maybe you should first establish because it is rather a serious subject.  

THE SPEAKER: It is okay, I have neutralised it. But thank you very much for your concern.

MRS BYENKYA: Could we go back to page 24 of the Committee’s report. I have finished the databank. 

The Commission’s Resource Centre: 

I will not talk much about that but I wish to point out the recommendations of the committee and that is on page 25. 

Recommendations:

• Consideration of the Public Service Commission Bill, which is now before Cabinet, should be expedited and tabled in Parliament within this finical year.
·	
• The commission should conduct regular and comprehensive workshops on capacity building for district service commissions to ensure that they adhere to statutes, procedures, rules and regulations.
	
• The Ministry of Finance should provide adequate budgetary funds to the Public Service Commission as follows:
·	
i. All budgeted funds for job advertisements;

ii. Release supplementary funds to the Ministry of Public Service for purchase of vehicles for all the members of the Public Service Commission. We have been informed that the commission lacks vehicles. They also pointed out that they are of advanced age although they do not look it, and that they do not have transport. It really makes work very hard for them. 

iii. A supplementary of Shs50 million for equipping the resource centre.

iv. A supplementary of Shs70 million to cater for the databank.

v. Funding to cover the cost of fuels and lubricants should be increased. 

• Immediate verification of qualifications and academic documents of all public servants should be undertaken by the Public Service Commission.

• All pending interviews arising from the past adverts should be disposed of within six months.

• The Public Service Commission should liase with all professional bodies in various academic disciplines for purposes of establishing a database of highly qualified and skilled Ugandans for any job opportunities.

• Capacity building workshops for local councillors and district service commissions must be co-ordinated with the Ministry of Local Government, the Ministry of Public Service and other stakeholders to avoid duplication of roles, workshop themes, as well as participants. Evaluation of workshops should also be undertaken to assess its benefits.

•The old vehicles of the Public Service Commission should be exposed to the annual board of survey so that they can be boarded off.

• The commission should liase with the Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Education, and the National Council for Higher Education to design a uniform curricular for adoption by all academic institutions.

Mr Speaker, at this point, we wish to go to the budgetary provisions for the financial year 2002/03. The committee recommends for approval by the House the following: 

THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE 

• Recurrent expenditure - Shs3,973,000,000
• Development expenditure- Shs3,417,197,000.

MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT 

• Recurrent expenditure - Shs2,721,800,000
• Development expenditure - Shs43,802,214,000.

LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE COMMISSION

• Recurrent expenditure - Shs1,220,075,000
• Development expenditure - Shs10,000,000.

THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 

• Recurrent expenditure - Shs1,650,000,000
• Development expenditure - Shs470,000,000.  

ALL LOCAL GOVERNMENTS OF UGANDA (Combined): 

The figure that appears in the report is not the one that should be. Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence to read the correct figures, as they should be. 

• Recurrent expenditure - Shs528,551,371,000 
•Development expenditure  -Shs160,433,229,000

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that this report be adopted. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the committee for your presentation.  

Honourable members, before you start your contributions, earlier on I introduced to you our children from Bweranyange Primary School in Bushenyi district. But now we also have our children from Kyayuku Baptist Primary School from Bugiri district in Muterere sub-county. We also have children from St Kizito Primary School from Lira Municipality. You are most welcome.

DR WILBERFORCE NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am only asking questions so that we can get more clarifications. 

My first question is on page 4. That is where the report recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should consider increasing teachers’ salaries. My question is, was it an after thought or was it something that was seriously discussed in the committee? Did the committee invite some of the teachers who have been on strike in different parts of the country? This is an extremely important issue because teachers are the most poorly paid public servants in this country, and the recommendation of this nature carries a heavy financial burden.

My second question is on pages 6 and page 22. It concerns a recommendation on the qualifications of people who sit on district service commissions. I remember when I was a member of this committee last year, we recommended that chairmen of district service commissions should be graduates because some of the people they are recruiting or interviewing now have, not only the first degrees, but masters degrees. Sooner or later, there will be people with PhDs entering district service programmes. So, what type of chairman should preside over the recruitment of such people?

My third question is on page 8, on the compensation unit. Does this compensation unit also handle death gratuity? I have evidence of some people who died some six years ago but whose families have never been given death gratuity.  So, what do we do, because this is a very big punishment to widows and their children?

A question has been raised about LC III chairmen, their qualifications and so on, but what about their remuneration. Mr Speaker, many chairmen at LC III and even LC I level do a lot of work for this country in terms of mobilising for development yet they do not get sufficient packages. May I know whether the committee has looked into this matter as well?

On page 14, on graduated tax, I am a bit unhappy about the statement, which gives the impression that reduction in taxes was the wish of the President. I believe that we are disowning the President. I think this is now a government policy. When the decree establishing a new tax structure was issued, it was a government circular. At this time, I think we should not be talking about whether this was in the President’s manifesto or not, but rather we should be talking about the decisions that government has already taken on all these matters.

Lastly - I don’t see anyone here from the Ministry of Education, but maybe the Prime Minister may want to make a comment. So, this question of establishing the National Council for Higher Education and also implementing the Universities Act is very important. They are delaying scrutinising the standards of universities, which have come into existence lately. At Kyambogo University for example, the university was not able to – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Ms Betty Akech): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is just to inform the speaker holding the Floor that the National Council for Higher Education has already been formed and it is actually operational. It has already sat a number of times. It is also the one that has recommended the establishment of the two universities of Gulu and Kyambogo. So, it is actually operational and it is moving towards quality assurance and ensuring that new institutions that are established operate within the required standard under the law.  Thank you.

DR NABWISO: I thank you for that information, madam Minister, but I think we need a detailed ministerial statement on what progress has been made, particularly with regard to the newly established universities whose standards, as of now, leave a lot to be desired. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the entire committee for this report.  However, I would like to raise a few observations and to get some clarification from the committee or the minister concerned. 

First, I would like to bring to the attention of this House that we have quite a number of people who have served this country in various capacities in the Civil Service, and they retired. The issue of pensioners is a very nagging issue when it comes to some members of our constituencies who served this country. If we are to nurture the confidence that the Civil Service should enjoy, then I think government should do whatever is possible to make sure that the arrears are cleared. Some of these people may even go and meet their creator before they get their pensions! This issue needs to be handled very seriously in order to encourage new people to join the service with the hope that at some point in time when they do retire, they will be treated fairly.

Secondly, the issue of election of LC II and LC IV in our structures. We have LC Is, LC IIIs and the rest in place, yet the administrative units of LC II and IV are missing. Recently the Minister for Local Government issued a statement to the effect that those levels are not there, yet they serve a useful purpose by assisting in administration, especially when it comes to settling disputes. If you are to get someone from LC I referred to LC III, then we are over-burdening that level. And there is a lot of work at LC III level. So, the earlier these units are put in place, the better. There is a big backlog of issues to be handled in our local governments, and these centres have been doing a good job. 

Some of the old LC IIs were still carrying out their work but because of the ministerial statement that was issued, they abandoned the work and we are having a lot of problems There are many unsettled disputes because the LC IIIs already have a lot of work. I would like to get an authoritative statement from the minister on the fate of the LC IIs and IVs?  

Mr Speaker, there is an issue of the status of some of the new districts, especially when it comes to sharing assets. I happen to come from a new district, Wakiso. We were part of Mpigi but when we parted and got our own status, all the tractors, all the assets that would make us take off easily were left behind. We did not get any and we are having problems with our roads. So, the policy of sharing or splitting assets should be streamlined so that even the new districts can take off well. They also need the basics that can make them do some good work.

I would also like to get some information about the Decentralisation Secretariat. It was doing a lot of good work but I am told that it either wound up or it is about to wind up. It used to help in capacity building, especially of the new districts and also streamlining the process of decentralisation. What is its fate? And in its absence, how is that work going to be handled? 

Mr Speaker, recently there were elections for speakers of LC IIIs. I would like to get clarification about the legal status of this office. What is their legal status and the terms and conditions of service? They are now in place and they feel that they are a little bigger than the rest of the councillors. Are they at the same level with the rest of the councillors? 

That office is new at sub-county level and I think we need to come to up with a clear policy on how they are supposed to operate. When you look at the Speaker in the context of the national setting, he is a very big person. So what is the status of the ones at LC III level? They are now clamouring for privileges commensurate to their office in relation to the chairmen. The earlier this issue is cleared the better, because it is bound to create some misunderstanding in terms of how the officials relate. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Rep. Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for the good report. I am going to seek three key clarifications. 

One is the Vice-President’s premises that are supposed to be constructed soon, according to the report. Only two pieces of land are going to cost Shs5 billion! Definitely, the Ministry of Public Service looked at this. They should have noticed that this is very expensive. I would like to know whether that is the real value of land in Uganda today, or it is an inflated rate. Considering the fact that the Vice President must have premises, and they have plans to acquire this land, how are you going to build a house at minimum cost?

The second issue regards the qualification for Local councillors III and V. I was in the 6th Parliament when we were debating the Local Governments Act. We said there must be standards set in the bill. When the bill went to the President, it was brought back and we had to change it to say there should be no minimum qualifications for these posts. Again, when we were amending the Local Governments Act the same issue was brought up but the President has not accepted it. I would like to find out from the committee whether they have consulted widely. Do you know if the President will consent to this? I feel it is a waste of time debating things, which will never be passed.  

The next issue is about capacity building for councillors. This is very important for them to know how to go about their business, but the problem is standard. If you have somebody who has never been to a classroom, what kind of capacity building do you do for him or her? There is no foundation! For that reason, standards are very relevant so that if we are building capacity, we build on a foundation that is already there.

In the councils at district and sub-county level, there are representatives of people with disabilities. These councillors also deserve to benefit from the capacity building. I have observed and noticed in the constituency that persons with disabilities are not catered for by some of the districts. That means that if a workshop is going on, the deaf are left out and they do not participate. The blind are not facilitated with guides to read for them the information either. As a result, they do not benefit from such training. 

The guides and interpreters are very important for the blind and deaf people respectively. UNISE and the Uganda National Association of the Deaf are training interpreters and mobility instructors. Such trained personnel are available. What is the Public Service doing? We had a recommendation that this group of personnel should be included in the Public Service payroll so that they are recruited to help and support councilors with disabilities. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much.  

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their report and I support its adoption. I have a few comments though.  

My first comment regards the widows and orphans of the UPDF. I welcome the move to take their benefits to the Ministry of Public Service. I am concerned by the comment of the chairperson, which she underlined, that there has been no machinery to effect immediate payments and there were no adequate preparations. 

These vulnerable people have been suffering very much when they have to follow up their benefits at Bombo, Ministry of Defence headquarters. I am concerned that this suffering will continue because of inadequate preparations.  

I wonder whether my colleagues know that in fact, when a member of UPDF dies, the following month by 15th, the salary has been stopped. Most of the times the families of these soldiers depend entirely on what the soldier earns. They do not have another income. So, within one month, there is a total loss of income. 

In fact, today I was reading in the newspaper about one Major who fell on the 12th of July this year and whose children cannot go to school this month because the income has stopped. So, I ask the ministry to make quick preparations to ensure that these people get their benefits and get them in a timely way.  

Also, the money that has been voted is too little.  It is not a good sign when we are able to pay ourselves - we the stronger people in society - without fail, but the vulnerable people are squeezed when the budget is small. It is a sign that our values are upside down, that we care for ourselves because we are strong, we have a voice and those who are voiceless are not catered for.  It is a bad sign about our political values.  

I would also like to make a comment about the Poverty Action Fund (PAF) and how the funds are being spent at the district level. I was disturbed when I discovered that in several districts, the five per cent that is meant for monitoring the use of PAF is spent on topping up allowances of councillors. 

These are the very people who are behind the companies that are implementing the programmes! So, these councillors are being given money to go to supervise work being done by their own companies. It is not an effective way to monitor at all! The monitoring funds, I believe, are intended to be given to independent actors such as Non-Government Organisations. They should be the monitors of government and see how it is spending this money, which is mostly accrued from debt relief. 

So, I would like to encourage the government to channel the monitoring funds to the well established networks of civil society that are trying to develop capacity and to monitor how the local governments are performing in delivering services to the poor.  

I am also concerned about the objective of widening the tax base. It is my observation that the most lucrative sources of revenue have been reserved at the centre.  At the district level, there is hardly much area left for revenue collection. 

When you look at what is happening in urban areas, it is frightening, particularly when you look at the taxes that a poor woman has to pay. A market woman pays graduated tax, market tax, education tax, sports tax, waste disposal tax, a tax for security where she lives, she pays for coming late in the market, pays for coming too early to the market, pays for wearing the wrong clothes, pays for not having a clean stand, pays a fine for turning up late for a meeting. It is endless, it is punitive, and it is a kind of extortion from the very poor people! I want a policy to protect the poor from this excessive desire by the local governments to collect revenue from the people in their areas.

The last issue I want to raise is about LC I monetary collections. LC I chairmen and their committees have been known to drink the money, which is supposed to come to them for effecting development programmes. When you think about it, you can hardly blame them.  

First of all, what they get from this split-up money is too small to do anything, and when you think about the responsibilities of LC I chairmen, they are so many! The LC I chairman is in charge of security of the village; he is the development agent. He authenticates passport applications and he or she is a court. So many burdens on that official down there, but the facilitation is not equivalent to the responsibilities, yet the higher you go, the more the facilitation political leaders get for their work. It is inevitable! And they are not stupid; they are not lost to this inequity. 

So, instead of asking for tighter and tighter ways to enforce accountability from them, it is better to design a more equitable way of facilitating the work of the political leaders at the grassroots to make it equal to the tasks that they perform. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR PHILLIP NTACYOTUGIRA (Bufumbira West, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker for offering me this opportunity to talk about the Ministry of Public Service. I begin by thanking the committee chairperson and the members for the comprehensive explanation they have given in their report. 

I wish to seek clarification about pensions and compensation issues. In the ministerial policy statement and in the chairman’s report, they state that they process pension gratuity within three months and they pay. I do not know whether this is true, because according to my knowledge, when papers come to the Ministry of Public Service, it takes more than two years before the beneficiary is paid. I do not know; maybe from other districts it is different, but not from the district where I come from. It takes more than two years.  

Right now, I have some examples of teachers who put in their applications two years back, and widows applying for death gratuity, but they have not received their benefits to date. I do not know why.  These teachers and widows come to borrow money from me to pay school fees and to use for their domestic use. Sincerely, if we are human, we should think about such persons.  

Imagine a teacher retires, or a public servant retires and for about two to three years, he is not paid anything! Think; how would such a person live?  Mr Speaker, I think –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, I am sorry to interrupt, but we also have children from Mutolere Primary School from Kisoro. You are welcome -(Applause).

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for welcoming the children. They come from my district -(Laughter). 

Mr Speaker, I wish to add that on many occasions, I go to the Ministry of Public Service and I find pensioners who are seeking gratuity in a small room lining up for several days. Is this proper? Why can’t government think of decentralising the pension and gratuity processing to their mother districts, so that these people who worked for government do not suffer the expenditure of coming to Kampala?  

I recall last year we talked about this, but nothing has been done. Both the ministerial statement and the chairperson’s report do not talk about it and yet we are in the age of decentralisation. I beg the government to consider the plight of these former government workers who are suffering.   

I understand that there is what we call revalidation of pension salaries. I beg that the honourable minister explains what this means. I understand for those, whose salaries have been revalidated, there are very many anomalies. Someone who was earning Shs200,000 was reduced to Shs40,000 and he is complaining and he comes to Kampala almost every month. I understand a medical assistant is earning Shs400,000 while a headmaster of an HSC secondary school is earning around Shs300,000. There are so many anomalies!  I beg the minister to give us this revalidation formula so that we can also go into the mathematics of it and do some calculations. 

The other issue is about compensation of the East African Community workers. I appreciate the fact that the government has paid most of the claimants and only a few are remaining. I understand there is what we call “loss of office”, and that government is supposed to pay for this loss of office.  I beg the minister to explain what you mean by ‘loss of office’ and why he does not talk about it in his ministerial policy statement. Many of these workers of the East African Community are waiting for this explanation. Honourable minister, would you tell the country what it is about, and why you cannot pay immediately?

THE SPEAKER: It is time, honourable member.

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for offering me this opportunity and I hope the minister is going to give us explanations to these issues - revalidation of pension, loss of office and why pension and gratuity processing cannot be decentralised to districts. Thank you very much.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their report. But before I make some specific inquiries, allow me to point out what I consider to be a cardinal weakness in this report - the biggest challenge facing decentralisation and some of the things that are not working in the districts. 

I have looked through this report and it is unfortunate that the committee did not give us a statement or positions on some of these challenges. Two cases in point are one; the failure of certain districts to utilise funds remitted to them for development activities. 

This morning, we were with the Ministry of Health and they gave us cases where money meant for drugs was kept at the district and not utilised. And in some cases, when the budget year ends, money is returned. There are similar cases for other things like education. This, to me, is something very important and for which the committee should have given us a position.  

The second example is the issue of tenders. We have heard the case of Katakwi where the Prime Minster’s Office intervened in the question of sub-standard contracts. One of the members who spoke earlier alluded to the fact that many people in councils collude with bidders for tenders and get cuts in this. This is really undermining the utilisation of development resources that are remitted to the districts. I would have loved very much for the committee to comment on this, and I ask the minister, when he is responding, to let us know what the situation is.

Turning to the report, on page seven, there is reference to the Public Service Reform Statute 2002/07. I am really very concerned about reform being a fulltime activity of government departments. In the last session of this Parliament, we passed a loan for public service reform. One begins to wonder whether reform should never end, like we are making privatisation a permanent picture of our economic development programme. 

I imagine that these reforms were designed to lead to something, and sooner rather than later, the thing to which these reforms should lead to, should emerge. Now we see a frame of 2002/07 implying that after that there may be another structure of reform. I would like the minister to clarify to us whether we are going to live with these reforms

On page 9, there is reference to defence gratuity with arrears for 37000 ex-service persons totalling about Shs91 billion. I would like the minister to let us know whether the 37000 people include the very many old people who, prior to the last presidential elections, were asked to report to Bombo with records of their services and with a lot of expectation that they were going to be paid. Are these people who trekked and borrowed money included in the 37000?  

On Local Government, I am pleased that the committee recommended that the minimum qualification for the LC III chairperson be ‘O’ level. I was exceedingly disappointed by the Sixth Parliament when after passing that qualification, they turned around because the President rejected the bill, and they accepted a lower qualification.  

I wrote an article in the New Vision and in the Monitor newspapers on this. I pointed out the fact that nearly all the people who contributed to that debate came from areas, which were getting LC III chairmen of ‘O’ level qualification. It was not a problem. In fact, one member who contributed very vigorously came from Kampala. And if you checked the qualifications of all the LC III chairmen from Kampala, they are all graduates. Nobody from Karamoja, nobody from Acholi, some of the areas that you would expect there to be a challenge and hope that this anomaly - (_Mr Ogwel rose_) The bell has already rang, allow me to finish. Please, I am sorry.  

Lastly, there is one matter which is also missing from this report, but which was presented before the committee by the Permanent Secretary. This is the issue of creating new town councils. This matter concerns me; I read it in the papers, I wrote to the Minister of Local Government, I wrote to the chairperson of the Committee on Local Government. 

I am exceedingly concerned because in 1995, six town boards were degazetted because a new regulation had come in place that set up town councils. These six town boards were considered not to be of sufficient financial standing to stand as town councils. Since then, all the previously degazetted town boards have come back. Some are either district headquarters or they have now been requested by the Ministry of Local Government for elevation to town councils.  

My concern is that the only major population centre in Pader district, which is Kalongo, which was a town board with a huge population and excellent facilities, was not included. This was in spite of the fact that Kitgum District Local Council wrote a recommendation to the Ministry of Local Government for Kalongo trading centre, previously town board, to be upgraded to a town council. My concern is that there are other centres within Pader district, which are large but relatively smaller than Kalongo, and unless Kalongo is elevated, these trading centres can also not be elevated. 

I ask the minister to regularise the criteria for promoting centres to town councils so that we know where we stand, because some of these places are too small. Otherwise, I thank the ministry for the efforts at promoting decentralisation.  Thank you very much.

MR DANIEL KIDEGA (Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a very serious concern for my constituency, which is on page 23, on the policy of job adverts. 

I have been very consistent in reading adverts from Public Service Commission and the District Service Commission. They have been very consistent in demanding for experience. I would like to know whether it is a policy that for somebody to get a given job, he or she must have experience as a qualification? If it is so, what is the ministry trying to do to make sure people are taught experience wherever they can acquire this experience from? 

We are very rich with experience of letting down or bringing to drain government parastatals, departments and committee projects in this country. These people have a very long list of experience, and once jobs are advertised they definitely take advantage of this. And we will definitely find that we are re-cycling people who have messed up community programmes and projects.  So, it is my interest and the interest of my constituency that this must be revisited.  

We have been trying to explain or to plead with employers in the private sector and elsewhere, but in vain. It is my prayer also, and I would like to plead with the members here that, let the struggle now be brought to the Parliament. We should put it as a condition that let jobs be advertised and unless there is an institution of experience, it should be kept off the advert and let the panel deal with that. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to those who thanked the committee for the good report however I want also to address my concern on Page 12, on recommendation No.6, that the ministry should expedite the Public Servants  Settlement and Negotiation Machinery Bill. When will the minister concerned bring this bill to this House? It has been on since the 6th Parliament, and I think it is one of the sources of all the strikes that are currently going on in the country, more especially by the teachers. 

Other workers are also crying that they have no platform where they can negotiate with their employers; neither do they have any platform where they could settle their disputes because they are aggrieved all the time. They have been patient enough to wait for this, and it is not forthcoming.  Please, could we get the clarification? 

Secondly, I want to thank my colleague, hon. Philip from Kisoro, who has raised a very, very good concern regarding the former East African Community workers and the rest of it.  Thank you so much. I think we have some people around who are thinking about workers. Please, keep it up.

Thirdly, I want to talk about the salary increments that are effected by the Public Service or the government generally to the public service workers. The big difference that is always given between the heads and the subordinates is very, very, very ambiguous, and I want to ask the government to take great care. It is government that has prompted the current on-going strikes because of the difference between the head teachers and the class teachers in terms of salary increments, which is very abnormal and unrealistic. Please, reconsider and address this matter seriously, otherwise, it is going to cause us a lot of problems There is a lot of imbalance in this kind of increments that the government offers to the workers.  Thank you once again, Mr Speaker.

MR JONATHAN NYENDWOHA (Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for this report.  

My comment is on pensions, Mr Speaker. The reason for not paying retired civil servants might not be solely the fault of the Ministry of Public Service, but I think somehow the officers themselves have to be blamed. I will give reasons.  

Most civil servants do not want to retire voluntarily. We wait until we do not appear on the payroll, that is when we remember that we are supposed to retire and this has caused a lot of problems I request the Ministry of Public Service to mount some sort of education to serving civil servants that they should give themselves time. If, for example, he knows he is to retire within two years, he should submit his application so that he has a year or two in which to process his retirement benefits.

Another reason is that most of these civil servants or retired civil servants - you see the culture of record keeping is not there. Now when this fellow is finally retired, when he is supposed to submit in his papers, he does not have any document to support that he was working somewhere. 

This year, I got somebody in my constituency who was retired in 1999 when he clocked 60. Up to this time, he has not submitted in his papers. He came here so that I could assist him but the fellow did not have any paper at all, no appointment letter, no document! So I had nowhere to begin. That is why I am saying that the Ministry of Public Service should actually take it upon itself to educate the serving civil servants that they should submit their application when there is still time.

Secondly, they should keep their documents because without any document, I see nowhere you can be paid your benefits. Most civil servants particularly teachers do not get their annual increment. You get a teacher who qualified in 1980 is getting the same amount of salary as a teacher who qualified in 2000. I do not know what is happening; I do not know if the ministry is aware that this anomaly exists.

There is also another case, particularly with teachers. There are teachers who have Grade V qualifications. Some of them are paid as Grade V teachers, others are saying, “No, you are not supposed to get a Grade V salary. No, you get a Grade III salary”. So, you find in a school both teachers having the same qualification but one is getting a Grade V salary and the other one is getting a Grade III salary.  I do not know what causes that, but I think this is another anomaly, which the ministry should address. Thank you very much, Mr speaker. 

MR ROGERS MATTE (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to be very brief. I have a few comments to make on this report. My first comment is about decentralisation and accountability in local governments.  In this report, they found out that some districts are failing to account and that this has led to continued misuse of resources. Therefore, when there is failure to account, no more release should be made to particular local governments.

I would like to differ slightly on this thinking because those who failed to account are individuals and when you do not give more resources to the authority, it means you are punishing the population, which is supposed to be served. You are not punishing the individual that has failed to account. My proposal would be that Local Government and Ministry of Finance should put in place a quick response mechanism so that they can be able to hold those responsible officers who do not account. But the poor population should not suffer for their failure to account.

My second point is on section 3.13 on the recommendation about the need to have the qualifications of local councillors put at ‘O’ Level. This will help the local government to improve their decentralised planning. My experience at local government level is that districts find it hard to sensitise people to mobilise and co-ordinate the planning function at the district because of the councillors whose literacy level is low. If the qualification of the councillors is at least at senior four level, I think this will help the districts to plan better the use of their meagre resources.  

I am opposed to recommendation No.4 on page 19. It is talking about amending the Local Governments Act to compel local government chairpersons who are petitioned out of office to vacate office. Mr Speaker, according to existing laws and policies, this recommendation will create a gap in the governance.

THE SPEAKER: The question is, is there any problem? If a person has been petitioned out, how does he continue to stay in office when the court has ruled that he vacates the office? So what is the problem?  

MR MATTE: Mr Speaker, I thought it was that person who is still being petitioned in court not somebody whose case has been resolved. Maybe, I have misinterpreted – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think the case was, you are petitioned in court, you are not a councillor, you are not a chairperson and you decide to appeal. In Parliament, the law was amended to allow a Member of Parliament who has been ruled out not to be validly elected if he appeals. The other side also thought this law affects them when it does not.

MR MATTE: With your guidance, Mr Speaker, I withdraw my opposition to the recommendation. Thank you.

MR UMAR LULE (Kalungu County East, Masaka): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson for this report. I also want to support the adoption of this report as moved by the chairperson but with few observations.  

On page 4, the report talks of the release of salaries to the beneficiaries in time, but the district accounting officers and the education officers who cause delays have hampered this exercise. This is a big problem in our constituencies in as far as the teachers are concerned.  This should be handled very expeditiously such that the relevant authorities submit the accounts well in time.  

Secondly, there is also a positive response in trying to revise the salaries of teachers upwards but this should be handled in conjunction with the provision of Pay As You Earn, which was last handled sometime back. I know that the Pay As You Earn of primary school teachers continues to be very high compared to their salaries, so this should as well be looked into as we try to revise their salaries upwards.

Mr Speaker, on page 7, the report talked about the vehicles of political leaders and entitled officers, which has actually led to the delay in handling or supervising government projects and the work that is going on. I was looking at the Ministry of Water. They have this problem - and actually all other ministries - but we are told that this year round, only two vehicles have been provided. So, I do not know when the backlog of 70-77 vehicles as provided here is going to be handled? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR TOM BAGALANA (Bunya County, South, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to register my appreciation to the Committee of Local Government for all the submissions to this budget, notwithstanding a few comments, which affect my constituency. One of them is the institution of local administration police. 

I think since I came to Parliament in 1996, whenever we consider budgets of local government, I do not see the institution of local administration police being pronounced. The conditions of local government police are very bad. They are working under very hard conditions. In my constituency, my major police station has one gun and one police officer. When I go back – (Interruption)

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do share the concerns of my colleague where he has got one policeman and one gun but how many guns did he need for a single policeman?

MR BAGALANA: Mr Speaker, I expect as a Member of Parliament when I go to my constituency to have somebody to guard my home. When he guards my home, who will guard the police post? So, Mr Speaker, we need to equip our local administration police posts. Their conditions of services should also be upgraded.  

The other issue is about the education level of our councillors. I wish to register to my colleagues that not all constituencies are having qualified councillors at LC I LC II and LC III. At LC III, the problem is that a few constituencies are monopolising the grant-aided schools. I have been here advocating for a school since 1996; a whole constituency has no school – (Interruption)

MRS SSEKITOLEKO: Is the honourable member in order to address the Speaker and this august House while pocketing?  

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is his mannerisms, but I think he has appreciated the observation.

MR BAGALANA: Mr Speaker, I apologise, and since she is a mother, I need to say sorry. 

So, if we are going to have good administration at local government, government should let us have equitable education. For 100,000 people to lack a school and you continue saying a councillor should have this qualification, it is really not fair!  

The other issue is about the poverty alleviation grant. I spoke about it last financial year, but the appropriate Ministry of Local Government did not address it. Many people don’t understand that this grant is not used to make profit. So, I want to alert the Ministry of Local Government to specify the conditions of this grant, which is given to sub-counties.  

The other issue, which is a problem to our sub-counties, is the signatories to the money. You find that the sub-county chief withdraws money without even the consent of the Chairman LC III. That is a very big problem in the sub-counties, and I think if it is not corrected, we will not have any development.  

In my constituency, one of the sub-counties collected Shs50,000,000 but when we went to audit the books, only Shs9,000,000 was on the account. They had not disbursed anything but only Shs9,000,000 was left. The inspection of our local government accounts was also not very good. I think inspection and correction of the signatories should be addressed in order that the money that is collected to do the rightful jobs. The politicians should have a say on the money collected. There must be something that pulls me to inspect the books of accounts of my sub-counties. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a very good report however, I have two problem areas; one is on page 9 about gratuity for retired public servants, and I quote: 

“Further to the transfer of pension and gratuity claims from the Ministry of Defence, the committee was informed that although gratuity arrears amounting to Shs91.2 billion had been computed for 37000 ex-servicemen for various categories, no provision had been made for this purpose within this financial year”.  

The committee observed that the cumulative pension arrears as at 30th June was 103,000,000,000 out of which only Shs14,500,000,000 had been paid to only 3,549 pensioners born before 1930.  Honourable members, how can we talk of poverty alleviation when we are causing poverty ourselves?  Why don’t you get this money and pay these people? They are poor because they have not been paid.  

Secondly, I would like to inform government that most of these people who left service are no longer able to work actively and contribute effectively in those forces. If these people are not paid, and most of them are dying before they receive their dues, it even becomes more problematic for the families to claim this money. I am therefore urging government to look into this matter. 

I want to say that the recommendation of the committee is lacking because they are only recommending that the Minister of Public Service should liaise with the Minister of Defence to transfer all relevant pension records. The issue is payment. Government should pay these ex-servicemen. You know that most people who have been involved in crime are mostly ex-servicemen. So, if we want to avoid some of these problems, government should make sure that people are paid.  

Secondly, I am not comfortable with the report on financial management and accountability in local governments on page 18.  We must observe that most of the money that is voted here is spent on local government and local governments have been given full autonomy in decentralisation. 

I want also to look at the office of the CAO. The CAO is appointed by the LC V Committee and you know the one who pays the piper calls the tune- (Interruption)  

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you my colleague, Maj. Rwamirama for giving way. It is not true that the executive committee appoints a CAO. All employees of district authorities are appointed by the District Service Commission and I think the difference is very clear. Thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you for that information, but I want to inform you my dear colleague that it is all about the influence of the Chairman LC V, and I want to tell you that it was brought out in a meeting we held. I am a Member of the Finance Committee. We had a meeting with the Ministry of Finance, but they are finding problems with accountability because they do not control those people who are controlling funds in those respective areas.  

It is high time we separated the roles of politicians from the technical officers. Like the Ministry of Finance appoints officers in various ministries, they must appoint the CAO so that the CAO is responsible to the centre. I want to give critical incidents: we have various incidents in various local councils where money for some projects has been diverted under resolutions – (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when this issue of CAOs came - maybe hon. Ben Wacha should tell you the background.  It came during the 1995 Constituent Assembly. This is when the idea of CAOs was introduced, and a survey was carried out as to who should appoint the CAO; should the Public Service Commission appoint him, or should he be seconded by central government to local government? Eventually, it was agreed that the CAO should be an employee of the district. Otherwise, if central government or any other body above sent him, it may not be possible to control him. Discipline may go away.  That is why they said the District Service Committee should appoint him. But whatever appointment committee appoints him, I do not think that should be a licence for him not to carry out his functions.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that information.  However, the learning experience indicates that there is a problem that should be addressed. 

I was giving a critical incident that when there is a need in the population; they convince the ministry concerned to fund that project but when money comes, they sit down and pass a resolution and put it elsewhere. So, if we have to account, there is need for the centre to have a big say at the local council level, because much of the money we are passing here goes down there. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR OGWEL LOOTE (Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from either the Minister of Public Service or the chairperson of the committee about payment of teachers. There are two issues, which concern me and the teachers in my constituency. One is the annual increment. 

For almost ten years now, there has been no annual increment for teachers. So you find that the teacher who started at Shs91,500 continues to get that for the next five years. Previously, there used to be increments and teachers’ emoluments improved annually. 

I want to reiterate that this will affect the retirement and gratuity benefit of teachers throughout the country. And it is a general problem. Is it caused by the introduction of computers? Because teachers have filled forms year after year to ensure that their increment is implemented but nothing has been effected so far. 

The second issue is what my colleague addressed. It is to do with the Grade V teachers in primary schools. Mr Speaker, you very well know that in the reform of our education system in 1987, there were recommendations by the commission. They included teachers who were to go for their formal primary education. So these teachers have been trained in Grade V institutions but when they go back to their respective schools, they continue to be paid the same amount as Grade III teachers.

The Ministry of Public Service has said they have not yet established the payment for these Grade V teachers. I do believe that the Ministry of Education, together with the Education Service Commission, should have come up with a policy for these teachers. If there is to be development in the education system, then there must be something in place to pay these teachers. And all these things are well known to the Ministry of Education. I would like to know what is going on so that when I go back I can tell the teachers that, “you Grade V teachers, the Public Service says, consult the Ministry of Education for your scales.”

The third point I want to raise concerns UNEB, on page 18. Recently in Moroto district, graduates were recruited for the post of sub-county chief. A scenario arises where the graduate finds a clan leader as the LC III Chairman. When it comes to funds, the graduate says, “these funds are meant for development of a,b,c,d.” The chairman says, “no, it must be withdrawn and used for recurrent expenditure.” This creates problems for the graduate and when he tells the chairman that, “the law says this,” the chairman says, “what is the law?” So, if the man who leads the area and directs resources given to the sub-county does not know the law and he does not know how funds should be utilised, what is the way forward? Mr Speaker and honourable members, we need to reconsider this. 

We request that if we want to deliver services effectively, if we want to value education, let us put politics aside and provide for minimum qualifications. All these bottlenecks with Parliament and the President should be put aside. 

The 6th Parliament was on politics. It did not seriously consider the issue. We have our chairman there, and the others can guide us. I feel that the minimum qualification for LC III chairmen should be O’ level.
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable colleague for giving way. I was a member of the 6th Parliament and when we enacted the law, I was a member of the Committee on Social Services. 

The honourable member informed this House that what transpired during the 6th Parliament about the academic qualifications of these LC III councillors was purely politics. I want to inform him that it was not politics; we analysed the situation on the ground. We said that in case there is a sub-county that fails to raise a person with the Senior IV qualification, what would happen? And then we said, “let us leave the law open to accommodate that; just in case there is one sub-county or two in the country called Uganda where we do not have that standard.” We did not want to borrow leaders from outside. That was the argument. I made a contribution here, it is in the Hansard.  We made the law to accommodate both the areas where we do not have qualified people and those that have qualified people. I thank you.

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the information from my honourable colleague. I know she was in the 6th Parliament. Nevertheless, I would like to inform her that we are also literate and followed what was going on in this House, in the newspapers. 

When the law was passed, it was sent to the President to sign, but it was not assented to. This was the period of electioneering. We remember also that the 6th Parliament provided that the nomination of Members of Parliament should be at Shs2 million.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I think I should give the member holding the Floor a piece of information. When the law was brought back after the President refused to assent to it, he is recorded to have said somewhere that he could not accept people who are standing for election in LC III positions to be restricted by any qualification because it would affect his voters.  

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you for that information.  Eventually, that was the situation. We were listening to the media, we were reading the literature and we were following the debates in the House. 

The third and last point I would like to raise is on UNEB. Many people in our country have diluted our system of education. Many claim to have finished their ‘O’ Level, ‘A’ Level or some course somewhere when it is very well known within the communities that they have never gone to a certain level of education. They are either senior three or Senior two dropouts but you find them with ‘A’ Level papers. What is happening to the records of UNEB? This is diluting our education system. Where are we going? Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Patrick Okumu Ringa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join the honourable members to thank the chairperson of the committee for their report. I also thank my colleagues who have made very useful contributions in areas of policy formulation and implementation with regard to the Ministry of Public Service.  

I would like to thank hon. Dr Francis Nabwiso for his concern about teachers’ salaries and the problem, which arose recently, which led to the strike of teachers in the districts of Bundibugyo, Busia, Kisoro and many others. Indeed, it is the ministry’s responsibility, together with that of the Ministry of Education, to rationalise the teachers’ pay. 

The complaint has been that there is a difference between the pay of a headmaster and a classroom teacher. Indeed, this has been a general outcry. I would like to assure members that an inter-ministerial committee of the Ministries of Public Service and that of Education is working towards resolving this problem. We expect that within the next three months this matter will be resolved.

On the issue of the low pay for teachers, I would like to report to the House that the Ministry of Public Service and indeed, government have done a lot to improve the pay of teachers. Seven years ago, honourable members will note, a classroom teacher was getting about Shs3,000 per month, but now the lowest pay for a classroom teacher is Shs102,000. This is a great improvement and we are even working to enhance the pay.

Hon. Nabwiso also raised the issue of the gratuity compensation unit. He was wondering whether or not the death gratuity is paid and if so, is it paid properly? I would like to inform the House that the Ministry of Public Service has worked to rationalise and improve the system of paying pensions and gratuity. Already the ministry has gone a long way in paying off the backlog of pensions and gratuity. 

There is the issue of revalidation of pensions. A few members raised this issue. I would like to inform the House that revalidation of pensions simply means that pensions have been increased. Whereas two years ago pensioners were being paid - for example, a scale of U6-U7 getting about Shs2,000 – Shs3,000, these pension scales have risen tenfold. In some cases they have even been increased by 15 times. For example, a pensioner who was getting Shs2,000 per month now gets ten times that amount. Revalidation has therefore improved pensions. This has also increased the amount of money, which government should provide in the budget, to pay the pensioners.  

Hon. Sebalu raised the issue of prompt payment of pensions. I would like to state that the Ministry of Public Service has gone a long way in targeting this. Pensions’ processing has been computerised. This also assisted in revalidation. Where, for example, the pensions census report did not reveal correct information, we have corrected that. Three years ago a pension census was undertaken to ensure that everyone who is pensionable is put on board. 

We have also had the problem of local governments failing to pay pension because they do not have resources to do so. The central government, that is the Ministry of Public Service, has been mandated to have the pensions of local governments in order. We had the census done so that these pensions could be paid. Already 33 districts have submitted their pensions for consideration and we hope that all of them will be incorporated and paid.  

Hon. Baba Diri raised the issue of the official residence for the Vice President. Indeed, we consulted with the committee and it is of the view that we halt further action with regard to the acquisition of this particular property. 
We are going to abide by that decision and hope that we shall revisit the proposal with a view to ensuring that the fund, which is already in place to acquire decent accommodation for the Vice President, is properly used. 

Hon. Byanyima raised the issue of lack of effective machinery to handle pensions from the Ministry of Defence. Indeed, in the Ministry of Defence, pensions have now been incorporated into the Ministry of Public Service. This is per Cabinet directive. I would like to however report that we are not able to implement this immediately because of the legal framework. 

As you are aware, the NRA Statute has a different provision in as far as the payment of pensions is concerned. We also have the Pensions Act, which has to be amended, and the general legal framework, the constitutional provision. So, we have consulted the Attorney General with a view to ensuring that the legal framework is in place so that the pension from the Army is well managed. I would like to assure the House that already we have the machinery within the Ministry of Public Service, which will be able to handle this as soon as the legal framework is in place. 

I would like to thank members for the valuable issues raised and particularly with regard to the need to supply adequate vehicles for entitled officers. With the support of the Ministry of Finance, we should be able to bridge the deficit of 72 vehicles, which we require to provide transport facilities to ministers and entitled officers. I assure the House that the ministry will address issues that are being raised when we next discuss other policy matters in the House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (LOCAL GOVERNMENT)(Dr Philip Byaruhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not have much to say at this stage but to thank the committee, on behalf of the Ministry of Local Government, for the very good and extensive interaction we had with them, and for the recommendations and observations made in the report. These are pertinent to the good operation of the Ministry of Local Government. 

I would also like to thank colleagues who have made contributions by way of observations, advice and recommendations to the ministry, to improve service delivery. By and large, the points that were raised revolved around the performance of the decentralisation process; the implementation of programmes in the district by the various local governments; accountability issues and the levels of education for our leaders at LC III, which was a subject of extensive debate. 

Creation of new councils and possibly the sharing of assets between the parent districts and new districts were also raised, together with the tendering processes and graduated tax instruments that were put in place following the declaration that was made on graduated tax. 

One colleague was worried about the position of the decentralisation secretariat. It is being accommodated into the mainstream Ministry of Local Government. We are not phasing it out but we are retaining it. As you know, it is a very critical function in the ministry as we strengthen the performance of decentralisation in the country. 

Concern was raised regarding the LC II and LC IV levels. First of all, these levels are in place; we have not got rid of them. It is their executive committees that are pending. And we made a statement here some time back that we are in consultation with the Ministry of Justice. Once funds are available, hopefully immediately we pass this budget, the Electoral Commission will conduct elections to fill in the executive committees at the levels of LC II and LC IV. 

Another point of concern was the level of education required for councillors at the sub-county level. We do appreciate this problem and as you have correctly pointed out, we had extensive discussions here about it. The debate was very rich and the last Parliament, in its wisdom, retained the open qualification for councillors at sub-county level. As you know, Mr Speaker, the Local Governments Act is a very complete law. It is a law that deals with the people on a day-to-day basis. As and when time comes, we are very open and can look at it again. Meanwhile, the level of qualification is really open for leaders at that level.

Colleagues raised the issue of graduated tax, particularly the minimum figure of Shs3,000, which has caused problems in various local governments. The Minister of Local Government issued two circulars referring to two statutory instruments. The first one was about the minimum graduated tax payable for the categories that were explained to people in that circular. The minimum payable was Shs3,000. 

The second one was in reference to exemption of those who are above 60 years, and are not in gainful employment. These were communicated to the local governments. We requested the local governments to implement them and they are soon to do that. Where we are having problems - and this is really in a few districts - the local governments have not moved quickly to sensitise leaders at different levels to assess the taxpayers to see how they fit in these new structures. So, we continue to sensitise and appeal to the local governments to move quickly because this also affects their revenues. You will find that those districts that are not moving quickly to put this in place have got a problem with their revenues, and as we continue to sensitise them on this issue, most of them are beginning to comply. 

The issue of fake tickets was raised, it is a criminal matter and we hope that the law enforcement agencies will really take it up.  But of course, all of us leaders have got to make a contribution to apprehend some of the culprits that may be involved in these exercises.

Hon. Winnie Byanyima raised the issue of the five percent that goes towards supporting the monitoring of programmes at the district level. How is this five percent used? She said this five percent is being misused by the political leaders who are at the same time monitoring the implementation of programmes where their companies have got interest. In other words, this was touching on procedures to some extent and also on the utilisation of this fund to monitor PAF related activities. 

Yes, this is what I said earlier. The implementation of programmes at the district level is a concern of all the political leaders. It is a concern of the civil servants and it is a combined effort by all of us, political leaders at district level. Members of Parliament - really where there is evidence that the political leaders –(Interruption)- okay, I have been advised to be very brief. 

In summary, we must all be part of this monitoring programme. We have made it very clear that councillors at the district level cannot and should not contract tenders to construct schools -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think honourable minister you might have said that it is not working.  I think the concern is, what practical steps are you taking to ensure that what you have said is implemented?  Maybe that is the question.

DR PHILIP BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The practical steps are in form of instruments and financial regulations; they are very clear and all of them are well provided for. We have got various guidelines which we have been issuing to the districts from time to time, we have got Public Accounts Committees in the districts which are doing a good job, we also now have a Standing Committee of this House, which has actually started making an impact. They are dealing with these reports that we have been laying on this Table and they are summoning the Chief Administrative Officers from all districts now. They have got a programme to relate to the district leaders directly and it is having an impact. I think we are in the right direction.

Regarding sharing of assets between the parent districts and the new districts, the mechanism is in place, it is very well established. So far it has been working very well in many districts but if colleagues have got some shortcomings, we can discuss this or we can handle that matter if it gets to our attention. So far we have had very good working relationship between the parent districts and the new districts. And in most cases, before we acceded creation of new districts, we had extensive discussions and the ministry continues to relate to both old and the new districts, and in most cases we have had excellent relationship. But this does not rule out the possibility of some problems in some districts, which we can handle.

Creation of new town councils: Yes, this has come up repeatedly on the Floor of this House. We have explained that first some of these proposed town councils are not viable and even those, which have passed the test, we still have the problem of the resource envelope. We have brought this to our colleagues in the Ministry of Finance and we have discussed some of these new town council proposals, but still the constraint resource envelope continues to be a major factor. However, we are still discussing with the Ministry of Finance. We have also realised that with repeal of the Rating Decree, which we are working on, we shall be able to realise reasonable revenue in some of these proposed new town councils. I think we are now beginning to develop a consensus, and I think we shall reach a reasonable position. Basically, those were the points raised.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister! Honourable members, the motion was that we adopt the report, of course, subject to the comments raised. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

VOTE 005 - MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs3,973,000,000 under Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)


HEAD 105 - MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE


THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs3,417,197,000 under Head 105 - Ministry of Public Service be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)


VOTE 027 - PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs1,650,000,000 under Vote 027 - Public Service Commission be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Head 127 - PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs470,000,000 under head 127 - Public Service Commission be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 025 – MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs2,721,800,000 under Vote 025 - Ministry of Local Government be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 125 – MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs43,802,214,000 under Head 125 - Ministry of Local Government be provided for as the development expenditure.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 033 – LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs1,220,075,000 under Vote 033 of Local Government Finance Commission be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 133 – LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs10,000,000 under head 133 of Local Government Finance Commission be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTES 050 TO 094, M1 TO M9, N1 TO N9, P1 TO P6 – ALL LOCAL GOVERNMENTS:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs528,551,371,000 under Votes 050 to 094, M1 to M9, N1 to N9 and P1 to P6, all local governments be provided for as recurrent expenditure (_Ms Kiraso rose_)

MS KIRASO: Mr chairman, I think there was a small mistake in the figure, which you read. The figure, which the chairperson read, ended with Shs351,000, but I heard you reading Shs371,000. I just wanted to be clarified, which is the right figure?

THE CHAIRMAN: I have read Shs371,000. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs528,551,371,000 under Votes 050 to 094, M1 to M9, N1 to N9, P1 to P6, all local governments be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEADS 150 TO 194, 1M1 TO 1M9, 1N1 TO 1N9, 1P1 TO 1P6 –  ALL LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs160,433,229,000 under Heads 150 to 194, 1M1 to 1M9, 1N1 to 1N9 and 1P1 to 1P6, Local Governments be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 395 – UGANDA AIDS COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs1,243,000,000 under Vote 395, Uganda AIDS Commission be provided for as recurrent expenditure -(Interruption).

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, in the report, it appears we do not have any record about Uganda AIDS Commission, and I am aware that Uganda AIDS Commission falls under the Office of the President. So, can I get clarification on how Uganda AIDS Commission is now being considered under the Committee of Local Government and Public Service?

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is that under our rules, when you come to the time when you have to finalise under the Act, you have to finalise this in August. Apparently, it seems this Vote was not reported although it was in the estimates. I have to read all our Votes so that we finish (_Mr Rukutana rose_) Hon. Minister of Finance, can you explain? Certainly, it is not falling under the report of hon. Beatrice Byenkya, but it is one of the Votes that were laid before us.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman and honourable members, Uganda AIDS Commission was originally intended to be covered under Social Services Committee, but when it came under Social Services, that Committee felt that it should go to Presidential and Foreign Affairs. When it came to Presidential and Foreign Affairs, it was never considered. So, it remained hanging; that is why it is being brought at this stage.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, honourable members, I think you have heard the explanation.

DR NABWISO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Is it in order to import such expenditure into Parliament at this hour through the corridors when in fact there was a time for the sessional committee in charge of affairs in the President’s office to present that report?

THE CHAIRMAN: For me, I have no explanation other than to say this is one of the estimates that were laid before us. But apparently, the committee, which was concerned with the same, never handled it.  Now, what do we do as Parliament? 

MR MIKE SEBALU: Mr Chairman, I am a Member of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee. If I make my recollections right, when we were reporting here, the AIDS Commission was one of the departments under the presidency that we reported on. In fact, in our interaction with the presidency we had a chance to discuss with the AIDS Commission, which was led by the Director General Dr Kihumuro and they gave us their submissions – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Did you make a report on it?

MR SEBALU: It formed part of our report.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then if it was reported on, it was an oversight that this vote was never read out?  In that case, I see no harm with us proceeding with this one.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, since I raised this issue, can I now move that consideration of the Vote for the Uganda AIDS Commission be deferred until Members have their copies of the report, and can actually follow the proceedings correctly?  This idea of ambushing Members of Parliament – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, it is not a question of ambushing – (Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Kagonyera to take part of the speakership and also issue orders to an honourable Member of this House. I take exception – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Unfortunately, I do not have a copy of the report on Presidential – (Interjection) – they are bringing it. I have seen the report here of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs and on page 4 it provides the political leadership of the presidency and then the Government corporations under office of the President. It says: 

“The following corporations also fall under office of the President: The New Vision Printing and Publishing Corporation, the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation, Uganda AIDS Commission, the Broadcasting Council and the Media Council.”  

This is what was reported. Then on page 10, “The Committee notes that the plan by Uganda AIDS Commission to use local governments to reach grassroots in the fight against HIV/AIDS is not effective since the local governments do not have adequate…” – then paragraph 16:

“The Committee observes that research in medicines to combat HIV/AIDS in Uganda has been completely donor dependent, with limited Government funding. This is not a sustainable way to combat...” then they continue like that. 

So, it seems they considered this one but apparently in their report they did not specifically mention this Vote although they recommended the Vote for the presidency and State House. This is what I observe as what happened. So, it might have been an oversight that this was (_Mr Nandala rose_) Hold on please, chairman of the Committee on the Economy. This is the state of affairs. This was mentioned in the budget speech and the estimates were brought before us. We are now finalising the issue of considering the budgetary Committee of Supply, what do we do?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, it is a well-known practice in this House that the Committee of the Whole House considers submissions from the sessional committees. It will therefore be necessary for the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs to make this submission.  I do not think it will be proper for the Committee of the Whole House to originate submissions to itself. And certainly, I would not expect the Speaker to be the one to make the submission on behalf of the committee. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of order. I have looked at our Rules of Procedure and I cannot establish the rule under which the honourable Member is moving. Therefore, is it in order for him to hold the House at ransom without quoting the specific rule under which his statement is being made?  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, as I have explained, the Minister read the budget and put before us the estimates. I have read out from the report that apparently the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs considered matters affecting the AIDS Commission and made some observations on the commission. Unfortunately, I think when they presented their estimates for the others this one was never mentioned, now it is before us; what do we do?  That is the question.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My reading of the mood of the House is that we are not opposed to passing this particular provision. I think we are concerned about the method in which it is coming for consideration. Therefore, I propose that we conclude this particular report and then the Chairperson or somebody else moves a special resolution for us to consider this other issue and then we can pronounce ourselves on it. I think this is much better so that they take responsibility of this particular omission, which we shall correct. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what I am going to do is this, tomorrow we are meeting, I will request the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs or his deputy to come and explain why this was not done. Certainly, it was an oversight but he can explain it and then we conclude the matter. We shall start with this one early in the morning - (Applause).

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(MR Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and a Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPLLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(MR Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the following Votes and Heads for the fiscal year 2002/03 and passed them without amendment as follows:

Public Service: Vote 005 and Head 105

Public Service Commission: Vote 027 and Head 127
Local Government: Vote 025 and Head 125

Local Government Finance Commission: Vote 033 and Head 133

All Local Governments of Uganda: Votes 050 – 094, Votes M1 - M9, Votes N1 – N9, Votes B1 – B6, Heads 150 – 194, Head 1M1 – 1M9, Head 1N1 – 1N9, and Head 1P1 – 1P6. 

I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(MR Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Thank you very much!

MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Under rule 40(1)(b) of our rules, I request that Parliament suspends the subsequent item to consider and discuss a matter of urgent national concern by moving a motion. The motion reads:  

“WHEREAS we members of the 7th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda are aware that the 16-year old war in Northern Uganda has caused untold suffering to the children, women and other people of the region;

CONSCIOUS of the moves so far undertaken by the government of the Republic of Uganda and donor agencies to alleviate the said suffering;

ENCOURAGED and supportive of the recent moves by the government of Republic of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army to bring about peace in the region through dialogue;

DO HEREBY:  

1. Urge the government and the Lord’s Resistance Army to pursue the said dialogue to its logical conclusion.
2. Support the government and donor community in their various moves in the supply of essentials of life to the affected communities, and do give a pledge by each and everyone of us donating a sum of Uganda Shillings 100,000 by the 12th day of September to buy some of the essentials of life to the affected persons.”

Resolved at Kampala this day, 29 August 2002.
Moved by Maj. Bright Rwamirama. 

THE SPEAKER: So, what do you want now? You want to argue this motion without giving notice? Okay, he has made that request, is it supported?  

HON. MEMBERS:  Seconded.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, we are all aware that we are all shareholders in this company called Uganda, and when one branch gets a problem, we all get affected. More often than not, we have had functions to improve the welfare of people in the South, Central, and Eastern Uganda and we have had our colleagues from the North who have gone with and supported us. Unfortunately, we have not been able to move to their areas because of the problems that are brought about by the war. 

Conscious of this and given the fact that His Excellency, the President has moved there to make sure that everything is done to improve on the welfare and the situation of the people of northern Uganda, I urge my colleagues that at this time, a friend in need is a friend indeed. We should be together in times of happiness and in times of grief. I therefore, urge members to support this motion and contribute generously.  

I also want to recognise the fact that we the members of Parliament sit here and pass the budget, which we have done during this period. We are aware of the money we give the ministries under the Prime Minister’s Office, particularly of Disaster. We have highlighted the need to improve on their budget, and conscious of this, I think it is prudent that we support our brothers in the North. Thank you very much.

MRS DORAH BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion on the Floor. I would like to draw the attention of this House to the New Vision newspaper of yesterday, 28 August 2002. In its headline story entitled “ Army Launches Attacks on LRA”, it stated that a UPDF helicopter gun-ship killed two people including a woman in Lira. The gun-ship mistook fleeing people for rebels. This incidence brought to light the hazards faced by people in war torn areas whose crime in this case was that they did not know which direction to take while fleeing. We deeply grieve with our brothers and sisters in northern Uganda who have died in Kony’s attacks.  

Mr Speaker, indeed the victims of Kony have been numerous over the last 16 years. I would like to draw the attention of this House to particular groups and these are the marginalised. Their situation has been further aggravated by Kony’s war. One particular case is that of the Aboke girls, who were abducted in 1996. Most of them are never to be seen again. 

The situation in the North has deprived the people living there of equal opportunities to resources. For example, the children have not benefited from UPE and most of them have not done exams Children have been robbed of their childhood because most of them have been forced to join Kony in his war.  These, Mr Speaker, are some of the issues, which the Equal Opportunities Committee would address in its deliberations.  

I would also like to highlight the plight of women in this particular area. Rape and defilement are used as weapons of war, and apart from the physical and mental anguish, this has also escalated the prevalence of HIV/AIDS in this area. Women are forced to join Kony and they are forced to fight with children on their backs. This is a very grave situation! 

And to quote the words of hon. Betty Amongi, she said that the women confided in her that most of them are suffering from STDs. They also said that when they return after abduction, their husbands reject them, and indeed, this has led to the break-up of very many homes. Some of them fear to return to their husbands because they may spread HIV/AIDS to them. And they say that they have started seeing the signs of HIV/AIDS on themselves as well as their children. This is the situation.

The issue of disability cannot be ignored, because most of the people in the northern region have suffered from gunshot wounds. Most of them have stepped on landmines and have no legs; most of them have been maimed. You will remember the cutting off of ears and noses in the early years of Kony’s attack. The elderly cannot swiftly run away when they are attacked and in most cases they are the first victims  

Mr Speaker, honourable members, the districts of Lira and Apac in particular have been host communities. They have taken in internally displaced persons, and this has put a lot of pressure on community necessities such as food, shelter, clothing and medicines; they are on high demand. 

On a personal note, in June this year I had opportunity to visit the district of Apac after the very first attack of Kony this year. I was shocked by the fear in people’s eyes and their crave for alcohol to defuse the pain and agony. Their requests centred on issues such as blankets. They were not focussing on developmental issues like roads or schools; they were focussing on issues of sheer survival.  

You may be wondering why we must support these people in northern Uganda. We must, because we are part of the same body. When one part is wounded, the rest of the body automatically responds. We acknowledge and appreciate government’s continued work in this area. We commend the work, which has been undertaken by NGOs, but honourable members, it is our noble duty as people’s representatives to show our solidarity with this part of the body that is bleeding profusely. We cannot ignore this pain. Can we? 

Northern Uganda’s loss is Uganda’s loss. Human resources are being depleted by the day. It is difficult for Uganda to attract tourists and investors when we have a war in our midst. As you know, this reduces on our gross domestic product, and it impacts on each and every Ugandan however geographically removed.

I remember in one book, which Hemingway wrote entitled, “For Whom the Bell Tolls” he noted that, “No man is an island, we are all part of the main. Therefore, do not sent to know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee.” 

Close to home, the celebrated Philly Lutaya put it more succinctly in a song, which we all know. He sang, “Today it is me, tomorrow someone else”. 

Mr Speaker, honourable members, African culture dictates that we associate ourselves with the suffering people of northern Uganda. These indeed are our brothers and sisters. It is in this spirit that I support this motion and I sincerely trust that you will support it likewise. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SEBALU MIKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to make an amendment to this motion. I definitely share the concern raised in this motion by Maj. Rwamirama and I do support it with just a small amendment. 

Part two says, “support the government and the donor community in their various moves in supplying essentials of life to the affected communities and do give a pledge…” 

My view is that we should not prescribe a figure or any amount, but we should make a commitment to pledge. The way it is worded, in my understanding, it would not even allow someone to go beyond Shs100,000 because there is nothing that would provide for that. 

My view is that we do support the principle and we allow members the liberty of determining the degree of the pledge. It could even be above, but we allow them that privilege.

MAJ.RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to clarify that this figure was reached after generating consensus. One is that we have various caucuses here and we had to come together to agree on a modest contribution. These caucuses include YPA, UWOPA, PAFU, and that is how we came to this figure. 

I want to urge members that since it has been the practice of contributing to each other’s constituencies around that figure, it would not do us harm to do it to the people of northern Uganda. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the principle is supported, but there was an amendment. 

MR LULE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank hon. Bright and hon. Dora Byamukama for this motion. Of course, we all share the suffering of the people of the north and we would like to address their plight. 

The amendment I would like to make concerns number two here, because they proposed Shs100,000 to be deducted by the 12 September this year. Of course, we have most of our funds already committed by the so many papers that have gone around and the individual commitments you have already made. I would therefore propose that this should not be limited to that time, but let us pledge accordingly, as we can afford. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems we support the idea but the problem is about this particular detail on how much we should give –(Interjections)- Oh! Is it not the case? Let us hear the contrary view.

MR KASSIANO WADRI (Terego County, Arua): I rise to oppose this motion. That is the more reason why I say I come from northern Uganda, but I rise to oppose the motion. 

We have just been passing budgets and there are line ministries charged with the responsibility of providing for welfare and needs of each and every person in this country. 

You will even appreciate that a few months back, this same House went out of its way and moved a similar motion, which was supported, and which extended support to the Police. At the end of it all, his Excellency the President rebuked the Inspector General of Police as to who told him to go out of the normal government machinery, to go and fundraise for running a government department.  

We have got information to the fact that this very week Uganda government has already raised US$1.1 million for the purpose of assisting the situation in the north. My concern is, why is Parliament waking up now when we in northern Uganda have been suffering for the last 16 years? Why did we not do this before? Why did we not do this when the suffering was not as high and as much as now? I think this is window-dressing.  We need to be a little more serious than what we are doing here. If we are to raise money, according to the figures we will only raise Shs30 million. What is Shs30 million to the population of the north, to the suffering of the people! (Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Thank you so much, hon. Wadri, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from you is that, when a rich person loses a child or someone, do the poor people not contribute mabugo? 

MR WADRI: The issue that you are raising, with due respect, is irrelevant. You only derailed me in the way I was advancing with my points. Even if a rich person loses a child and the poor, in African solidarity, come to give mabugo, as I have asked, one thing which we need to take is, we have suffered for the last 16 years, why are we being asked to raise Shs30 million now? What will Shs30 million do vis-à-vis the magnitude of the population? (Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I would like to inform my honourable colleague that whereas the fundraising he was referring to was initiated by the Inspector General of Police, this noble cause which was cutting across YPA and UWOPA was brought on board, PAFU was brought on board, the Movement caucus was brought on board.  For your own information, Sir, this –(Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA: I am the General Secretary of the Movement caucus and I have never been informed about this.

MR BANYENZAKI: My honourable colleague, it was the chairman of the Movement caucus who was to be consulted by the Deputy Speaker. And we were actually grateful to the Office of the Speaker, which came in. A letter from the Office of the Deputy Speaker was distributed to all Members of Parliament in their pigeonholes.

MR KINOBE: Mr Speaker, the point I wanted to clarify is; the member said that it has been agreed to in the Movement caucus, I want to correct that. We have not discussed that subject at all in the Movement caucus, but the chairperson was consulted and they told me that they would call me later on so that we harmonise. I am only surprised that before we meet to harmonise, the motion is in the House. So, that is the position of the caucus.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have just heard this matter. That is why I normally hesitate to comment until I have listened to the people who are speaking. I would suggest, especially in future, that we hold careful consultations. 

This is very essential, because I have been to Gulu myself and his Excellency has a number of proposals. One of them, which I will now declare, is that we should have a special school for former abductees who have been traumatised. It is going to cost a lot of money because it is for at least 3000 people from the north. 

I am handling this matter through a technical committee because whenever the Head of State makes a proposal, he says the Premier should go and consult. I am consulting, and the technical committee, in fact, is due to meet tomorrow because we have to find land and so on and so forth.  

So, it is important in future - because I was not even consulted - that we consult each other. Be that as it may, I think Shs100,000 is not a lot of money. It is a good gesture, I would support it but let us say that it should not set a precedent and that in future we hold consultations on matters involving expenditure, because it requires careful consideration. 

Of course, as you know, I am in charge of disaster and we are also handling a number of issues with our development partners. But let us accept this motion without setting another precedent. I thank you.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I was still on the Floor. I am surprised that the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister has talked as if he had a substantive position to talk from. I thought he was going to give me information, but to my surprise he has gone on to make a substantive contribution and make his personal position known on the motion.  Nevertheless, I still would like to advance the point that I wanted to share with the Members of Parliament. 

I think in principle it is wrong for Parliament and any ordinary Ugandan to usurp the responsibilities and role of government. It is completely wrong! What we can only come up to do is –(Interjections) - organize a fundraising? We shall come to that! We will receive you in the North if you will have the courage to accompany us, because there are many of you who are talking here, reading only papers. We are on the ground and we know what it is. We are on the ground. So, to bluff us with Shs30 million and you think it is going to help our suffering, is an amusement to all of us. I think there is more that government should be seen to do. I am happy the Prime Minister has once again informed us that the government has in plan a programme for traumatised children, to give them psychosocial treatment. It should be that sort of process that we should follow but not these ad hoc measures, which will end up even not reaching the beneficiaries.  

So, once again, I stand here to oppose this motion because there are line ministries, which are charged with this responsibility. We have Disaster Preparedness, Ministry of Gender and Social Development, Health, Education; all these ministries are there and we have just passed money. What are they going to use the money for? Thank you.

MS BEATRICE KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I have an amendment to move to hon. Rwamirama’s motion, which amendment might take care of hon. Wadri’s concerns. It is true that the government has got a responsibility, and it is true that as individuals, if we want to extend a humanitarian hand to our suffering colleagues or fellow citizens, I do not think that stops the government from going ahead with its programmes.  

I have an amendment, but before I move this amendment, there is more than meets the eye as hon. Kassiano says. There is the health problem, which hon. Byamukama has talked about. We have seen a letter from the Deputy Speaker saying that in Gulu, Kitgum and Pader alone, there are over 500,000 internally displaced persons. Furthermore, there are over 280,000 mobile displaced people who sleep in bushes, corridors of hospitals or verandas in town. She goes on to say, “but most important, there is need to reach out to our displaced brothers and sisters.”  

So, I would like hon. Kassiano to look at this as a brotherly or sisterly outreach. It is a gesture from us as individual Members of Parliament that for us to collect clothes, blankets and mattresses, it is not enough. Even for us to collect this Shs100,000; it is a token; even that one is not enough - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you tell us the amendment then we see the way forward.

MS KIRASO: Well, I am adding number three in the motion to say that: “We urge the Government of the Republic of Uganda to declare the districts of Pader, Kitgum, Gulu, and the counties of Oyam and Kole in Apac district, and Otuke in Moroto and Erute in Lira district disaster areas, calling for special government and donor interventions.”  I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, there is an amendment, which has been supported. Can you speak to your amendment.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues who have already shown support for this amendment. 

We are aware that the budget is almost as good as passed. There was no mention of a special fund anywhere to take care of what the Prime Minister has talked about. This means that government’s commitment will call for budget cuts from different votes. It will call for intervention of other funds, which had otherwise not been provided for in the budget.  

The donors have moved from project funding to budget support. The donor community will support the Republic of Uganda by giving us a lump sum of money to put in the budget. But after we have declared these places disaster areas, then international organisations, local NGOs, and the government itself will give these places special attention.  

I know that all of us have lost people, but when you lose people en masse! I want to identify myself with the people of northern Uganda because of what I saw in Kichwamba Technical College. I wept, but we are talking about less than 100,000 people. I found them burning like muchomo! It is very sad. Even the likening, I do not want to think about it, I do not want to think of the trauma that these people are going through.  

Definitely, we need more serious government intervention. Talking is one thing but real intervention is another. I urge my colleagues to support this amendment to the motion, and I support the motion moved by hon. Rwamirama Bright and seconded by hon. Byamukama Dora. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the amendment is good, but why don’t we concentrate on hon. Bright’s amendment? The problem I now foresee in this one is somebody will say after all, that amendment has contravened Article 93 of the Constitution. 

The motion of Maj. Rwamirama Bright was for us to mobilise amongst ourselves with our resources to go and help our brothers and sisters in the North. But when you bring in this amendment by hon. Kiraso, it has certain implications under Article 93 and, therefore, they will say you cannot bring that amendment. Article 93 of the Constitution says: 

“Parliament shall not, unless the bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the government – 
(a) proceed upon a bill, including an amendment bill, that makes provision for any of the following-

(i) the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction; or 

(ii) the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund…”  

So, when somebody reads this particular motion, he will say you are moving a motion that will cause a charge on the Consolidated Fund. I would prefer that we concentrate on this one ourselves; we agree to raise funds from among ourselves, so that somebody running to this particular Article does not derail us. This is my fear. 

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that I did not have enough copies to give all my colleagues. I am saying that we urge the Government of the Republic of Uganda to declare the districts of Pader, Kitgum, Gulu and the counties of Oyam and Kole in Apac District and Otuke Moroto and Erute in Lira District, disaster areas calling for special government and donor intervention. I have not prescribed any amount of money that should be sunk in there. If the Government does not see it fit - really, because our motion is to urge the Government. Then, if they think the situation is not warranting that kind of attention, let the government -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister – it was supposed to be hon. Katuntu, but give your contribution and then hon. Katuntu will come in later.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(MR Rukutana Mwesigwa): Mr Speaker, I sympathise with hon. Kiraso’s proposed amendment because that amendment would pre-suppose that the government has not taken interest or indeed any interventions or measures in the situation in the North. What I know is that throughout this period, quite a lot has been done in the North. I have personally signed supplementaries - about four or five times - for monies going to the North. Not only for Defence, but also for welfare, for the displaced persons, for food, for aid; everything.  

Everybody is aware that the President has taken off time to go and camp in the North. Indeed, we are very much alert on the situation in the North. We have not yet, as government, felt that it deserves to be declared an area stricken by disaster. We think everything is under control, and I am telling you, whether we pass this motion or not, government will not be diverted from the interventions it is already giving.  As I said, I want to repeat that quite a lot, even outside what was budgeted for the North, has already gone to the North to alleviate the situation there.
 
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hearing the response from the Minister of Finance, it is now of utmost urgency that we adopt hon. Kiraso’s amendment. The minister is telling us that the situation is not out of control. So, it is not a priority now. All information reaching us says the situation is really out of control. A situation that requires a whole Head of State to camp there to guide the soldiers to address the plight of the people, and the minister is telling us it is under control?

Mr Speaker, I stand here to support hon. Kiraso’s amendment. But you raised another issue, Mr Speaker, of the Constitution. It is unfortunate the Attorney General is not here, but we can benefit from those who have read the same thing the Attorney General did. The essence of hon. Kiraso’s amendment is not to create a charge but to urge government to treat this area as a priority: treating it as a priority is not creating a charge. It is urging government to treat (_Mr Wandera rose_) I will leave the floor for hon. Wandera.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Hon. Katuntu has already informed us that the President is camping in the North and I do not think the President would be there if he did not consider that problem as a priority area -(Applause).

MR KATUNTU: I do not know whether that was information or a clarification. If that is so, how then does the minister come and say the situation is not out of control? You see, there is the issue you know of government taking the necessary step, but we are saying it should go further than that, whether the President is there or not. If it is not a deliberate government policy to take this area as a priority, then we will be wasting time when people are dying.  

If we are talking of disasters, for instance, like a bus crashing and 20 people dying and we call that a disaster and then the minister writes about 20 or 30 people have died in an inferno, and yet people are dying daily - just read the papers, Mr Speaker! Everyday for the last two and a half months, it is Kony killing this; it is one child dying breast-feeding on a dead mother; is that not a disaster?  It is a disaster, Mr Speaker, let us be serious.

DR BULAMU: Mr Speaker, I am a specialist in disaster preparedness and response. I have not gone to the north because I am a Member of Parliament here, but this government has a Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. Much as we may want to advise government, our biggest information is from newspapers. As a Parliament, what limits us from getting specific briefs from the Ministers of Disaster?  Internationally, by logic, if you declare part of the country a disaster area, it means you are self-confessing that you can no longer handle, fine. And if we are saying the Government can no longer handle, then it is not that when Parliament orders it to handle, it will handle the situation better.  

I think let us seek more clarification from the government through the minister concerned and urge or advise government on other priority approaches rather than passing resolutions here when we have not even given the government a chance to brief us. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KATUNTU: Thanks very much, hon. Dr Bulamu for the information. I have known Dr Bulamu for so long as a medical doctor, of course, and from what he has said, there is nothing really to prove to me that he is a disaster expert. I am even yet to see this school where Dr Bulamu went for disaster preparedness. 

But that notwithstanding, the issue of the counties designated by hon. Kiraso being a disaster area should not even be debatable, in my opinion. It is really a disaster and none of us here has come up, except the minister. In fact it is even worse for hon. Dr Bulamu. He says he has not even been to the north, he does not know what is going on there, yet he is saying there is no disaster and he is an expert.  You see!  So, if we had to debate from an informed position; if we had to be serious and be alive to the plight of our own people, we must adopt hon. Kiraso’s amendment.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that we adopt hon. Rwamirama’s motion as amended by hon. Beatrice Kiraso. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SULAIMAN MADADA (BBALE COUNTY, KAYUNGA): Mr Speaker, having listened to the members discussing this particular motion, and whereas I am in support of those who support the people in northern Uganda, more particularly that some of us do not have copies of this motion; and given the circumstances of the so many amendments that are coming in, I would like to propose that this motion be deferred to a later day. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it a motion?

MR MADADA: I beg that the motion is deferred to a later date and we scrutinise it further. 

CAPT. MATOVU: Mr Speaker, I am worried the spirit in which this resolution was made is being over-stretched and we are getting derailed. The matter is really becoming political.  You have heard the outburst from my colleague there.  So, Mr Speaker, I am requesting this House that we restrict ourselves to the spirit in which this resolution was brought for humanitarian grounds and only that, the rest, another day. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: For me, that is what I really thought. You should not derail hon. Bright’s motion; we should have concentrated on that.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to entreat Parliament not to underestimate the actions and concern of the government. The amendment of hon. Kiraso amounts to underestimating what the state is doing.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has already contributed to the motion. He is now contributing the second time.

THE SPEAKER: He did not contribute to the amended motion, and in any case when he stood, I think he stood when hon. member for Terego was contributing and I thought he was giving information. The information was not for the motion as amended. Since it is now amended, then he can now contribute.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, because I have not understood your ruling, I am seeking a clarification. If there is a motion on the floor and an amendment is moved is it the same motion or it is a different motion? And what do our rules say?

THE SPEAKER: They say if an amendment comes, it changes the text of the motion. Therefore, somebody can contribute on the amendment. Please, proceed.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issues we are dealing with are so grave that we should handle them with care. These are very, very grave matters, and it is proper that we should even get a notice. But the way I see ourselves moving, we are underestimating what is going on and what the Head of State is doing. This is not the first time he has camped; he has camped, for example, in Karamoja!  

We should also avoid creating panic, because if you create panic, our adversaries will get strength. We must avoid creating panic! I want to assure you that the situation is under control. In fact, the President is summoning a number of people and there are certain security matters we cannot discuss with you here, but we can discuss them with relevant committees of Parliament. So, we are not in a position to declare a disaster because you have not heard what we are about to do; we shall be playing in the hands of our adversaries. I want to entreat Parliament to confine itself to the initial motion of making a contribution –(Interruptions)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am citing rule 16(2). Is it procedurally right for us to continue debating on this matter when there is no quorum in the House, Mr Speaker?

MR BEN WACHA: Mr Speaker, Rule 16(1) says, “The quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote” and 16(2) says, “The quorum prescribed under Sub-rule (1) of this rule shall only be required at a time when Parliament is voting on any question.”

THE SPEAKER: Now, the question has been raised. We are not voting but let us ascertain whether we have the quorum, then we can proceed.  

(Members are counted.)

THE SPEAKER: I am advised that the number is 75. The only thing we can do is maybe to debate. We shall not pronounce ourselves on the issue.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I had not wanted to speak on this motion because of the interest I have in the matter, but I think I should put on record one or two things arising from the debate.  

Mr Speaker, if I was sick and I had a terrible calamity befalling me, and somebody came to me with five shillings, I would accept the five shillings not because I consider it inadequate but because of the heart with which that person has given it to me -(Applause). To me, that is the principle behind the first two paragraphs of this motion.  

It is impossible for anybody to think that a Parliament of 300 people could raise enough money to satisfy the needs of the displaced population numbering to 600,000. It is unbelievably and unthinkable. If Parliament was to give a small gesture, even if it was Shs10,000 or Shs5 from each Member of Parliament, I would not care about the amount. But for Parliament to come out and say, “yes, we recognise their needs, with our meagre resources we are going to contribute” that would be a first class thing and I would be proud to be associated with a community of honourable members of that nature! That is number one.

Hon. Kiraso is seeking for special intervention by government and the donor community. I do not think she is negating the effort that has been made by the government so far. Mr Speaker, I would shudder to think that a population which is living in the camps; a population which is staying in the bushes; a population which is running every now and then, their state to be stated to be under control! I really shudder to have such adjectives labelled on the people who are suffering in the north.  

We know there is government intervention, we know for example that last week or early this week, Shs400 million was released for buying food for people in the north, but we also know that most of these monies has gone for administrative purposes, and only Shs100 million will remain for purchase of food! 

We are grateful. I mean it is our government; we pay taxes, no problem. But what is wrong if we members of Parliament say, maybe you should rethink, maybe you should put things under a microscope, redirect your mind and call the donor community to direct their mind to that place? What is wrong with that? After all, a resolution of Parliament may be ignored, but at least Parliament would have expressed it. That is our role as members of Parliament. What is our role as Members of Parliament?  One of our roles is to direct and redirect the attention of government on matters that we feel are important, and I feel this is important enough – (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: I thank the honourable member for giving way.  Nobody is saying that there is no suffering in the north.  But aware that whatever suffering is in the north is caused by the war situation, is the mere declaration of a disaster stricken area going to end the war? Are we suggesting that the government has not done enough to end the war? I am seeking clarification. What declaration in actual sense is going to end the plight of the people of the north, if the war continues?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I heard from the mover of the motion, on his original motion he had said that he had wide consultation and there was a consensus about this motion coming up. I think that if that consensus was there, why didn’t we take that consensus and agree with this Shs100,000? But now when you bring in other dimensions - because another one will say, “was that part of the consensus”?  That is my fear. A good motion was brought to help our brothers and sisters by mobilising something for them, should it be derailed by another amendment?  

I did not think there would be any debate after hon. Byamukama had made her presentation. I had thought that the matter had been accepted. The only dimension, which came in, was when hon. Sebalu was changing the figure. One would say, “how could you implement it, if it is a resolution of the House?  How will you implement it, if everybody is left to decide what he wants? That is why I think we should have proceeded with the original motion. Otherwise, as I see now, people are trying to change their minds about this original motion. So, I really do not know. But continue and wind up hon. Ben Wacha.

MR WACHA: Thank you, I do not think I will clarify a situation, which is already clear. To me that is what hon. Kiraso is asking: redirecting the mind of government.  

Now there is another aspect of the motion, which nobody has touched on, that is the peace efforts that have been undertaken by government and the LRA. I want to make one statement on this one.  For some of us, if the guns were to fall silent even for only one month, we would stand up and bow before President Museveni. That is how bad the situation is. I feel saddened and sick when I see certain addresses coming from big people in our press. I really feel sad. I really hope they rethink and retrace their footsteps. As Dora Byamukama says, today it is me, tomorrow could be somebody else - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members I think –(Interruption)

MR KINOBE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural point. We now have three motions on the floor. There is the original motion and there was hon. Kiraso’s motion and then the motion moved by hon. Madada. What I wanted to suggest is that procedurally, Mr Speaker, as you can now observe we have failed to harmonise our perceptions on all the motions.  

You have guided this House wisely that even if we debate now, we cannot even vote on the matters that arise out of our debate. Would it not be procedurally correct that we adjourn until tomorrow, sleep over this, harmonise our perceptions, we come back with a harmonised position that would be passed without controversy?

THE SPEAKER: I think we can do that. What I suggest is this. Let us get a team of about five people to go and look at this motion as amended, and give us a harmonised position tomorrow. 

I think it will be better that way so that we have consensus. This is a matter over which I thought you would say yes immediately, but now so many things have come in. So my suggestion – (Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: The objective of the motion was humanitarian. Since we all agree that we should assist our brothers and sisters in the North with whatever little we have, those who want to bring other complicated matters should desist from doing so now. Why do they not bring them up another day, after this issue is concluded?  

THE SPEAKER: What do you think about having a team of six working on this so that tomorrow – (Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, we should not get derailed. There is the original motion moved by hon. Maj. Rwamirama. That motion was successfully amended by the hon. Beatrice Kiraso. What I know is that the motion currently on the Floor is the one moved by hon. Rwamirama, as amended by hon. Beatrice Kiraso.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think that you need to look at it tomorrow? In view of what you have heard various members say, don’t you need to think about it? Because if I put it to the vote in its entirety, will we not lose good contributions from some members? Actually, we had the consensus of the members but we might lose it. That is my fear. Even the original motion, which had 95 percent support from members, might be lost. You are starting to lose support! And those people need our support however small it may be. As I said, I did not expect much debate over this. It was clear to me. Hon. Byamukama had clear intentions and I thought it was okay, but then other factors came in.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, you have ruled and I think your ruling is wise. It would be prudent for us to sit down with other members so that we reach a consensus on this issue. As you rightly said, the spirit of the motion was purely humanitarian, beseeching Members of Parliament to come forward - as they have done before - to assist those brothers and sisters of ours.

Perhaps it would have been better for us to sit and harmonise our position before these amendments were brought on the Floor. Therefore, I suppose that we should go ahead and name a small committee to co-ordinate this. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I now advise that the Mover and Seconder get some members, as they see fit, and sit together to see how to harmonise this. You will report back tomorrow. 

With that we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00a.m.

(The House rose at 6.43p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 30 August 2002 at 10.00 a.m.)

