Wednesday, 24 August 2005

Parliament met at 10.33 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are welcome. As I informed you yesterday, today we expect to receive at Parliament His Excellency the President of the Republic of Tanzania, Benjamin Mkapa, who will address us. Therefore, members are expected to take their seats between 1.00 p.m. and 1.30 p.m. in the Conference Hall downstairs. Good arrangements have been made for you. You will feel comfortable there than here perhaps. He will arrive at 2.00 p.m. and then go to the Conference Hall at 2.30 p.m. The proceedings should end at around 4.00 p.m. Therefore, my appeal to you is that you should be on time to take your seats so that when our visitors come we are ready for them.

As we heard yesterday from hon. Aggrey Awori, protocol does not allow you to come late when His Excellency the President has come, especially when he is coming with the visiting President. So, let us adhere to the known protocol and behaviour and be on time.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure pertaining to the Order Paper. We saved some work last time pending completion of the constitution amendments. What is worrying me is that some of the work, which was pending, pertains to the execution of certain aspects of the Government policies.  

I am referring to the issue of face technology. The august House instructed the Committee on Finance to come up with a report on whether this particular company should be given the tender to print driving licenses. I note with concern that before even the committee has made a report to the august House, which is a legislative organ of the State, the Executive branch has proceeded to award the tender to this company. That means our work in Parliament has been made redundant and not only that, it really shows that the Executive branch has no respect for Parliament.  

Parliament has got a reason to set up a committee to look into any matter they feel is not properly being handled. When the Government continues or proceeds to take decisions while Parliament has yet to make its mind and to pronounce itself on the matter, I think it is irregular and bordering on contempt of the august House. So, I would like to know from the Government whether they are really taking into consideration the concerns expressed and on what basis they have awarded this particular contract for the face technology to start printing road licenses for the country.  

Over and above that, we also had another matter being investigated by a committee of Parliament. That concerns the former Nile Conference Centre and the company that was suing the Government for breach of contract. We have yet to express ourselves on the matter to reach a decision and yet the Judiciary and the Executive branch, especially Ministry of Finance, are already negotiating settlements of this particular contract over which we feel government has got a stronger case.  Really they can win this particular case and we do not have to pay this Shs 0.3 billion to this particular company. So, I am expressing concern that the Executive branch should not make certain decisions while the matter is still before the august House. Can government tell us why they are doing that?

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The point is taken and members of the front bench have noted it. Do you have any response?

10.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Ms Hope Mwesigye): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I take note of the issues raised by hon. Aggrey Awori and relevant ministers will brief Parliament at an appropriate time. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(I)	The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the Fiscal Year 2004/2005. 

(II)	The Budgetary Proposals for the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the fiscal year 2005/2006.

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the debate should continue. The only technical problem is that the owner of the motion apparently is not here. Can we be advised?

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The owner of the motion is still dealing with a very urgent national issue and has requested me to step in for him. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the debate should continue.

10.40
MR MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the committee for this wonderful report. The report at least reflects the fact that agriculture or the agricultural sector is now getting better attention as it should, making the saying that agriculture is the backbone of the economy a true reality.  

However, in paragraph 7 the report says that Shs 0.2 billion has been allocated to institutions of development and training. I wish to express caution about this idea of training. Over time there has been training, training, training. I think really the country is saturated with this training. I wish to say that careful balance ought to be struck between training and actual agricultural production. In other words, I really agree with the committee that we do not spend this scarce resource on training at the expense of the actual practical production.

Paragraph 8 of the report talks about irrigation and water harvesting. This is another reflection that at least agriculture is now getting better focus from the Government. Government efforts, I hope, will be strengthened in this aspect so that with time every inch of Uganda has access to irrigation. As for now starting with arid but fertile areas of Uganda such as the cattle corridor and a few areas I think is the right thing to do.  

We also need to look at more practical ways of water harvesting. This aspect of water harvesting would be given more attention by government. For instance, part of the money that is spent in sinking boreholes and other water points in the rural areas could also be used to provide individual households, particularly in those arid areas of this country, with water harvesting materials like tanks and cheap solar pumps and even cement ponds so that this problem of water is better handled than it is now. I pray that the NAADS programme be extended now to all the districts and sub-counties of Uganda.  

The report recommends that government should avoid the use of DDT as a malaria control measure because they fear that this will affect our export ambitions. Given the fact that malaria is a very serious health hazard in this country and the fact that the use of DDT will actually be subjected to very tight control. I wish to urge government to ignore this recommendation because we need a healthy population to produce and also to export and to benefit from these export ambitions. Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR BADDA: Thank you, my brother, for giving way.  I would like to inform my honourable colleague that there are a number of alternative methods that can be used in controlling malaria other than focusing on DDT alone. About DDT, you may be informed that about some six years ago Ugandan agricultural exports were affected just because of the traces of DDT that were found in the horticultural crops that were exported to European markets. 

And to make it worse, given the example of Kalangala, if you used DDT in Kalangala to spray, although you spray in houses these are not properly built houses such that when you spray inside the house part of the DDT will go out of the house.  These houses are on the shorelines. That means when it rains part of this DDT will be drained into the lake and what will happen next is that the fish and the aquatic life in the lake will be affected by DDT and our exports will greatly be affected as well. That will give a very big negative impact to our exports and therefore to the economy of the country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You stood to say that there are other better ways of dealing with malaria, but which are these better ways?

DR MATOVU BYATIKE: Mr Speaker, in fact there is a report in the papers today done by Makerere staff and the Medical School recommending that DDT can be used but as you correctly said, there are better ways of doing it, but are they as effective as DDT?  That is the question. That is why the Government decided on DDT.

MR MUKASA MURULI: Thank you very much for that information. Mr Speaker, paragraph 38 –(Interruption)

DR ESELE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I wanted to give is that in South Africa, especially the Limpopo Province, they are producing a lot of fruits – mangoes, oranges, guavas – and they are exporting all these to Europe. However, they are at the same time using DDT for the control of malaria, but Europe is not complaining.

THE SPEAKER: Actually I attended a talk by Prof. Joseph Mukiibi, formerly of NARO. The title was, The rise and fall of DDT and he said there was no harm. However, I wish you would get his paper and then you see why people started de-campaigning DDT. I am not campaigning for DDT but I am only saying that I think I will ask Prof. Mukiibi to give us his very good paper on the rise and fall of DDT. You will see why people are de-campaigning DDT rightly or wrongly.

MR MUKASA MURULI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It will be so much the better when we receive that paper. 

Paragraph 38 recommends that an airfield be built in Kampala to ease the travel of tourists who come to this country. This is a very worthwhile recommendation but I wish to maybe request that if this is going to be put into practice, we should look at other horizons. Instead of establishing a new airfield in Kampala, which is already congested with so many other things, by all means we could look at other horizons. We could look at areas, which are still free, like Nakasongola, Kisanja and Masindi where tourists could come in. After all some of these tourist attractions are near there. We have Murchison Falls; we have all these others –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague, for yielding the Floor. I would like to confirm your wish that indeed Nakasongola has the third longest runway in the country: it is in Gulu, Entebbe and Nakasongola.

MR MUKASA MURULI: Wonderful! The infrastructure is already there. Instead of creating a new airfield here we could have that one there and then it would ease the travel of the tourists –(Interjections)- it is in the middle of the country and very near the tourist attractions. You never know Nakasongola could actually be the future capital of this country, why not? We can have the airfield there before the capital city.

Paragraph 50 of the committee report recommends that government should provide science equipment in addition to other teaching materials to all government and private schools. Government should take this recommendation seriously. Of course the benefits are immense because really we know that private and government schools are in a partnership to provide quality education to our children. Therefore, if there is this boost given to them definitely the quality education that we need would be there.  

Private schools have from time to time complained of the heavy taxes, which they have to pay and this bears very seriously on the kind of quality teaching that they are likely to give to the students. We need to focus again and look at the private schools. They are not so much commercial enterprises but semi-commercial and yet they are providing a very vital service to this country. 

Indeed many of the private schools today, as you know, are serving not only Uganda but also other areas of the region, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi. Therefore, we should assist them to strengthen this partnership by waiving some of these heavy taxes so that they continue to provide the quality education, which we need. If they collapse given the fact that we have UPE and that we are not building as many government schools at the rate we are producing the UPE products, then if those private schools collapsed there would be dire consequences for the education system in this country. 

I quite agree with the quota system. This is very good but I would like to say that in its application relaxation should be included so that it is not specifically children from secondary schools in that particular district who benefit from the quota system. I would like to say that why not also say children from a particular district regardless of whether they have actually qualified from that particular mother district or from another district elsewhere?

 We know there are some districts, which do not have very good A’ Level schools and they are likely not to produce very many children to qualify for the given quota. But some of the children from these particular districts may have qualified from schools especially around Kampala and Wakiso. These may not benefit from the quota system. However, if there is this relaxation then this quota system could serve the purpose more effectively for what it was intended for. I hope that progressively the quota system could be expanded in future so that more and more children from the rural schools benefit from this arrangement.  

Also, grant-aiding various secondary schools which have been built by the community should be taken seriously. Various communities have built secondary schools here and there but some of them have collapsed because they cannot afford to pay the teachers given the level of poverty in rural areas. I think that instead of government building SEED secondary schools to harvest the products of the UPE they should take on some of these community schools, which have been built, grant them aid, may be the cost is relatively low in that respect than building new secondary schools. We would, of course, go ahead with providing quality services to our children.  

On the health sector the report is very good. I would like to say that many districts do not have district hospitals but it may be costly to have district hospitals built. Why not upgrade some of the health centre IVs to a certain level in given constituencies? Why not even add more health centre IVs in a particular constituency?  

Finally, I would like to express thanks to government for providing facilitation to traditional leaders in accordance with Article 246 of the Constitution. This is wonderful. Indeed, government has done well and my traditional leader, the Ssabaruuli, asked me specifically to say he is happy with this facilitation. It may be small but it is okay.  

Well the time is not enough but I have one or two more points and with your indulgence I would mention them in passing. There are certain outstanding pledges to Nakasongola, which were made by government. For example providing electricity to Lwampanga landing site and building that landing site to an international level. This has not been fulfilled. 

Government pledged to provide electricity to Nakitoma, an upcoming trading centre. That has not been provided for. I hope these pledges will be remembered and they will be fulfilled.  

The land fund has not been efficacious. Let it also this time cut across board to avoid all these rampant evictions, which people are suffering from. Landlords are selling off their land and new landlords are so callous and inhuman but if the land fund were efficacious then may be all these tragedies would be avoided.  

I would also like to say that it might become necessary for government to provide legal services to these peasants so that they can withstand these callous landlords who are throwing them out in complete impunity of the law.  

Finally, Nakasongola, Lira and Apac at one time were linked by a ferry service. Why don’t we restore this ferry service? Minister of Works, please look into this. It would boost our tourism and trade. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

11.00
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would like to thank the Budget Committee for the good report well handled.  

On page 15, regarding Education Service Commission, the committee really agrees with everybody that there is a lot of under funding of the Education Service Commission. I am on that Committee on Social Services but for the last four years the Education Service Commission has been under funded. This is a serious matter that the Ministry of Finance should make it a priority. We have been urging the Education Service and the Ministry of Public Service to lift the ban on the recruitment of teachers but there has been a complaint that even if money is identified for recruiting teachers, the Ministry of Finance has been under funding the Education Service Commission. So, I would like to urge the Finance Ministry to ensure that this is something that could operationalise the lifting of the ban on teacher recruitment.

However, I am disappointed to note that after having got some little funds for the Education Service Commission, there is a lot of inconsistency within the Education Service Commission. A case in point is that recently they held interviews for the head teachers and to my disappointment and the disappointment of all Ugandans they instead went ahead and withdrew their appointment letters. So my question is, is the Education Service Commission going to re-do the interviews and are they going to make another requisition for that exercise after messing up? The Ministry of Education should take it upon itself to ensure that the Education Service Commission really tells us why they withdrew the letters. This shows a lot of inconsistency and some kind of unseriousness and laxity.

On page 16 the committee says that some other districts, which do not have hospitals, which are government-funded, should be looked at. This is a serious matter. In Districts like Mayuge the only facility we depend on as a district hospital is almost near Iganga and it is an NGO; it is not within the centre. When you look at the distance from where that hospital is right from the beginning of the district at the lake, you have to travel about 80 kilometres. So, it is my argument and my request that let us have government putting up district hospitals in these new districts at the centres of these places in order to ease travel burdens.

Mulago Hospital has been lamenting for the last five years or so that there is a lot of under funding. We have been interacting with this department or institution. I am reliably informed that the operational costs, the budget that was made in 1993 in as far as the daily administration of Mulago is concerned, is the same budget that Mulago Hospital runs up to now. When it comes to the things like the scans and all that, this is a serious matter. I would like to urge government and Parliament to ensure that we put more emphasis on Mulago. It has a problem that even from health centres around it like Kiswa and other places, people tend to run to Mulago. There is a lot of inflow of patients knowing that when you go to Mulago you are assured of recovery.  

My argument is that the Ministry of Finance should ensure that at least they step up the operational costs of Mulago because you cannot depend on a budget of 1993 where the dollar cost I think less than Shs 1,000 by then and this is the same amount that the Director of Mulago Hospital uses.

On page 17, I would also like to appreciate the Ministry of Gender for the efforts it has made to ensure that it operationalises Article 246 of the Constitution. We have been complaining that our traditional leaders have been living on handouts and donations from several people from our society. So, the recent Shs 5 million given to each traditional leader is a sign that we are operationalising this Article. I would like to condemn the members of the society within Uganda who are really condemning this, that government is trying to bribe traditional leaders to support them. I think this is lack of seriousness and whoever is against this one is abrogating the Constitution.  

I am sure these days everybody is a political analyst in this country. We have found ourselves being insulted, because if Parliament has been urging government to operationalise this Article and when government begins doing so the public goes ahead to say that government is bribing traditional leaders. For those ones who are constitutionally ignorant, I would like to condemn that act and this is something that we must do to avoid our leaders living on handouts.

The other issue is about water. In as far as this ministry is concerned I would like to mention that several districts lack water. A case in point is Mayuge District. Our water coverage is 23 percent vis-à-vis the national one of around 60 percent. In this budget the Ministry of Finance put a fund for some districts that lack water. I would like to urge the Ministry of Finance that this time they should not change goal posts. If this money that was already within the Budget is put in place, let us have these districts being saved from all this embarrassment. You cannot imagine 23 percent vis-à-vis the 60 percent. I think this is a serious matter that the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Water should put in place what was mentioned in this year’s budget.

I have one or two more points about power. In the Ministry of Energy there is some fund, over Shs 20 billion was put in order to promote rural electrification. I would like to urge the Ministry of Energy that they have a habit of putting something in the budget and then at the end of it all they say the resource envelop is smaller. So, let me hope the Shs 20 billion that was put for the rural electrification is used because in 2001 there is some loan that we passed to electrify 30 landing sites in this country but none of them has been electrified up to now. Let me hope the Ministry of Energy and Ministry of Finance will do the needful.

Lastly, about micro-finance, we have talked about micro-finance for the last five years. About Shs 270 billion, wherever this money is lying, heaven knows. So, it is either now or never that this fund is operationalised because the public has waited for this money so much and I am told that this fund is lying within the Ministry of Finance. So, what is the problem? 

I would like to appeal to honourable members that we must put pressure on the Ministry of Finance to release this money and the general public gets this money for development, because it is just like a song. We have sung this for the last five years, so I request that Ministry of Finance should some up with either a Bill or a report and tell us where this fund is. His Excellency one time had a radio programme and he assured Ugandans this money is in place but up to now there is nothing that has been seen. So, can I appeal to Ministry of Finance to tell us where this money is? 

In conclusion, I would like to urge this House that this is the last Budget of the Seventh Parliament. We must move expeditiously to ensure that whatever was said in the Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance should be put in place expeditiously. I thank you very much.

11.10
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take the opportunity to support the report from the Budget Committee and also to support the national budget read to the nation.  

Let me address myself to page 17 under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I appreciate that the committee recommended that national women councils, national youth councils and national council for disability are under funded, but probably they forgot that labour department is the worst of all. I want to remind this House that one time the Ministry of Labour was a core ministry and an independent entity but in each and every budget of this country you find that the Ministry of Labour today is the most under funded. There is a court, which is a court of Justice of Equity (Industrial Court). That court is almost halted because it is not functioning at all. Its not funded, files have piled up because of lack of funds.  

I want to express my gratitude to His Excellency the President for having had regards to launch the exportation of labour for our unemployed people who are really many in this country. Much as it is bad to our economy because we still need these people and we train them to come in the economy and develop it with their skills acquired from wherever institutions that they come from, at least I am happy because I recall in the Budget Speech of 2002 I stood on this Floor and floated an idea that our children really struggle a lot to get visas and they go out stealthily but at the end of the day these children fetch a lot of foreign exchange to our economy and normally we read this in our Budget. I am happy that at least His Excellency heard this cry and has launched this exportation of labour. 

What we need to know is, how are these people going to go about it because many of them are very anxiously waiting? I have received several calls asking me how they can go about this. What are the arrangements of the Government? Is the department of employment still established in the department of labour because in the olden days when the Ministry of Labour was a ministry of its own we used to have such a department where people could go and then they were helped to look out for jobs wherever they were available in those good days of our good economy. So we need to know more about this.

I also want to talk about the taxation base of this country. Now and again I have been with my colleagues trying to cry out that the threshold for pay as you earn should be raised. It has really over stayed. According to the law it would have been raised to the next stage but then up to now it has never been effected. And much as the Committee on Finance moved a motion or a report to this Floor that the threshold should be put up from the current threshold, it has never been effected. We want to find out from the Ministry of Finance why is this not effected? 

Now that there is this halting of poll tax, unfortunately much as people jubilated over it but again gradually we find that the taxation is so inhuman and this is one of the reasons why the business community is now trying to cry out that the taxation is so abnormal and people are forced to strike. I do not know what the Government is going to do about this.  

Yesterday I happened to be on one of the radio talk shows and I received several calls from the business community crying out that we should help them to make sure that the Government revisits this issue of taxation because considering the level of poverty, which is about 38 percent of people living below the poverty line and putting that rate of 400 percent, it is not the businessman who is going to incur this but it is the consumer and who is the consumer? This is the person who is living below the poverty line because he needs to use the services, the essential commodities and the like.  So, I ask the Government to come back and readdress the idea of hiking the taxation. 

I appreciate that there is a need to widen the tax base but let us find another way, which is human other than making the poor suffer more. Because if you look at the way it is being done, there is going to be a tax imposed on houses even the person who is in the village is likely to pay a tax but from where? This is a very big problem that we need to address.  

I want to talk about the Ministry of Education. I call upon the Minister of Education to critically look at the administration of the public universities. Just recently we had an outcry of the public about the increase of tuition fees in Makerere University. Currently there is another one in Kyambogo University on appointment and legalization of workers who were found on the ground during the time of establishing Kyambogo as a university and after the merger of the three institutions. There is a problem and this is going to impact negatively on the education of this country from the public universities. 

I call upon the Ministry of Education to seriously look into the Kyambogo University issues because the academic staff are really demoralized and they are even proposing not to begin the academic semester because they have been belittled to the level of not even being capable of handling graduate students of degree level. So, there are a lot of things that the ministry should look at. Where need be I would call upon the Ministry of Education to appoint an independent body to look into the legalization of Kyambogo University administration, appointments and the like. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.15
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This report has been so well written and presented that we could even have gone ahead to pass the Budget without a general debate. But since we have an opportunity to do so for purposes of emphasis let me comment on one or two things very briefly.  

My major speech in this House was about water. My people do not have water to drink. It is a big paradox for me to sit in this air-conditioned Chamber when young girls in Madi-Okolo wake up at 5.00 a.m. to go and look for water instead of preparing to go to school. Women, instead of going to the gardens, also wake up at the same time to go and look for work.  

In a nutshell I am saying the coverage of water is too slow and there is not enough of it. I want to emphasize that we need to give more money to this sector. Elementary economics teaches us about opportunity cost, that which we forgo because we have chosen to do another set of things. Those who control the purse will say, “We do not have money to do a, b, c”, but if we prioritise well we will find that there is a lot of wealth. 

For purposes of emphasis, we have a multitude of presidential advisors and you cannot quantify their impact on the well being of this country. What kind of advise are they giving to His Excellency the President? Can we have an audit? His Excellency, the President of Tanzania is coming here today to say goodbye, did these presidential advisors also tell our President that some time next year he should have been on a similar tour? If they did not advice so, why are they still being retained? What value have they added to this country?

MR ERESU: I am a Member of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee and I have been a member of this committee since I came to Parliament. I, therefore, also handle matters concerning presidential advisers. I would like to inform my colleague that in assessing the performance and competence of a presidential adviser, it is judged along the lines of the stability that the country has, which Uganda has enjoyed, along the lines of economic programmes that have been put in place and generally along the lines of performance of the various sectors of the economy, which are directly under the office of the President of Uganda. Therefore, whether Madi-Okolo has water or not, the mere fact that it exists as an entity in Uganda and is within the planned framework of this country implies that the performance of the presidential advisors in that regard has sustained Madi-Okolo to exist and, therefore, they have performed.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, my colleague is entitled to his views but I am here to say that my people have no water to drink. I would have been happy if the emoluments going to these presidential advisors first provided water and then we can have them but as of now, the priorities are upside down. 

Rural electrification has been a song going on for a long time with nothing happening on the ground. Even the pilot project, which has been started in West Nile, is not of much assistance. It is very erratic, it is very expensive –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: I am sorry my honourable colleague, before you move from rural electrification, I want to draw your attention and the attention of other colleagues to the report on pages 41, 42 and 43 where the committee has recommended reallocations most of which has been agreed upon now by the Government. In particular, look at the first table where we are proposing a reallocation of Shs 5.532 billion from the Government of Uganda development budget ceiling to go to various areas and we are putting aside Shs 1 billion for water for production.

I am saying this because it gives you an opportunity now to lobby government to utilise some of this Shs 1 billion for Madi-Okolo. So, I mean all is not lost; there is something there. Let us continue lobbying. I thank you.

MR ARUMADRI: I am grateful to the chairperson for that information. Before I was interrupted I was talking about the cost, even the pilot project in West Nile is so expensive that many people have resorted to buying their own generators. For example, there is a standing fee of Shs 7,500 compounded by a VAT percentage of 17 percent, which comes to Shs 8,775. These monies have to be paid whether there is electricity or not and in the village this is not small money. To access this electricity we are using a one-pole service. A person in Madi-Okolo will have to sell nearly all his cattle to bring electricity to the homestead and this is before he has started paying the bills. So, government needs to put in a cushioning fund to enable people to initially access electricity.

Mr Speaker, I want to end on gross; the figures of gross have been flaunted here and there. If we may ask, gross for whom? When we do a Lorenz curve for the economy of Uganda to analyse income and wealth distribution, we are slowly but surely moving to a situation where 10 percent of the people will own 90 percent of the wealth of the country. That is why I am asking, gross for whom? Gross should be the basis of development, it must be structural, but if the wealth of the country is concentrated in a few hands then we are laying the basis of a social revolution.  

Income distribution –(Interjection)– Mr Speaker, I am being rudely interrupted but let me go on. Without appearing to be an advocate of socialism, I would want to see a situation where the economy of the country is aligned in such a way that we do not have a small oasis of affluence in an environment of abject poverty if we are to stand future social tensions within the country. I thank you. 

11.28
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for the report and I have to make a few comments on the following sectors. I heard my colleague from Nakasongola particularly talking about paragraph 38 of the report and suggesting that perhaps another airport should be in Nakasongola and I was perfectly informed that there is a big one there.  

However, the problem is transport from Entebbe to Kampala. Somebody travels by air for eight to ten hours and again spends two hours to reach a hotel in Kampala! I would like to urge the Government to develop this area between Entebbe and Kampala so that at least tourists who come to Uganda spend not more than 15 to 20 minutes to settle in their hotels. The money budgeted for the construction of airports can be used to construct roads, even flyovers, to reach this city. Utilisation of Entebbe airport is after all, about 20 to 24 percent; the airport is not fully utilised and this is why we say, if it is done and the time taken from Entebbe to Kampala is reduced then perhaps more people would think of transiting through, and touring, Uganda.

There is this sector about information. Recently we had a Bill on creating the Broadcasting Corporation and I am told that it has delayed because they do not have money to lay off the workers who were there. I have checked in these books but I do not seem to see the money allocated to make sure that this sector is handled as fast as possible so that we enjoy the services of the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation.

We have been told in the report that the agricultural sub-sector’s share should be increased to ten percent, which is good. We can increase these but as long as we have not developed the associated marketing strategies, the cold storage for fish, for example, the way flowers move; currently we do not even have an airline in this country! We depend on foreign airlines and they close at will, just last week Sudan stopped flying to Uganda. There is no guarantee that if we produced enough under agriculture as is recommended our produce, especially perishables, will reach the areas required for consumption. 

So I urge the Government to look very seriously in this sector and see that while we advance agriculture we also advance its marketing strategies. There is one who had goats; if he slaughtered meat obviously he would need very quick transport to have that meat in the Arab market.

Then, I am particularly concerned about this re-occurrence of the East African Community money. We are paying this money every year and now I see Shs 42 billion as the total pension money in this report, of the Shs 327 billion, including the current East African Community and the Ministry Of Defence arrears. This sort of money looks very difficult to get during this financial year but I am particularly concerned about the East African Community one, which earns interest. Each time we put it off it becomes even bigger the next financial year. I urge Government to quickly find money and pay off this debt so that we live comfortably without getting accumulations every financial year that follows.

I am also appreciative of the money given to feed the internally displaced people in camps, but I urge the Government to find money and buy land to settle those people who are now in thousands because of various hazards like landslides. There are many people who were displaced by landslides and since 1997 they have been promised that money would be found to buy land and settle them but up to today nothing has been done. 

Lobbying is okay but what is the role of the National Planning Authority? The National Planning Authority should have Uganda in their mind. I was listening when the Member for Madi-Okolo was contributing and the chairperson urged him to continue lobbying since there is one billion. We want the plan of the National Planning Authority to show that, “This area does not have water, and that area needs settlement”, so that we move in that direction. This idea of begging people should stop and we run on structures, which are set by government. I thank you very much.

11.33
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Mr Speaker, I will first of all talk about two general issues before I go into some specifics. The first one is that when this budget was read, a lot of people hailed it as the poor man’s budget. In Kagoma County, which I represent in Parliament, this Budget was not well received. It was in fact considered to be a rich man’s budget. The ordinary person in Kagoma is concerned about how much he pays for his sugar, paraffin and transport. So when you start talking about a budget being good for him, those are the indices that he asks about. 

I am not sure whether we bother to read some of the documents by the President of Uganda himself. For example, in his book: What is Africa’s Problem? On page 162 he says, “You see peasants are realistic, they have the capacity to know what is wrong in a given situation although they may not know the reasons why this situation is not viable.”  So the question is, how can you have the viable nation when that nation has no viable independent economy?

I keep on asking myself, when the Cabinet is discussing or planning to produce a budget, does this question arise, is it discussed? Because we know that the Budget, which we are operating, is not ours, it is not for the peasants. It is a budget, which is intended for investors, to promote foreign investors, to promote certain sections to pay high public wage bills, and not really to save money for the ordinary person to use.

Mr Speaker, my second general point is on the question of -(Interruptions)

MR AWORI: My honourable colleague, thank you for yielding the Floor. I would like to inform you that the Budget is supposed to be a collective view of the Cabinet to Parliament to authorise resources for their use. To show that may be it is not their document, look at the scarcity of ministers today in the august House! We are supposed to be authorising money for each ministry but notwithstanding the reminder by the Speaker yesterday, they are not even here to know our concerns about their respective ministries. So when you talk about the Budget and whether the Cabinet owns it, I support your view.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INDUSTRY AND TECHNOLOGY (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Mr Speaker, I want to inform my colleague that today is Cabinet day and some of our colleagues are in Cabinet. However, we are ably representing them. The NPC is here, and other ministers.

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, my second major complaint is about how much we are trying –(Interruptions)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you honourable member for giving way. I want to clarify on the first point my colleague raised. He has said that this was not a poor man’s budget. Why it was referred to as a poor man’s budget is that the taxes levied on high income earners and luxurious goods were increased and this is to create money to go to those areas. It is technical. So you just hold on, we have just started; I think we shall get there. We are in the process.

MR ERESU: The Budget Speech of this year by the Minister, hon. Dr Ezra Suruma, on pages 4 and 5 stated as follows: “Savings mobilisation”, part II reads: “The people of Uganda have known from time immemorial the importance of dividing their resources as to provide not only for today but also for tomorrow. We do know that it is important to put aside seed for planting, to increase our herds of sheep, goats and cattle, and to maintain cassava, sweat potato and banana gardens to sustain us through days ahead. Mr Speaker, what we seem to have lacked and still lack is how to shift traditional savings into monetary savings, maintain the social security that traditional savings serve, and pool these savings into institutions that can intermediate them as credit.”  This is a reflection that this budget is actually dealing with issues of transformation of a rural society, a peasant economy into a modernised economy.  

DR NABWISO: I thank you for that information but I want you to get a little more education, that the President himself says: “A pre-condition for the success for mobilisation of populations for effective participation is of course political will and genuine government commitment to improving welfare of the rural majority,” and I am trying to find out where that commitment of the ruling class for the majority of this country is. How much are we are investing in those people? This is the question that I am trying to raise.

It is also important, Mr Speaker, to know that if we are going to improve on the welfare of our people we have to address the question of population growth. This is one of the things that this government is scared of talking about -(Interjection)- do not ask me how many wives I have. The most important question I am asking, is the population explosion in this country vis-à-vis the resources that we have, can they be matched if we do not tell people in our villages, in our rural areas, about the need to look at the family sizes, which they have? We are just wasting time! 

I will now comment on the most specific issues. I was very interested in Prof. Kamuntu’s points yesterday, particularly on unemployment of graduates coming from our universities. I have been to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to try and see whether we can get some support to train the youth in job creation skills, and they have made roadblocks. We are not going to help the youth unless we readdress ourselves to the problem of teaching them job creation skills and investing heavily in that programme. Therefore, allocating Shs 1 billion to promote youth employment is just a joke and I do not usually believe in jokes.  

Sugar cane out-growers schemes: the people around Kakira Sugar Estate have had a raw deal and some of us who have recently visited Kinyara are saying, do not divest Kinyara. Let the people participate in growing sugarcane because that is one way of trying to pass on these incomes to them. 
  
Bujagali Dam Project: the construction of Bujagali Dam is a project, which is of very great importance to the people in Jinja and we would like to participate in the discussions of the proposed construction -(Interruption)- I am about to finish, Mr Speaker.

Rationalisation of public expenditure: in my opinion since we have created more government systems of consuming public funds, I would advise that as soon as possible the Ministry of Local Government should do away with district tender boards, district service commissions and district land boards and put them into regional governments so that we can reduce on these expenses. It will help us to rationalise public expenditure.

Mr Speaker, Jinja needs a special rehabilitation programme and I am glad that we have some ministers from there. For Jinja, I want to advise the Movement Government that if it wants votes from that region, it should do something about it. It may be necessary to have a martial plan for the rehabilitation of Jinja as a municipality, and if you are thinking of constructing a second international airport let it be in Jinja. 

As for Kagoma, we have asked the President to help us construct a tarmac road from Kimaka along the river up to Mbulamuti to promote tourism in that area. We still have only two and a-half government-aided secondary schools, and I believe something will be done to alleviate our position.

11.48
MRS ROSE LOCHIAM (Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for including Karamoja in the report. I am going to say something on the Karamoja question on page 34.  Karamoja indeed has three districts: Moroto, Nakapiripirit and Kotido. These are the poorest districts in Uganda and so the poverty level is very high –(Interjections)- my neighbour here says it is not true, but I am the one who lives there and knows about the poverty level.

The report mentions something on public investment, which is a good observation but I would like to add that there is also need for household investment. There is need to create wealth in the households, apart from the public, because much of the problems are experienced in the households. I would like the Government to take a multi-sectoral approach to handling the problems in Karamoja. Karamoja needs much attention from all ministries. Apart from the disarmament programme, there is need for every ministry to take a serious step in Karamoja. 

For example, in agriculture there is need for programmes like NAADS, which are not there, in order to increase on the food availability in the region because people are dying of famine. The World Food Programme is only handling a small section, which is feeding the schools and catering for a few projects, but the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness does not attend to the people when there is a disaster. For example, there is a food shortage, which calls for the ministry to come and help the people. This year alone people in Iliri and Lotome sub-counties have died of famine but the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness could not come in time to attend to the cries of the people.  

Then programmes like NUSAF are highly needed in Karamoja. It is currently handling a small section of community-initiated projects but leaving out the major section connected to the interest groups’ projects. This would help to create the wealth within the individuals and the households but NUSAF has not up to now attended to that section that would help to reduce the poverty levels in the region. 

For other programmes like on education, the schools are there but are not well facilitated. The Ministry of Health has also built health units but are not facilitated and so the services are not efficiently given to the people in spite of the buildings.  

There was something, which was said by the hon. Member for Nakasongola on water harvesting. Apart from dams and boreholes, there is need for other methods of harvesting water so that the water can be available for both production and human consumption.  

We also need attention in other sectors, for example, in mineral excavation. We need electricity so that all these industries can be fully developed. In spite of having natural resources in the region, the technical know how of exploiting them is so low that these resources are idle. So, I am urging the Government to come in full swing and help us exploit this natural wealth, which we have in Karamoja.  

I would also want to comment in disarmament in Karamoja, on page 39. Well, the Kenyan Government has done good to join the Ugandan Government in the disarmament process, but the challenge is still on the Sudan and Ethiopia side. The Sudan side is so porous that the guns flow into the region from the unattended to border. 

So, I urge the Government to place the Army to handle this border so that the flow of guns can be controlled, otherwise the disarmament process will continue to be tricky and very slow. During disarmament, it is not only law and order, which is needed, as it is stated in the report. There is that bit, which the Army and the communities should handle, so we need all these organs to work together so the disarmament process can be successful.

The other section, which I want to comment on, is the communications sector. I thank MTN for bringing the telephone communication to Karamoja but there is need to spread it to all rural areas. For now it is only in some spots, but it has helped us in attending to some of the problems we have.

There is also need for secure roads and the central government should help us tarmac the central roads because this would help us to have good communication not only within Karamoja but also with other parts of the country. Feeder roads also need to be maintained and created within Karamoja.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I want to welcome our visitors. These are students from Pombe High School, Kabale Municipality. They are here with their teachers. You are most welcome. The Prime Minister has a clarification because he wants to go and meet the guest. Could you make your statement then we go to the Member for Kayunga District and hon. Kiwagama then we see how we proceed. 

11.57
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you all know, I normally speak last because we have to listen to the issues but there are some urgent matters requiring me to make an important statement and then go. -(Interjections)- no, I do have very competent people to answer including the NPC who is going to take charge when I leave and I intend to read it in order to save time.

Yesterday in Parliament it was observed by hon. Kiraso in her report that the Office of the President and the Office of the Prime Minister overlap with regard to co-ordination and monitoring of government policies and programmes. So, the problem of overlapping was recognised and that is a very important observation. Mr Speaker, I would like to respond as follows:

In order to ensure effective co-ordination and monitoring of government policies and programmes, Cabinet established an institutional framework for co-ordination and monitoring of government policies and programmes in 2003. The institutional framework is a four level committee system consisting of a Cabinet sub-committee under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister, followed by a committee of permanent secretaries under the chairmanship of the head of the Public Service, followed by a multi-sectoral technical committee under the chairmanship of Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister. Then you have various sector working groups chaired by their respective sector permanent secretaries. 

The Sub-Committee for Policy Co-ordination, which I chair, includes the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because Finance is very critical; the Minister of Public Service, the hon. Minister of Local Government, the Minister for General Duties, Office of the Prime Minister, the NPC who deals with our politics; the Minister of State for Economic Monitoring from the Office of the President, and the Minister of State for Planning. So this is the sub-committee of Cabinet, which I chair. Under this arrangement the Office of the Prime Minister is the apex institution for co-ordination and monitoring of government policies. So ours is now the apex body. 

It is, however, important to stress that this framework does not mean that the sectors and institutions of government do not co-ordinate and monitor their functions because the ministries must also monitor what happens. What it means is that while sectors and institutions of government undertake co-ordinated monitoring for their functions, they do so not in a fragmented manner but in a harmonised manner. The role of the Office of the Prime Minister as an apex institution is to bring about this harmony in the Government so that there is improved flow of information and decision-making. 

Let me also point out that every six months, I take a report to Cabinet concerning issues of co-ordination, the problems we have found, and give solutions to them. Cabinet also irrigates my office by making suggestions to me, and they are very useful.  

Let me also say that the President in his own right also monitors the extent in which government policies and programmes are implemented, because the President must also monitor what I am doing. I cannot monitor myself. The historical overlapping, which was very significant, has been largely eliminated and I want to thank hon. Kiraso because she raised a fundamental point. And with your permission Sir, I would like to go, but in case there are colleagues who would like to ask some questions with your permission, they are free to do so, because I am a clarifier.

12.04
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and her committee for the good report given to us.  

I have a few concerns regarding this Budget, and I would like to start with banana wilt. The committee has done a good job in recommending Shs 1 billion to go into eliminating diseases for crops, especially the banana wilt, but I want to report that in Kayunga District, specifically Ntenjeru North, we have been hit by the banana wilt and the coffee wilt and we had resorted to vanilla.  

I have not seen anywhere, not even in the report, or the Budget speech, where one talks about vanilla prices, which have gone so low. When I tried to -(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member that the banana wilt she is talking about is being spread by the rampant movement of kisanja from one place to another. (Laughter)

MRS NYOMBI: Thank you for the information my colleague but even if it is spread by the kisanja, it needs to be contained. Anyway, do not divert me.  

My concern is the banana and coffee wilt. Much has been done but it is not enough and this is hitting Kayunga District so hard that the only crop, which we had left, is vanilla. Actually all farmers in Kayunga and Mukono - we had really put in a lot of effort to grow vanilla but as I talk now a kilogram of vanilla costs Shs 500. When I read papers the other day and talked to the Minister of Agriculture he said that it would even go down to zero. So my question is, what will our people do? Because they really have nothing left and our budget is concerned with increasing the household incomes, yet our people are left with nothing to earn income from.  

I am pleased with the committee report that it commends government for prioritising roads linking districts to each other, and also linking town centres. My concern is that there are districts, which are connected by waterways. For example Kamuli and Kayunga, we have River Nile in between and so we need a ferry service. So, when you talk of a road linking districts, you forget waterways. I urge government to really consider connecting these districts and I will be specific. Nabuganyi – there is a ferry between Nabuganyi on Kayunga side and Mbulamuti on Kamuli side. I wish that since government is committed to linking these districts, let them prioritise linking Kamuli to Kayunga by a ferry in Busaana sub-county.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way.  Through the Speaker I note that Members of Parliament intend to be unfairly selfish. We are soon launching the Kalangala ship, for which we have spent very handsomely and we have already a ferry that is operating in Kalangala, so it is a matter of giving them that new ship and then we transfer the other one to your side. It is something that could be done amicably without spending an extra shilling to your side. Thank you.

MRS NYOMBI: Thank you my colleague. Patience pays and I believe that this is cleared hon. Byanyima being the Chairman of the Committee on Works. I believe now that the ship, which has been in Kalangala will be transferred to Kayunga to connect Kayunga to Kamuli District through River Nile.

Thirdly - I have not even said a thing but my third point is to do with rural electrification. The committee has noted that if counterpart funding to the tune of Shs 3 billion for the acquisition of way leave on the SIDA funded Rural Electrical Schemes if not provided, donor support to this activity may be withheld. I urge government to find this money so that we can get the Rural Electrification Scheme moving. I still have a case in Busaana sub-county. There is no viable activity, which can go on without power. I wish that government could find this money so that at least Busaana sub-county could also benefit by getting electricity.

Finally, I am very grateful and happy with the committee’s report that they have at least relocated money for water production. It had become a song in every budget. Every year the poor performance of food crops is attributed to poor and erratic rains. Whereas we have a lot of water wasted, there was no deliberate effort done to tap it. I am glad that it has now been relocated. We will get water for production. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.10
MR WILLIAM KIWAGAMA (Bunya County West, Mayuge):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have only four items to talk about and I will allocate one minute to each.  

The ministry of Education policy starts with the primary schools, but we have citizens below primary school. These are the under five children, and the newly born, before they go to primary schools. Government does not appear to have a policy regarding kindergarten, yet this is the tender age where these future citizens acquire the cultural and traditional behaviour from their parents and from kindergarten. 

At the moment each kindergarten has got its own syllabus. We have talked about this before, urging government to at least formulate a national syllabus, which will guide the people who ran kindergartens. We have also urged government to provide training for those people who run kindergartens as these people are very important in uplifting the quality of our future citizens in this country.  

My second point is about street children. Every year we budget but the problem of street children is never addressed. Yet again, these are future citizens, the people who will succeed us when we go, yet we are not really concerned about how they grow. We have again urged government to come out with a policy regarding these people but the work of looking after or trying to rehabilitate these children is left to non-governmental organizations and there is no specific concern from government. I would urge the Government to pronounce how they want to treat these children. 

Government should take interest and they should take the trouble to remove these children from the streets on a sustainable basis. They should either return these children to their parents or take them to rehabilitation schools and other appropriate schools so that that section of our future citizens is also looked after.  

My third point is that there is a group of senior citizens - you may call them old people - those over sixty years. Their population has gone up and because of the changing social set up and the decline of extended families, there are many old people who are helpless out there and they need care. Nobody cares for them yet these are people who have contributed to the development of this country. The people who get pension are those who have been civil servants before, but every citizen of Uganda contributes to the development of the nation and, therefore, when they get old they should be entitled to some sort of care.  

I do not know the ministry concerned, but I think the Ministry of Gender should establish a desk for old people so that a policy is formulated of how to look after them and these old people should also be provided with some seats in Parliament so that -(Interjections)- I am not representing them, I am representing a constituency and I am not old though I am approaching that age.

Lastly, I want to touch on something concerning my constituency. Over the last 15 years when I have been leading or representing Bunya County West we have struggled to build some health centres at parish level. We have finished the construction, but I do not know the Ministry of Health policy. These centres have not been equipped. There is no medical staff, no medical equipment, no drugs and people are very disappointed that they took so much effort under my leadership to do this work and yet government has not come in to help as they should. I urge the minister to provide me with an answer. I have clinics at parish level, at Magada, Busui, Bute, Namuswena, Bukaleba, and Kobe.  

To conclude, I would like to thank the committee, which prepared this report. I wonder where they got the time and opportunity to sit down and write a good report. In fact I do not know what the sessional committee reports will look like. I think we better just read this and each committee endorses or comments on this and then we pass the Budget, since we do not have time. Thank you very much.

12.18
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whether I should allow members of the Budget Committee to make contributions, because this is your report.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, naturally, we should not talk about –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But you can clarify.

MR ERESU: The trend of the debate, as it progresses, also causes concern to Members of the Budget Committee because from our observations, members are concentrating on government supply and what is missing, not knowing that there is the cost aspect. What they need - we would expect members also to highlight certain aspects of cost to the supply of what we want to have. For example, they are talking about high cost of sugar but they do not know that the cost of sugar is variably linked with other costs, like fuel.  

What do we do as a Parliament to determine a reduction in the cost of fuel? These things need to be handled in many aspects. So, Members of the Budget Committee are worried because the House is only concentrating on one side as if we are coming only to lay demands.

THE SPEAKER: Well, this is the reason we have a general debate. That is the problem.

2.19
MR ROBERTS AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My point of clarification to the committee as follows: on page 8, paragraph 25, it is very clearly stated that the activities of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry have been over taken by the President’s Office.  

My point of clarification is that, why is this happening? Is it not possible that under the present restructuring exercise, as it takes place, can we not afford to restructure, especially in the sector of trade so that it goes fully in the Office of the President than having a shadow ministry, which is just overlapping and doing nothing? May I get clarification?

Mr Speaker, the other is on page 10, paragraph 35, on research. While we are aware that research is a systematic and goal oriented study of any form of phenomena, which is always geared towards achieving some payment, we are also undergoing an industrial age in Uganda where we would like to industrialize yet we are not providing for research. 

Research requires information that is complete. It requires information, which is accurate, up to date, cost-effective and verifiable. When you do not provide enough for research, there is always a problem.  You can end up having false information because the researchers rely on false background information, and once you have false information, you are likely to head towards false conclusions.  

In research once there is a false conclusion, we are destined for a disarrayed industrial led growth of economy. We can devastate our industrial destination if we do not invest much in research.  

When you look at page 13 - I do this because I want to manage time – on page 13 when we look at school feeding programs, a number of people have talked about this issue and have requested the Minister of Education to take it seriously that feeding in schools is very important. I do not need to emphasise it especially in the area of Karamoja where without food in the schools you definitely do not expect children to go to school. Without food at home it makes everything very difficult and we are conspicuous on the map of Uganda because of this. 

My question now is, how much are we provided with as a country to replace this demand from donors and the World Food Programme? We suggest that the Minster of Education should put up something in the vote to make sure that all the schools generate something to sustain their feeding projects in their areas. 

On that same page, paragraph 50, the committee talks about teaching materials in both public and private schools. On this point we as government intend to go scientific. If we are emphasizing science education more in order to industrialize, can I get clarified on how much we allocated for the planned, scientific, strategy in the MTEF that we are undergoing? Have we provided enough for the teachers in sciences and can I know how many science teachers we have especially in secondary schools? I would be very proud if I get that information.

Mr Speaker, go to page 15, on sports. The other day we were very proud of the achievement of Inzikuru. After Parliament blessed Inzikuru there was another one who came with a gold medal. Mr Speaker, may I know from the minister if this element of sports, which I cherish, is one of the main factors that can be used for enhancing the spirit of nationalism, just like dance and drama? 

Sports do not really give differences in culture. In sports, there are no differences in norms except the culture and language of sports and in that way you prescribe a well known boundary of your nationals, your people, so that sports becomes a uniting factor. May I know from the ministry or from the chairperson if it has been explained? Is there anything that makes sports so unique that it must be only in the institutions and schools without opening it up to those who are from the informal sector? Can’t we have them too? I think it is important because for example if you went outside to fish for sportsmen, like in my area, you will find Karimojong who can run. It is a matter of giving them the language of sports; they will take off and there will be gold here without going to school.

The last point, which is very important, is on page 39. It is explained in the report that Karamoja disarmament is a law and order matter. Yes, by principle but in essence it is not at all. We shall miss a point if we look at the issue of Karamoja barely from the perspective of looking at the action of the Police and yet the Police as a sector are a disabled institution, which cannot cope with the unique and peculiar problems of Karamoja –(Interruption)

MR LOOTE OGWEL: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Aachilla John Rex for giving way. I would like to inform you that the Police have no capacity at the moment in terms of human resource and equipment. Secondly, they are unable to even arrest within the suburbs of the town.

MR AACHILLA: Thank you honourable colleague. Just to let the minister cool down, this is for your consumption. We have just come from there. Move two kilometres out of Kotido town and you will hardly get the Police working. It is only the Army, which is helping. So we are saying that let us use this complementary approach so that the Police, as we are building it into an institution, gets support from the Army. To say that we shift it away and leave the Police to do the work is missing the point. But the point here is that as we move towards disarmament of Karamoja, what we are calling for is commitment.

This is a subject of Parliament. It was the Sixth Parliament that resolved that disarmament should be implemented in Karamoja but we are running away from it. We have not shown any commitment under the MTEF. And on page 39, nothing is provided for disarmament. It is not there and as active participants in the disarmament process, the donor always pins us down. They what to know how much government committed itself to in terms of funding for this program! Where is the money? They want to see how much they have put there so that they can contribute. So what we are saying? Is it that there is lack of commitment towards this programme so that we can do something as Parliament? 

12.29
DR JOHN ESELE (Bukedea County, Kumi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to join colleagues in appreciating the work of the committee in analysing the 2005/2006 Budget.  

I would like to address myself to the rural development strategy of government in which agriculture is a major component. I note from the Budget that the allocation of agriculture this year has increased from 3.4 percent to 4.1 percent. While this is appreciable, I would like to observe that one: it is still the lowest in the total national budget allocation to the sectors. Agriculture still has one of the lowest allocations. This 4.1 percent is low.

Secondly, it is far below the Maputo recommendation of ten percent. Specifically for Uganda’s case where agriculture is a major component in the economic development, I think even the ten percent recommended by Maputo is still low. I am told by those who were very active at that time when agriculture was playing a major part in the economy of this country that the national allocation of the budget was about 26 percent. So I still think that we need to improve on the allocation of the national budget to agriculture.  

Mr Speaker, PMA is one of the major components in the modernization of agriculture but my observation from the way it is operating is that as it is now it will take a very long time for PMA to have an impact because PMA is considering the whole agricultural sector and there is no way we can modernize the whole agricultural sector considering the type of commodities that we are producing. In crops alone, we have over 50 crops starting ranging from amaranths (doodo), all the way up to coffee. There are so many crops that we are producing. The livestock sector has a number of species and if we tried to move all this at a go, we would not modernize agriculture. 

I have a recommendation: we have two good initiatives in the country, one initiative is a strategic exports programme where government has identified specific commodities with a good market outside, which can be produced here in Uganda and have an impact on the economy. They include cotton, coffee, tea, livestock, fisheries and horticulture.  These are commodities that have a large external market and have a good potential for production in the country.

The second initiative is zoning, where we allocate specific commodities to specific areas in terms of their growing ecologies. These are very good initiatives. My recommendation is that we should specifically direct all PMA activities to only these two initiatives. If for example there is an area in Bukedea that is remote but produces a lot of cotton yet there is no road to access the cotton in that location, then PMA should build the road. 

If the cotton there cannot be processed because there is no electricity, then PMA should take electricity there so that the processing of cotton can be started in that area. If the farmers in that area do not have enough technologies, the extension activities specific by PMA for cotton production should be taken there. If the farmers cannot produce because there is no credit, then the credit component in the PMA should be extended to the farmers in that location. So, I would like the PMA activities to be specific to those areas and those commodities.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): I would like to appreciate what hon. Dr Esele is talking about, and I think that he is taking advantage of being a Member of the Agriculture Committee of Parliament to inform the House on what government is actually doing. I do not know what type of information I should be actually giving - I want to appreciate that he is relaying information on the policies and programmes that government is putting in place. 

For example, the idea of strategic export programme zoning and also saying that we should direct PMA activities according to those particular areas that have been identified by government. For example, if there are textile industries, government policy is that there should be electricity in that place to ensure that the factory works. So I want to appreciate the information that you are giving but I also want you to acknowledge that this is the trend that government is taking. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So you are in total agreement, in word and deed. 

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, I agree with what hon. Esele is saying, but I would like him to recognize that that is exactly what we are doing and he is aware of it because we plan with him as a Member of the Agriculture Committee of Parliament. Thank you.

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Speaker, I would like to find out from the honourable member holding the Floor, through the minister, I have perused their budget but I do not find any provision for zoning. They have not put any money, which is going to help the districts that are carrying out zoning. I do not know whether it is incorporated there because it seems they are talking about zoning as a policy but they have not provided for it in the budget. I would like the minister to clarify.

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, honourable minister and hon. Esele for giving way. The way I understand hon. Dr Esele is that he is saying government is not committed to going to the end of its plan in strategic intervention. I want to give an example. They have started many programmes in terms of increase in tea production and increase in coffee production but today if you asked where the coffee is, I do not know if it is anywhere in this country. Coffee to be talked about, that this is the coffee that came out of the strategic intervention, even the coffee nursery operators themselves have not been paid.  

Look at the people working in tea in my constituency Buyaga. They have never been paid and the people who started growing the tea reached a point where nobody was following the whole thing. So I think the concern is that this strategic interventions start then somewhere midway either the project loses its soup and the rest and people jump off, I don’t know. And I can bet that soon upland rice will also be off this strategic intervention programme. So, why do you start and end midway before we have really seen something come out? That is the concern of the members.

PROF. KAMUNTU: On the strategic intervention and water for production especially as it relates to animal industry, it is in the Ministry of Water and Lands and yet the Ministry in charge of Livestock where water is critically needed is not managing the supply of this water and you have to be tossed between ministries when the life of livestock is at risk. Why put water for production in the Ministry of Lands when the producing ministry would have been more efficient and caring?
  
MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, I would like once again to appreciate the concerns of the members. As a matter of fact, the more questions are asked the easier it becomes to understand what government is doing through responding to the questions.  

One, we started with strategic intervention programmes then we realized that we need to zone the country in order to be able to effectively implement the production of those particular crops, livestock and so on. So we have undertaken the programme on zoning. 

We started with Luweero as a district. In this financial year we propose to roll it out to other districts as speculated in our plans, and the figures are there. If you look carefully in the figures you will realize that the funds under NAADS have increased. The strategic interventions programme, which now has rolled out into zoning the new rural development strategy where credit is going to be given to farmers also in terms of seeds and other inputs, is going to be done through NAADS.  

As you are aware, NAADS is rolling out to other districts. It is down on paper. Please, study your documents properly. You will realize that we are rolling NAADS out to cover more districts. You realize also that we are short of funds. Funds are not so plentiful that we can roll out the entire country at the same time, but the effort is clearly there, and the progress too. Our aim is to roll out to 37 districts this financial year.

Another point is water for production. I must remark that the water for crop production is mainly still in the Ministry of Agriculture. It is water for livestock that moved from the Ministry of Agriculture to the Ministry in charge of Water. That is under consideration. The Committee on Agriculture has made recommendations. Government is negotiating - we are reconsidering this because we realize that there is a gap. I am aware of the plight of livestock keepers in the dry season and this is being addressed. Thank you.

DR ESELE: I thank the minister and colleagues for that information but let me say that the last time the Committee of Agriculture met the Executive Director of PMA and I raised these very issues, he gave a different answer from the one the minister is giving now. That is why I am emphasizing it again.  

Mr Speaker, if we did PMA activities directly as I have recommended, we would strike a few things. One is that the strategic exports and destinations touch every single district of this country but we have complaints from some districts that PMA is not operating in these districts. It is not in the other districts, but if we did as I said, then every district will have a share of PMA activities and nobody will complain.

Secondly, because the money is limited, if we concentrated on modernization of a few commodities then the rest of the commodities will pick up as a consequence. For example, a farmer will have to see that if he applies fertilizer to coffee and has benefited or has supplied pesticides to coffee and has benefited then he will do the same to groundnuts or millet and the whole sector of agriculture will consequently be modernized.  

I would like to agree with the committee in paragraph 174, that the Ministry of Finance should leave sector activities to the various ministries responsible for them. I have never been convinced why you think that the Ministry of Finance suitably co-ordinates PMA. The Ministry of Finance should leave PMA to go to the Ministry of Agriculture, which is the sector responsible for that area. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, Uganda is also missing out a great deal on one new aspect of technology development in the area of agriculture. That is the area biotechnology. Biotechnology is one area that can help modernize agriculture in this country especially in areas of improving nutrition and areas of pest and disease control as well as areas of draught tolerance. Biotechnology is also useful in health and in environment but we are unable as a country to adopt this technology simply because we do not have a biotechnology policy in place. 

I understand that this is a policy in the Ministry of Finance, and it has been there for a number of years, but it has never been given to us and, therefore, our scientists cannot proceed in the area of biotechnology. It pains, especially because we have the technical capacity and the human resource. This country has trained a lot of scientists in the application of biotechnology. We also have a facility in Kawanda. It is in Makerere and in other private labs for the utilization of biotechnology but we cannot have this capacity utilized because the policy is not with us. I would like to appeal to government to come forward and bring up this policy so that we can operationalise biotechnology. We are running behind our neighbours and we are losing a great deal.

Last year I remember in the Budget government had set aside some money to reward scientists and it was to the tune of Shs 400 million. However, I do not know whether this money was utilized. I have not heard that and yet it is important to reward somebody who has performed well. This year it is not even there at all. What is happening? Is government still interested in the areas of science or is it not? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I had already identified hon. Wopuwa and hon. Kule Muranga, but I am the one who told you of the programme for this afternoon and I said that by 1.00 p.m. you should be going to the Conference Centre. So, if I now allow you to continue then I will be aiding late coming. I suggest that we end here and I doubt whether after we have listened to our distinguished guest we shall be able to continue with this kind of debate, although according to the programme stated by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee I should have let the committee start processing their reports from tomorrow.  

However, I have to find time to compensate for the time lost this afternoon. It is not lost in the actual sense but for the time, which we shall be using to receive our distinguished visitor, I suggest that we come back tomorrow morning and continue up to midday, and the committees can then start in the afternoon and Friday. That will help us to cover up for this time. So far 30 honourable members have contributed. Do you have any more ideas?

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I had a request to make a contribution. Most sessional committees, after we agreed on this programme, went ahead to invite their sectors that they supervise and they have already scheduled meetings starting at 10.00 a.m. tomorrow. Actually most of them are even going to spill over into the weekend.  If Parliament meets in the morning, then we will have disorganised their programme.  

May I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, given that there are many people who still wanted to contribute to this report and the general debate on the Budget speech?  If it is true that this afternoon’s programme with the visiting President is ending at 4.00 p.m., maybe we would come back and give our –(Interjections)- well, that is our option, which Members do not seem to be interested in. We could continue for about an hour to give as many people as possible chance to make their contribution.

The other alternative is that after every Sessional Committee has made its presentation, the ministers that supervise those sectors would answer specific questions and points of clarification. The dilemma in which we are is, the Sessional Committees have invited their sectors and yet, the members still want to contribute.

THE SPEAKER: I think then we shall be disappointing those who have been invited.  Therefore, I think we should get a solution and then see how we proceed.  The proceedings of this –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. Will the proceedings of this afternoon be part of our Hansard?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, they will be part of our Hansard. It is Parliament, except the venue has changed for convenience.  

MR AWORI: I was just wondering about the technology on the ground.

THE SPEAKER: So, for now we end the proceedings here. The committees will start processing their reports tomorrow.  

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, you have not given us your final word on how we are going to wind up this debate.  Are we winding up or coming back, because tomorrow – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When we come back – because the motion is for us to constitute ourselves into a Committee of Supply; and once we agree to constitute ourselves into a Committee of Supply, we start the supply by receiving reports of various committees on the figures.  I shall put a question on the motion sometime when we come back.  Now, we are still a House; we are not sitting as a committee.  However, there will be a time when we sit as a Committee of Supply. That is how I understand the motion.  The motion is intended for us to constitute ourselves into a committee of supply, resume, approve and then finish the Budget.

The proceedings are now suspended because we shall continue with the same proceedings there.  I am not adjourning now; I will adjourn when we are there.

(The House was suspended at 12.50 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.02 in the Parliamentary Conference Hall_) 

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, presiding_)

TANZANIA NATIONAL ANTHEM

UGANDA NATIONAL ANTHEM

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda; Your Excellency Benjamin Mkapa, the president of the United Republic of Tanzania; the Tanzania First Lady, Mrs Anne Mkapa; Your Excellency Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, Vice President of the Republic of Uganda; Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament; Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament; His Excellency, the Secretary General of East African Community: Honourable ministers; members of the diplomatic Corp; Honourable Members of Parliament.

 On this auspicious and rare occasion, permit me on behalf of the Parliament of Uganda to warmly welcome the President of the United Republic of Tanzania and to state how greatly honoured this Parliament is to have been considered as one of the places to be included in the programme for His Excellency President Mkapa’s state visit to Uganda. (Applause)  

I am saying that this is a rare occasion because the last time we hosted a distinguished guest of His Excellency Mkapa’s status was on 28 November 2002, when we hosted the former President of the Republic of Kenya, then His Excellency Daniel Arap Moi. (Applause)  It has always been our desire as Parliament that whenever a foreign Head of State or Government visits Uganda, a slot is found in the programme to visit and address Parliament on matters of mutual interest. 

The visit of President Mkapa to Parliament of Uganda is very timely. Timely because Uganda is in the process of political transition from a Movement political system to a Multiparty political system, an experience that Tanzania went through very successfully up to 1 July 1992, when it completed the process of transition from a one-party political system Chama Cha Mapinduzi to a multiparty system.  At that time, Mr President, you were the Minister of Information and Broadcasting, and I am sure you had a big role in sensitising the population on the merits and demerits of the change in the political system. (Applause)

We, therefore, have many blessings from Tanzania’s experience and I hope that our introduction this afternoon will expose us to the challenges we should expect during the transition and the solution we need to overcome these changes. 

Secondly, His Excellency, President Mkapa is the Chairperson of the Summit of East African Community and as such, he is in a strategic position to discuss the progress and challenges of the envisaged economic and political integration of East Africa.  

On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda, I would like to congratulate you and your colleagues, the Presidents of Uganda and Kenya for what you have been able to achieve so far in this regard. (Applause) We in Parliament follow with keen interest the developments as they unfold in the process of integration of East Africa. We need a bigger market for our goods and services, free movement of our people and well planned and shared infrastructure. 

Common policy of preserving and improving the environment and prudent utilisation of our common waters in Lake Victoria is also an important aspect. Your full commitment to the fast tracking of the East African Political federation is highly commendable. (Applause)  We look forward to benefiting from President Mkapa’s and Tanzania’s experience in the above areas. 

I once again extend a warm welcome to His Excellency, President Benjamin William Mkapa, to Parliament and I thank His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for having found it appropriate to include a visit to Parliament in President Mkapa’s programme. It is my honour to invite His Excellency the President of Uganda to make his remarks. Your Excellency, the President. (Applause)

3.10
THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Your Excellency, President Benjamin William Mkapa, the President of the sister Republic of Tanzania, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, the Vice President, the Prime Minister, Ministers, Honourable Members of Parliament, Mrs Mkapa and all of you dignitaries who are here today.  I will just make a few points because it is not my day.  

The first point I would like to tell you is about the role of Tanzania’s party, Chama Chamapinduzi (CCM) and of the late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, the founder President of the United Republic of Tanzania. Tanzania, her people, their ruling party (CCM) and their leaders led by the late Mwalimu Nyerere have made significant contributions to Africa –(Applause)- especially to black Africa. By 1963, when the Organisation for East African Unity was formed, there were only 36 independent States of Africa. 

The States, which are now independent in Africa, are 53. Only Eritrea came out from another country, Ethiopia. Otherwise, all the other countries were liberated subsequent to 1963. Some of them were liberated peacefully like Zambia, which got independence around 1964. However, others were liberated by military force. 

When the OAU was formed in Addis-Ababa in 1963, a liberation committee was formed. This was a sub committee of the Organisation of African Unity. This liberation committee, which comprised nine members, including Uganda, was headquartered in Tanzania –(Applause) This was not an accidental choice, I am sure the OAU leaders chose Tanzania to be the headquarters of the OAU Liberation Committee, because they knew the unequivocal stand of the leaders of Tanzania, especially Mwalimu Nyerere. He was unequivocal, uncompromising, not the type with endali - looking this way and that way. 

Tanzania therefore, became the seat of the Liberation Committee and gave their territory to the African freedom fighters; they played a very decisive role.  All the liberation movements in Southern Africa, FRELIMO from Mozambique, ZANU and ZAPU from Zimbabwe, SWAPO from Namibia, the NPLA from Angola, the ANC and the PAC from South Africa; were all headquartered in Dar-es-Salaam.  

These days whenever Ugandans get a toothache, they rush to South Africa for treatment.  That is all thanks to the work of some of our leaders, like the late Mwalimu Nyerere who sacrificed so much to -(Applause) - assist the freedom fighters of Africa to liberate those territories. Not only did he support the liberation movements of the countries either colonised like Mozambique by Portugal or under minority racist regimes like Rhodesia and South Africa, but he also supported us in Uganda to get rid of Idi Amin, as you all know. (Applause)  They contributed materials and human beings to assist us in the process of getting rid of Idi Amin.  Therefore, when you talk of Tanzania, of CCM and of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere; you are talking of a key cornerstone to the liberation of especially Southern Africa. 
 
Tanzania, CCM and Mwalimu Nyerere made two other contributions.  One was to develop the Kiswahili language, an indigenous language that would be used in the whole country so that from North to South, East to West communication among all the tribes of that country would be in an African language.  No leader, minister or president in Tanzania today gets his speech translated for him when he is speaking to any community in Tanzania. (Applause) It is not like here in Uganda where when somebody goes to some place, where he does not understand the indigenous language and then they start saying: “Ladit president loka, this and that.” [Hon.Members: “What does that mean?”] You want me to translate for you? (Laughter) You do not understand Acholi, so I am sorry for you.  

That is Tanzania’s second contribution to the cause of African independence and freedom.  If you have a language, you are free.  If you are speaking somebody else’s language, then what are you especially if you lose your own language eventually?  If we lose our languages, what shall we become; African-Americans, Anglo-Africans or what?  What shall we be called?  The people without a language are not a people; this is a big contribution by Tanzania to the cause of African freedom.

The third contribution is unity by the people of Tanzania. (Applause) Getting rid of sectarianism.  I will give you two personal examples; recently, when I was already here in the Government, a sheik came from Tanzania to attend a function in Kabale, one of our towns in the West.  I asked him, “How many Moslems do you have in your area of responsibility?” He said, “Bwana, hiyo siokazi yangu bwana. hiyo siokazi yangu, kwesabu Waisilamu wangapi, Wakristo wangapi.  Kaazi yangu, kuhubiri neno la Mungu. Hiyo kaazi ya kujuwa watu, yakwesabu watu kaazi ya area Commissioner. (Applause) He said it is not his work.  He was even shocked that I asked him that question.  But you know, here the religions are always busy on the computer -(Laughter)-  totaling up how many Catholics, how many Protestants, how many Moslems.  

This is a personal experience; this is an ordinary person, a random sample, because I had not planned to talk to him. I just met him by chance.  He said his work is simply to preach the word of God, not to know how many Moslems there are in his country.  That is census for the area commissioner, a type of DC, who does not count how many of this group, how many of that group; he simply knows how many people are living in this area.  “Wa Tanzania wangapi wanaishi hapa?”  

The other example, I did not encounter, but I read in the papers.  There was a Tanzanian Member of Parliament in one of the Dar es Salaam constituencies known as Kitwana Kondo.  I used to hear about him when I was in Tanzania.  He is born in Dar es Salaam.  Now, in one of the elections, he was standing with a woman who had originally come from upcountry.  

During the campaign, Kitwana Kondo said something to the effect that when the voters were electing they should do so wisely, by understanding their own people.   This one was an indigenous; the other one was a Mufuruki. You remember our story of -(Laughter)- if you remember our story -(Laughter)

So, in the campaign, Kitwana Kondo said, when ewaka temu nakwaguwa, mwelewe wantu, I do not remember the exact words but it meant you should understand the ones who know you; something like that. Kitwana Kondo won and the woman launched a petition in the court. She brought the record indicating what Kitwana Kondo had said during campaigns. 

They asked him, “Who are these your people, ‘tunataka munoshuwa Kitwana Kondo awa mbiye makahahi watu wake, the wantu gani?’” The court cancelled the elections. (Applause) They asked, “Mr Kitwana Kondo, who are these your people you are talking about?” Now, that is Tanzania. Tanzania supported Uganda, as you know but that one I have already mentioned.

Two final points; who is His Excellency, Benjamin Mkapa? Because up to now, I have been talking about Tanzania, CCM, Mwalimu Nyerere. I have not talked about His Excellency Benjamin Mkapa. This is by design because His Excellency Benjamin Mkapa came from the other three; Tanzania, CCM, the leadership and guidance of Mwalimu Nyerere.  

When I was studying in the university of Dar-es-Salaam, His Excellency Benjamin Mkapa had already finished school. He was Chief Editor of the newspaper, The Nationalist. In 1968, I wrote a bad article, against certain leaders in East Africa –[An. Hon Member: “Like Mwenda?”] - (Laughter)- not like Mwenda - that article had substance. I never write things, which do not have substance. His Excellency Mkapa published it in his newspaper and then His Excellency Daniel Arap Moi, who was Vice President of Kenya and Minister of Home Affairs, banned his paper from Kenya because of my article. However, later on the three of us worked very well. (Applause)  

President Mkapa studied at Makerere here, as you know. He worked in the newspapers and was very close with Mwalimu in his thinking.  When he took over leadership, he played a very crucial role.  Tanzania had made many achievements as I have enumerated above but there was one problem with the economy. They had a state-run economy; a very large public sector and that had caused many problems for the economy. His Excellency, Benjamin Mkapa took the leadership in liberalising and privatising the economy. Today, Tanzania’s economy is very vibrant. (Applause) 

His Excellency has been a moderating influence in the region and I will give you an example. You know, I do not speak without examples. You remember we had a big problem in the Congo crisis; the whole of this area was divided.  Uganda and Rwanda were on one side and some of the countries in Southern Africa, Angola, Zimbabwe, and Namibia were on the other side.  Tanzania, which had links with both Southern Africa and with us, was the moderating influence. They did not take sides in that misunderstanding and on the contrary, they played a leading role in bringing the two sides together, until we eventually signed the Lusaka Agreement in 1999.
  
His Excellency Benjamin Mkapa has also assisted me in the Burundi peace process, which is now finally concluded. They have gone through democratic elections and now have an elected President. Burundi is now back to recovery. (Applause) All along, Arusha was the meeting place of the Burundi peace talks and His Excellency Benjamin Mkapa was the Vice Chairman, as head of the Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi.

Finally, Presidents Benjamin Mkapa, Mwai Kibaki and a little earlier Daniel Arap Moi and Ali Hassan Mwinyi all played a historical role.  Presidents Moi, Mwinyi and I revived the East African Community when we signed the treaty.  In that treaty, there is an Article, I think Article 5, which says, “We are reviving the East African Community, which is aiming at an economic community, a customs union, a monetary union and eventually a political federation.” That is what the Article says. It had already been agreed upon when the treaty was signed in the early 1990’s. 

Recently, we had a meeting in a Nairobi workshop between His Excellencies Benjamin Mkapa, Mwai Kibaki and I. We asked ourselves, “Why don’t we fast track this article? Why do we say, ‘eventually we shall get to a political federation’? Why don’t we make it faster?” Therefore, you can see His Excellencies Mkapa, Kibaki and I here have played a historical role in introducing this element of fast tracking the East African Federation. (Applause) 

When we last met, we agreed that we should give ourselves a year from May 2004, to meet and take a decision on this issue of the East African Federation.  

This is the person I am inviting to talk to you, Your Excellency, Benjamin William Mkapa. (Applause)  Thank you very much.

ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA TO THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 187 (2) OF THE RULES OF 
PROCEDURE

3.34
THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA (Mr Benjamin William Mkapa): Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Speaker of this august assembly, Rt hon. Deputy Speaker, Rt hon. Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, honourable ministers, invited guests, ladies and gentlemen. 

Mr President, I am very grateful for the very kind words you have spoken about my life and my East Africanness. (Applause) I shall have more to say in reply over dinner, I hope, tonight.  But for now, let me thank you very deeply, especially for the tribute that you have paid to the role Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, the founding President of our country, played in the liberation of our continent and then fostering East African and African unity as a whole. Thank you very much indeed. (Applause)

Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I feel deeply honoured by the privilege you have accorded me to speak to you members of this august assembly of a neighbouring - the President has said “sisterly” and I say “brotherly” country. (Laughter)  I am afraid I am going to disappoint you, if you think I am going to address the issues that the President raised in introducing me.  In two months, my second and constitutional last term of office as President of the United Republic of Tanzania ends. (Applause)  I am here on a farewell visit; no forum is more appropriate for this purpose than the Ugandan Parliament representing as it does the entire people of this beautiful country.

I thought hard about what I should tell you as a neighbour.  In the twilight of my administration, I can be forgiven for looking back and reflecting upon governance.  I was a member of the Commission for Africa, established early last year by the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Tony Blair.  Our report entitled Our Common Interest was released on the 11 March 2005.  One theme that runs across the report is governance in its broad sense.  

The report singles out governance as Africa’s core problem; it says that without improvements in governance, economic, social, cultural and other reforms will have limited impact in the race to make poverty in Africa history.  It points out that good governance is about much more than periodic multi party elections, sound policies and the challenge of putting policies into effect.  It places strong emphasis on capacity building for governance and on getting systems of governance right.

African leaders are urged to improve accountability and to do so by broadening the participation of citizens in governance. (Applause)  Ever since the report was released, I have taken keen interest in feedback from stakeholders and other interested people and institutions.  I have just finished reading one of the reviews of the paperback abridged version of the report, Our Common Interest: The Argument; a review by David Booth from the Overseas Development Institute in London who has also done some research in East Africa.  

I do not agree with everything Mr Booth says or the emphasis he attaches to various issues, but I think he is right when he says that the report did not go deep enough on the question of politics.  I agree that while the report boldly points out weaknesses in governance as a factor in low levels of economic development, we in the Commission did not, for the sake of gravity, go deeper in analysing the nature of African political systems, which nature may explain at least partly the ineffectiveness of some states as agents of development. Mr Booth also wonders why after making reference to the role of colonialism in establishing non-viable states, we in the Commission did not address how this has affected social attitudes and shaped the moral and institutional foundations of today’s politics in Africa. 

Mr Speaker, I have decided to share with you my thoughts on these political issues today.  In this, I am encouraged by our friends, the Chinese. It is generally acknowledged that the People’s Republic of China introduced, and has since managed its political and economic reforms admirably by ensuring the reforms benefit from the international realities and the local imperatives. Hence, the outcome widely acknowledged as reforms with Chinese characteristics.  

As I reflect on my ten years as the President of the United Republic of Tanzania and as I look over the African political landscape in the last half century, I am convinced that the time has come for Africa to go back to the drawing board and design a new paradigm of governance in Africa-democratic governance with African characteristics. (Applause) 

Mr President, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, let us first look at some background facts.  For the majority of African nations, the period they spent under colonial rule is still far longer than the period they have since enjoyed independence and self-rule.  It can roughly be said that Europe ruled most of Africa from 1885 to 1960, a period of 75 years.  

In some African countries, European colonialism started much earlier than the Berlin Conference.  
Portuguese rule goes further back. That is why until today, the effect of colonial rule on our politics, our economics, and our social life remains strong; and not just because we have been taught and pressed to think and speak in the languages of our colonisers. It is also because at Independence we inherited with little variations here and there, the political and economic systems of our colonisers. 

An honest evaluation of political systems and processes, and of governance, in contemporary Africa has to go to that far back and ask: “What did we learn and adopt from the colonial rulers, and how has it shaped and directed post - colonial political systems and governance in Africa?”
 
Honourable Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, there has been a lot of debate about how far Africa’s Anglophone, Francophone and Lusophone colonial legacy has to do with what has happened, or not happened since independence; and what effect this legacy continues to have on our continent.  

As I stated earlier until today, the time we have lived as independent nations is much shorter than the years we were under colonial rule. In all these years of colonialism, the relationship between rulers and the ruled was basically one of master and servant. Every white man, woman or child was made out to be superior in all respects including colour and culture, and the black man, woman or child was made to feel inferior. Our confidence and dignity was deliberately undermined. Slavery, which in itself was an enforced inferiority on the black people, was superseded by colonial administration, which made little, if any, effort to disabuse the black people of such imposed inferiority.

The white people’s democratic values, which were maturing in Europe in the 19th century, were deliberately not spread to Africa; and any efforts by Africans to demand democratic rule and civil rights were ruthlessly suppressed. Traditional, political and administrative systems in Africa were also rendered inferior to the colonial administrative systems, developed specifically for the colonies. And, these too were presented as superior, except where local chiefs could, through carrots and sticks, be enlisted to do the master’s bidding through different forms of indirect rule, which coupled with “divide and rule” characterised most colonial administrations in Africa.

The British historian, David Cannadine, wrote four years ago an incisive book entitled Ornamentalism: How the British Saw Their Empire. Using various sources, he stated as follows: “Like all post Enlightenment imperial powers, only more so, Britons saw themselves as the lords of all the world and thus of humankind. They placed themselves at the top of the scale of civilization and achievement, they ranked all other races in descending order beneath them…”

Honourable Speaker, you can imagine the place of Africans in that descending order! And to make matters worse, an African was made to understand that he or she can only be considered civilized upon embracing the language, religion, ways and mannerisms of citizens of the colonial power.

Mr Cannadine continued, “By the end of the nineteenth century those notions of racial hierarchy, supremacy and stereotyping had become more fully developed and stridently hardened, as exemplified in Cecil Rhodes’ remark that ‘the British are the finest race in the world, and the more of the world they inhabit, the better it will be for mankind’, or in Lord Cromer’s belief that the world was divided between those who were British and those who were merely ‘subject races’.”

Mr Speaker, whether we like it or not, and whether the former colonial powers want to admit it or not, what most of us in leadership positions in Africa are has roots in this colonial past. We still believe that to be educated and hence to be fit for leadership is to speak English, French, or Portuguese. We practice Christianity even as we still make libations to appease our ancestors- (Laughter)- and dabble in the occult.  

Our political systems and institutions still mirror to a large extent systems and institutions of the former colonial powers. Have we thought hard enough whether systems and institutions are appropriate to our circumstances and priorities? Our public services still mirror in structure and attitudes, those of the former colonial powers. It is difficult to change their attitudes such that they became facilitators and catalysts of speeding development and such that they become relevant to Africa’s present and future challenges.  

The concept of “African Big Men” is used in vilification of African leaders, or as an illustration of what others may want to portray as African proclivity towards tyranny and dictatorship. But, as David Cannadine again reminds us: “the (British) governor was ‘the fountain of honour and the distributor of patronage and rank’, by (among other things) determining who should (and should not) be invited to Government (nowadays State) House.” (Applause)

The experience that the first group of postcolonial African leaders had of leadership was precisely that: leadership was about to be the fountain of honour and the distributor of patronage and rank.  That Africa ended up with “Big Men” at State House is not entirely unrelated to this colonial legacy. It is not right and we should change it; but its origin is not necessarily inherent in our Africanness. It is true a few of the independence era leaders tried to see power differently and to use it to build new nations and new systems. But there were not too many Julius Nyereres around. (Applause)  

The ridiculous borders drawn at the Berlin Conference dividing compatible people and cultures, while lumping together incompatible people in cultures taken together with “divide and rule” tactics to this day explains a large number of African conflicts and civil wars. (Applause)

Another British historian, Thomas Pakenham, explains how the Belgians scrambled out of the Congo in 1960. He says: “Unprepared for party politics, the country (Congo) split along ethnic and religious fault lines. When the Belgians scuttled out of the Congo in July 1960, they had left the country well prepared for civil war and anarchy.  The prospect of their departure from Rwanda-Burundi, though delayed for two years, had the same disastrous effect”.   

Honourable Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, it is true Africa has to bring to a close this sad chapter of conflict. But our former colonial masters must be courageous enough to accept part of the blame on the one hand and be decent enough to practically support Africa as it seeks lasting solutions to these conflicts on the other hand. (Applause)

The other important aspect of the colonial legacy is education. Colonial powers did not prepare Africans for self-democratic rule. The forms and systems of government they introduced were not democratic by any measure. They were not concerned about human rights and those who demanded their rights, including democratic rights, often were incarcerated. Should we have been surprised when post-colonial leaders also incarcerated their opponents? They learnt from colonialism that this was the way to deal with opponents. (Applause)   Again it is true Africa has to change this and introduce more tolerance in our political systems and practices. But, obviously, the colonial legacy has something to do with this democratic deficit. 

The education that colonial powers gave Africans was not meant to prepare them for leadership, but to help perpetuate their rule. That is why educated Africans were dismissed from their jobs once they ventured into politics. Today about 50 years since most African States became independent, we have to design democratic systems with African characteristics to shed off this colonial legacy. (Applause)

Honourable Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, it is also important to remember that most African States became independent at the height of the Cold War, and the onset of the new scramble for Africa between the West and East.  Even our efforts to be non-aligned states did not entirely cushion us against the forces and effects of the Cold War. 

In my own analysis, I explain the phase of military coups in Africa in terms of three phenomena. The first was that colonial powers always wanted a domineering influence in the newly independent African states. When the new leaders adopted an independent attitude enough to make the metropolitan power uncomfortable, military coups were resorted to, sometimes financed and abetted by the erstwhile colonial powers and their agents, in the hope that the new military rulers would be more pliable to the dictates and wishes of the former colonial powers. I should not be presumptuous.  But, however bad one may have thought Milton Obote was, to replace him with Idi Amin Dada was the epitome of strategic miscalculation. (Applause)

The second phenomenon that derived from those who wanted to put a brave face on the military coups that characterized the first few decades of independence, was that newly independent African states needed the discipline associated with the military to stabilize and develop. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, this proposition featured not only as conventional wisdom but also in textbooks on international relations in centres of learning in the West.

The third phenomenon was the cold war during which the big powers did not care so much about an African government’s record on governance as long as it was supportive of one of the sides in the Cold War. Proof, if any was needed, that this was indeed the case is that after the end of the cold war in the early 1990s, the spectre of military coups largely disappeared from the African Continent and it is our duty as Africans to make sure it does not reappear. Where those who colonized us tolerated, or even at times encouraged and facilitated military coups on our continent, the new democracy for Africa I am arguing for must be devoid of military coups. I am encouraged by the fact that the African Union has promulgated this position. (Applause)

Honourable Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, as I prepare to leave office, and as I look back over our recent history, I am convinced that Africa needs a homegrown new democracy. After almost half a century of independence, we need to go back to the drawing board. I do not propose one uniform set of parameters of political systems and processes in Africa. Far from it. But from our colonial experience, and from our independence experience, I believe we now know enough of what works and what does not work in Africa to be able to develop a synthesis based on our history, our experience, and on global realities.  

Such a synthesis has to revolve around the following six points I should like to share with you.

The first is education. There is no denying the fact that low levels of education was one of the major problems related to governance. Many people were given important positions of leadership without the education, the skills and the experience needed to discharge their duties properly. In addition, they were deliberately denied the preparation they needed to assume leadership. Thus poorly equipped, they had to courageously muddle through unknown terrain.

Today we are independent. Free, fair and regular periodic elections, in multiparty political systems, are very important. But they are not enough for the new democracy for Africa that I envisage. We must also properly prepare our people for leadership, not simply by expanding enrollment in different levels of education systems, but also by improving the quality and the relevance of that education to the needs and challenges of today and tomorrow. We also need to identify potential leaders early, and develop and nurture them. (Applause) Leadership of our countries should not be turned into a lottery, where every Tom, Dick and Harry can try their luck. (Applause)

Honourable Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, education is also the means by which ordinary people can acquire the tools and the courage to make informed choices during elections, and to hold leaders to account after elections.  Without this, free and fair elections will not amount to much. For us in Africa, education must be not just for social mobility, wealth creation and poverty reduction, but especially as a means to encourage and facilitate good democratic governance.

The second point is building capable and sustainable institutions and systems for good democratic governance. There is today a lot of talk about the capacity of African institutions to deliver on good governance and on development. In extreme cases, we are concerned about the so-called “failed states”.

It is obvious from history that colonial powers only focussed on those institutions and systems that worked to ensure firm control over their colonies. They did not focus on developing institutions and systems to ensure democratic governance and development after independence. Neither was the development of such institutions and systems a priority during the cold war in most African countries. 

Today in the era of multiparty politics with the divisive tendencies they often spawn, and in the competitive environment of the market nationally, regionally and internationally, the question of effective, efficient institutions and systems to guide, regulate and monitor the political, economic and social life of our people and countries becomes both pertinent and pageant. And not just that, we must now create systems of political and economic management that are strong, that are resilient and that are capable of outliving their founders and current leaders.  (Applause)

The third point is on tolerance and inclusion. As I pointed out earlier, the colonial legacy in Africa is one of “divide and rule”, of playing one African group against another, one religion against another, one tribe against another, one clan against another. Today from the experience of the last few decades we can attribute most civil wars and cross-border conflicts to the legacies of the policies of bigotry, intolerance and exclusion.  

The new African democracy I advocate must have at its heart the politics of tolerance and inclusion; not as a product, but as a fundamental deliberate goal and priority. I am sure that if we look far back enough into our history to the period before colonialism, we can find archetypes of politics of tolerance and inclusion that can today inform our efforts to design a new more inclusive form of democracy with African characteristics.  

Today there are people who ridicule the African extended family. It is true some aspects of it are now anachronistic and unhelpful. But the extended African family is an expression of a sense of belonging, of inclusion and of participation, yet when we embraced western forms of democracy we fell into the trap of making political parties, not as mechanisms for tolerance and inclusion, but of intolerance and exclusion. The concept of “winner takes all” has no African roots. Traditional Africa is corporate; truly it had its own framework of institutional checks and balances, but it was always inclusive. 

In the new African democracy, political parties will not be an excuse to exclude people, but a reason to bring them together. (Applause)  Political parties must never be based on divisive things like religion, tribe or race.  Some religions are minorities, some tribes are a minority and some races will be a minority. No political system should institutionalize the disadvantages generated by such minority status.  No one wants to be perpetually excluded, and if they see no light at the end of the tunnel, they take desperate measures to be taken note of and to be included in governance. 

Additionally, inclusion must also cover the social and economic spheres. Africa must avoid social and economic policies and practices that exclude some people from the benefits of national ownership of natural resources, of national investment, and of growth and development. As in politics, people who feel permanently excluded from the benefits of growth can be desperate, and hence be a potential force for instability.

The fourth aspect is participation, which I deliberately want to treat separately from inclusion. Inclusion is one thing, actual participation is another; together they create a national force, together they forge a national vision. Here too we can find in traditional African societies archetypes of participation in the social, economic and political systems on our continent. We have to think out of the box and refuse to be constrained by what we have been conditioned to accept as the gospel of democratic participation. 

An African proverb made famous by Senator Hillary Clinton says, “It takes a whole village to raise a child.” This is the kind of participation I should like to see emerging in the new African democracy. The relationship between governments and people should not be about them and us; only about us - one team, one destiny.  (Applause) It is common now to hear of the imperative of ownership in socio-economic development. But ownership is pointless without actual participation, including the full participation of women. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, decentralization of government, of resources and of responsibilities is one way to address the needs of inclusion and participation. But it has to go far, embodying and illustrating more trust and more confidence in the people.  Former colonial rulers underestimated the capacities of Africans. 

Today, governments in independent Africa must not repeat the same prejudices and mistakes. They must never underestimate our people’s capacity to plan, to prioritize and to do things for themselves with government support. They must strive to avoid state capture by elites. In traditional African societies people used to sit under a tree or around a fire and discuss issues thoroughly until solutions shared by all people were found. This may be considered inefficient in today’s fast pace societies, but we can always find ways of incorporating some of these positive elements in a new democratic paradigm for today’s Africa.

The fifth aspect is transparency. In my ten years as President of the United Republic of Tanzania, I have tried to change the attitudes of political leaders and public officials about the necessity to be more open and transparent in the operations of government. It is not about being open on all government matters at all stages of formulation and implementation, but about acknowledging the people’s right to know what the government is doing in their name. I have also just talked about inclusion and participation, both of which are not possible if people are not well informed.  Effective participation requires effective government communication. 

In the new African democracy I envisage, it is the government’s duty to communicate; and I use the broader concept of “communicate”, not the narrow one of “inform”. For important as the duty to inform is, it is much more important to communicate, to create space for dialogue and to facilitate free flow of thoughts and ideas.  (Applause)

Communication rather than information builds stronger institutions and processes for good governance. It is about improving interactions between governments and the governed, in whose names decisions, and government revenue is spent.  Elections every five years are important for democracy, but they are not sufficient to ensure the people have a better say in the way they are governed. 

In between elections, the people must continue to feel relevant, to feel they are listened to. That is the heart and culture of the new democratic governance for Africa I am advocating. The new, welcome multiparty constitutional order prevailing in the most African states requires openness and accessibility as pillars of legitimacy, and as determinants of government popular support –(Applause)

A democratic government thrives on popular support but such support cannot be in the abstract. It must be based on what the people know. No matter how hard one works, and how much attention is given to the people’s concerns, if the people do not know about it, they will not give due credence, credit, credibility and support. They cannot feel part of the general polity if they do not hear and are not heard. The new democracy must be people driven.  

Mr Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, the sixth and last point is on accountability, which flows logically from the previous point of transparency. Being open is exposing oneself to public scrutiny and hence being accountable. When people are open and accountable, little room exists for the scourge of corruption. 

In the new African democracy I envisage, all stakeholders have to be open and accountable. Those who want to hold the government accountable, such as the media, political parties and civil society must, indeed, be themselves an example of integrity, transparency and accountability –(Applause)- before they can demand the right to hold the government accountable. 

Additionally, African media and civil society will have to develop an African agenda. I have the impression that most of our civil societies in African are not only externally funded, and hence beholden to those who pay the piper, but also they have no agenda of their own, preferring –(Applause)- to echo and respond to an agenda set by others. Likewise with our media. In Tanzania, I always ask the media not to be like the proverbial knife, which thinking it is only destroying an old sheath, is actually destroying its own home –(Applause)- An Ashanti proverb says, “Do not call the forest that shelters you a jungle”. Let African media pay a heed to this adage as they relate to their own countries and their continent. (Applause) It is bad enough that the international media hardly sees anything good worth reporting on Africa. The real tragedy is when they are fed with the negative stereotyped stories by our own local media people. 

Mr Speaker, effective and efficient government communication critically depends on the quality of the mass media. For the media are the bridge between the government and the governed. They are the mechanism for the interaction between them and the forum for the exchange of ideas. Once the credibility of the mass media is eroded, there ceases to be effective partners of government in the promotion of open and accountable governance. And, very importantly the media people should not assume a role that could be construed as supplanting representative democracy. They should instead play better their role of societal watchdogs, whistle-blowers, signalers and initiators of action to promote good governance. 

One problem I discern is the trend to turn the concept of a free press upside down. Some think the plethora of media is a reflection of a free press. Does the production for instance in my commercial capital of Dar es Salaam of 5 English language and 8 Swahili language daily newspapers truly empower our people to participate in democratic governance more effectively? I wonder! The quintessential question of quality verses quantity needs attention.  

But, above all a free African media should uphold African decency, respect for authority, –(Applause)- and the right of maligned people to respect and to legal redress. A free press is not licensed to lie, misrepresent and to insult. I yearn for a free press, with African characteristics, one that seeks to build, not to destroy, to heal, not to kill. 

Mr Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, I have spoken for too long and I should now bring my remarks to a close. My plea to you and to all African brothers and sisters is that after all those years of colonial rule, and the five decades or so of self-rule with its mistakes of all colours and shades, the time has now come for Africa to go back to the drawing board and try to engender a new democracy for Africa with African characteristics.

I have attempted an outline of such democracy, but my purpose is really to initiate a rethink and to provoke a debate. In colonial times, conventional wisdom derisively held that out of Africa came always something new. In our time I believe it is imperative that positively we put our heads together to develop a new African democracy for the Africa of today and tomorrow. We can do it if we really want to and I hope it will be a new democracy underpinned by the Christmas gift suggestions of Oren Arnold:

To your enemy, forgiveness.
To an opponent, tolerance.
To a friend, your heart.
To a customer, service.
To all, charity. 
To every child, a good example.
To yourself, respect.  

I thank you for your kind attention. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no doubt this has been a very moving address to us and you will need time to internalize it because it is food for thought.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF 
PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO PAY 
TRIBUTE TO HIS EXCELLENCY BENJAMIN WILLIAM MKAPA, THE OUTGOING PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA.

4.20
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Parliament of Uganda resolves to pay tribute to the out-going President of the United Republic of Tanzania, His Excellency Benjamin William Mkapa.  Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is seconded by hon. Winnie Matsiko.

MR SEBALU: WHEREAS His Excellency Benjamin Mkapa has served the United Republic of Tanzania since 1962;
 
AND WHEREAS during that period he rose from a humble beginning of a journalist to the highest office of the President of the Republic of Tanzania for the last 10 years;

NOTING with appreciation the long service and statesmanship exhibited by His Excellency Benjamin William Mkapa;

NOTING FURTHER the political stability that has existed in Tanzania combined with a rapid economic development during his political career;

APPRECIATING the efforts the President put in the integration process of the East African Community and the commitment to the Fast Tracking of the East African Political Federation;

APPRECIATING FURTHER the President’s spirit of good neighbourliness and the active participation in conflict prevention and resolution in the Great Lakes Region and the consolidation of the East African Community Customs Union;

HAVING EXHIBITED great support and maintained strong and committed membership to the organization of African Unity (OAU), now African Union (AU), the Commonwealth and other International Organisations;
HAVING EXHIBITED FURTHER the highest calibre of statesmanship through his deep consciousness that power is not his to glorify but to serve the people who entrusted it to him and the efforts made to be accountable to the people in the exercise of that power;

NOW THEREFORE, it is hereby resolved by Members of Parliament that:
1.	His Excellency President Benjamin William Mkapa be recognized as an illustrious and celebrated out-going President of the United Republic of Tanzania, Eastern Africa and Africa as a whole; (Applause) 

2.	The Parliament of Uganda registers its great admiration for President Mkapa’s statesmanship in peace-keeping and conflict resolution and for the exemplary leadership he has rendered to his nation, East Africa and Africa as a whole; (Applause)

3.	That the Parliament of Uganda wishes the President the best in his retirement. (Applause) Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

Mr Speaker, His Excellency Benjamin Mkapa, the out-going President of the United Republic of Tanzania, is a distinguished son of Africa with a proven record of commitment to the ideals of Pan Africanism. His illustrious and colourful career can best be summarized as a distinguished journalist, seasoned diplomat, formidable politician and a committed statesman. (Applause)  

He was born in November 1938 at Masasi in Mutwara region. Between 1945 and 1951, he attended primary school at Rupaso and Ndada schools where he attained a standard 8 certificate. He was at Kingosera Seminary from 1952 and 1953 -(Applause)- before moving to Ndada Secondary School for his ordinary level secondary education. He then moved to St Francis College, now Kungu Secondary School, for advanced level in secondary education where he was awarded with a Cambridge certificate. From 1959 to 1962, he was at Makerere University in Uganda and obtained –(Applause)- Preliminary Arts in 1959 and Bachelors of Arts Degree with Honors in English in 1962 - (Applause)- the year Uganda attained her independence. 

After graduation, he went back to Tanzania and embarked on a long and distinguished career, which ran as follows:

In 1962, he was appointed a district officer in Local Administration in Dodoma. Later that year he served as a foreign service officer. In 1966, he started a long career in journalism, which saw him serve as Managing Editor of Tanzania’s leading newspapers, including, Nationalist, Uhuru, The Daily News and The Sunday News. In 1972-74, he served as Managing Director of Daily News, Tanzania. 

In 1974-76, he served as President Julius Nyerere’s Press Secretary, a job he did with remarkable distinction. (Applause) In 1976, he was a founding editor of the Tanzanian news agency, SHIHATA. 

From 1976 to 1977, he went back to diplomacy as Tanzania’s High Commissioner to Nigeria also accredited to Ghana. In 1977-80, he became a minister of Foreign Affairs and in his acceptance speech, he joked, “The High Commission lost a High Commissioner, but gained a minister for Foreign Affairs”. (Laughter) In 1980-82, he became a minister for Information and Culture. 

In 1982-83, he returned to diplomacy and served as High Commissioner of Tanzania to Canada and that clearly shows his humility. Having served as a minister, he went back and served as a high commissioner. (Applause) In 1983-84, he became Tanzania’s Ambassador to the United States of America. For the following six years, His Excellency Mkapa returned to Tanzania and served again as a minister of Foreign Affairs in 1984-90.  So, when I talk of him as a seasoned diplomat that is exactly what I mean.

In 1990-92, he went back to serve as Minister of Information and Broadcasting and then 1992-95, saw him serve as a minister of Science and Technology and Higher Education. 

Having served all the above high ranking positions, the alternative was to turn to the highest position in the land and indeed, in 1995 he was elected President of the United Republic of Tanzania in the first multiparty elections. (Applause) 

In 1996 he became the Chairman of Chama-Chamapinduzi and in 2000 got re-elected as the President with 71.9 percent of the total vote turn-out.  

One of the outstanding achievements of His Excellency Benjamin Mkapa as President of the United Republic of Tanzania was the political challenge that he expounded on. He presided over the transition from a one-party system to a multi-party system. He maintained the political unity of Tanzania and under his tenure the number of political parties increased from 13 in 1995 to 18 in 2005. 

In 2001 he signed a reconciliation agreement, Mwataka between CCM and the Civic United Front (CUF) that ended the animosity that had cropped up between the two parties, especially in Zanzibar. The Mwataka is in the process of evolving into a national agreement to include all other opposition parties.  

He has tackled the issue of liberalizing the media and in the last ten years of his tenure, newspaper dailies have increased from 22 to 42. Mr Mkapa has just talked about the issue of quality, which I do not have much information about. However I can state that the number has increased from 22 to 42. Radio stations have also increased from 2 to 63 although the issue of quality also needs to be looked at, at this point.

Mr Mkapa’s biggest challenge as a president has been in the area of the economy as the President of Uganda has clearly stated. However he has proved himself by living up to this challenge as well. During his tenure, the economy has registered significant improvement and outstanding performance. Inflation has been brought down from 27.1 percent in 1995 to 4.5 percent in 2004. (Applause) GDP growth has increased from 3.6 percent in 1995 to 6.7 percent in 2004 -(Applause)- while Government revenues have risen from a monthly average of TzShs 37.4 billion in fiscal year 1995-1996 to a monthly average of over TzShs 140 billion in fiscal year 2004-2005. (Applause) 

Between 1995-2004, the Tanzania Investment Centre approved 2527 projects that were responsible for the creation of 500,000 jobs. Tourism has been growing by an average of ten percent annually over the last ten years while the number of tourists going to Tanzania has increased from 295,000 in 1995 to 582,000 in 2004. This has been responsible for an increase in revenue from $ 258 million to $ 746 million over the same period of time.  

In the area of health, between 1995 and 2004 the number of hospitals has increased from 194 to 220. Health centres have increased from 333 to 443 and dispensaries from 3832 to 4622.  

At a regional level, His Excellency Mkapa has been active in conflict prevention and resolution in the Great Lakes Region. He is an active player in economic cooperation with SADAC and is the current Chairperson of the 14-member Southern African Community. As an East African, President Mkapa has provided the required leadership and has seen the community consolidate its Customs Union. 

As the Chairperson of the community and in partnership with His Excellency Mwai Kibaki and His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, he has strongly supported the integration process of the East African Community and is fully committed to the fast tracking of the East African Political Federation.  

His Excellency Mkapa is also a serious writer. His first book, Wazi noukweri raisi watu azungumuza na wanachi which means, “Truth and transparency; the people’s president talks to People”, was published in Dar-es-Salaam in 2003. President Mkapa holds three doctorates; one from Soka University, Japan 1998, another from Moore House Atlanta, USA 1999 and another one from Open University, Tanzania 2003. (Applause) 

On top of what I have said he is happily married to Ann Mkapa –(Applause)- and they are blessed with two sons. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the standing ovation that His Excellency the President received, this is clear testimony to the fact that all the 304 members want to be given an opportunity to support the motion. However for purposes of record, because we have to record evidence, I will limit the speeches. This is because I can see that somebody is trying to move to put a question. 

Also I am saying this because I have received His Excellency the President’s program for today and he has very many engagements and I do not want to disappoint others by retaining him here for a long time. Therefore I call upon the seconder to make a contribution and then we will see how to proceed. However it should be brief. 

4.36
MS WINFRED MASIKO (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion moved by hon. Sebalu of Busiro County East to pay tribute to the outgoing President of the United Republic of Tanzania. 

On this historical occasion when the Parliament of Uganda is hosting President Mkapa and his wife, I feel honoured to be accorded this opportunity to pay tribute to a successful politician and President of the United Republic of Tanzania. (Applause)  

Mr Speaker, President Mkapa must take much of the credit as the driving force behind the Tanzanian extensive economic liberalization as already mentioned. Under his leadership he has instituted the transparency needed for conventional investment and has established an anti-corruption commission as well as an independent Tanzania Revenue Authority.  

Mr Mkapa, not only did you take advantage of the uninterrupted political stability of Tanzania since its independence in 1961, which placed it in a special category but also put much effort in economic reforms, reconstruction and discipline of public service for good governance.  

Like the President of Uganda, your commitment to reaching out to the sick and the disadvantaged is highly commended.  It is vividly seen in the establishment of the Tanzania Benjamin William Mkapa National HIV/AIDS Fellows Program.  Indeed this program shall provide highly dedicated and skilled personnel to work for, care and treat people in under-serviced regions as well as improve the management of healthcare systems not only in Tanzania but East Africa as a whole. (Applause)

Your Excellency, when you co-chaired the World Commission on the Social Dimension Globalisation, you emphasized the importance of re-thinking and re-engineering globalisation into a process which would truly create equal opportunities for all. It was a great pride when you co-chaired that commission.  

You articulated the governance of globalisation as one of the major problems and cited the fact that global markets have grown rapidly without parallel development of economic-social institutions that are necessary for their smooth and equitable functioning. You raised the concern about the unfairness of key global rules on trade and finance that favour rich countries, and highlighted the inadequacy of current international policies to respond to challenges posed by globalisation. Furthermore, you challenged Africans to take the lead and stand united in the globalisation process. We applaud you for that, your Excellency. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, allow me to thank His Excellency for the fact that during his term of office we saw the rise of hon. Gertrude Mongera to the prestigious top office of the Pan African Parliament. We saw you nurture and support Gertrude Mongera who is an inspiration and a pride to women in Uganda, in East Africa, Africa and the world at large. (Applause) We would like to commend you greatly for that.

I cannot stop without mentioning the engine behind the great performance of His Excellency hon. President Mkapa.  I would like to pay tribute to Mrs Anna Mkapa as well. We are proud of you and you are a woman of great integrity. You have been an example to the African continent and a clear indication that good families are the foundation of good leadership. (Applause)  She has given Mr Mkapa support and been a woman of good character void of controversies.  Indeed you have been a mother of the Nation and we hope that you continue to mother Tanzania so that it can continue to be a successful nation.

Mr Speaker, to a President who has been a formidable politician, I wish to second this motion and to call upon my colleagues here to support it with all the fairness that it deserves. I thank you very much. 

4.44
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Bwana Speaker, naomba kibali maalum niwahi kuongea katika lugha yetu ya East Africa Kiswahili –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the official language is English. I know there may be something in the pipeline but it has not been finalized.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very happy to be here this afternoon, not only to welcome a great East African but also to pay tribute to what he has done for this region. I take your guidance that we have not yet made Swahili our second official language not withstanding the fact that it was a major recommendation in our constitutional amendments last week. Diyo manake, ndikuya nikiwomba kibali kulingana na hiyo mapendekezo ya katiba.

Mr Speaker, Ndugu Mkapa the President of the United Republic of Tanzania is not a stranger amidst us. I have known him personally for some time since we were diplomats in Washington at the same time where he was representing Tanzania while I was representing Uganda. I have known him as a great East African by virtue of his own background and performance. I cannot help saying that if it were not for his background work and efforts in Moshi since 1979, I doubt that some of us would be here.

Mr Speaker, it is because of Tanzania’s input in our liberation nearly 30 years ago that we are able to stand here, having achieved all that we have and pay tribute to him. You know what you have done Mr Mkapa, especially for President Museveni.

Mr Speaker, I know in Swahili they say kunatuka manake kustaafu sio kwamba which means, “you have now run out of energy”. However when you retire it does not mean you are no longer able to perform. It is a constitutional requirement and you must adhere to it.

Mr Speaker, once again we call upon Tanzania to help us in our efforts to get together not in a loose association per se or mere cooperation in economic pursuits but in our efforts to form one country to include Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania. (Applause) I know that at the moment there are efforts or “fast track” as President Museveni has put it to bring us together. However when you give us breakfast we also ask for lunch. In other words, in our opinion the fast track is not fast enough.  

Some of us believe that the resolutions of the National Parliaments of Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya should be adequate to give the leaders the capacity to sign an agreement that will bind us. Furthermore a referendum should be held to confirm that the political East African Federation is a reality. 

Mr Speaker, we find that the process is a bit too slow.  Our leaders have got the capacity and the mandate of the people. We thank God that in East Africa we do not have a military government that has imposed itself on the people.  Instead all the leaders in East Africa are elected representatives of the people. (Applause) Therefore President Museveni, you have our mandate to negotiate a political federation. (Applause) As usual you can come to us for the stamp of our approval. 

What we do not want is this question of ministers and commissioners investigating the possibilities of a federation. What is it that we do not know about East Africa? Some of us are actually East Africans by birth. (Laughter) What is there that I do not know about Kenya and Tanzania? I have got a brother in Kenya, a half brother in Tanzania and I am here in Uganda. What else do we have to wait for? 

Mr Speaker, we are here this afternoon to pay tribute to a great East African. Once again I call upon the people of Tanzania to allow President Mkapa to be available in our efforts to bring these three countries together irrespective of the fact that he has relinquished his official function of running the United Republic of Tanzania. (Applause) 

Furthermore in regard to this issue of fast track, we have a retired President in Kenya, we are soon to have another one in Tanzania and within a short time we will have a retired President in Uganda as well. (Laughter) These three leaders with their vast experience in matters of managing the state can form a club and formulate a constitution and the framework for a federation. 

Ndugu Mkapa, I would have spoken in Swahili but I am inhibited by our Rules of Procedure. However let me say that kama nime kupata kibali kutoka katika kwa mwenye kiti, it would have been possible. However we will have our internal problems from time to time. You are now our big brother and Mtwala is not too far. If you hear anybody crying across the border, please pick up your mobile and call Ndugu Museveni vipi huko kunanini huko naskiya maneno? 

Likewise from time to time, raisi mtalagiwa akichukwa kazi; remind him that in East Africa we have always worked as a team and there are certain aspects that need to be attended to immediately.  

I do not want to get into the various constitutional arrangements that we have in our respective countries. Instead I would like to thank you for the wise words you have given us in your speech regarding governance. (Applause) I cannot analyse it and as the Speaker has put it very correctly, we need time to internalise the speech.  I would like to add that like a good former journalist you came prepared with a printed text. I hope this example will be followed internationally. (Applause)

Finally I would like to say to our Guest of Honour this afternoon that please do come back. You are not a visitor here but a brother. The doors are open any time you wish to come whether it is by bicycle, wheelbarrow or jet. You and your dear wife are most welcome. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

4.55
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker Sir, I beg to support the Motion. I have been so animated and inspired by your speech that I wish to invite you to give public lectures at Makerere University and other universities. (Applause) President Mkapa has maintained a policy of good neighbourliness through the meetings of the East African Presidents and by being a very diplomatic person. 

As already mentioned, he has successfully spearheaded the transition from a one-party state to a multi-party system in Tanzania. Uganda and other African countries should learn a lot from this experience. You have also maintained stability in Tanzania by creating an environment conducive for investment. Although there are many ethnic groups in Tanzania, ethnicity has not been a divisive factor in Tanzania’s politics. 

This is so because leaders have pursued unifying policies such as the use of Kiswahili as already mentioned. The use of this language has reduced the gap between the elites and the masses at a horizontal level. In amending our Constitution, we have decided to have Swahili as the second official language, a move that will enhance communication within the East African region. (Applause)  

Hon. Mkapa worked closely with the other East African Presidents to establish the East African Community, which will give us a clout to bargain globally. The challenge of course is to form a political federation of East Africa.

Tanzania paid a very high price in liberating Uganda from the grip of Amin’s dictatorship and we are very grateful to it. (Applause)

As Chancellor of Makerere University and on behalf of Makerere University alumni, we are proud to point out that we have had such a distinguished former student who has gone further to become a successful President. (Applause)  We hope that you will continue to be available to us for advice. I also ask that you write a book about your experiences for scholars, students and politicians.  

I want to thank your dear wife for sustaining you while handling this good work. We wish you success in your retirement. I beg to support the motion.

4.59
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much Mr Speaker, Your Excellency Benjamin Mkapa of Tanzania, Your Excellency Yoweri Museveni of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, the day would not end if UPC did not say a word. (Laughter) I thank the President of Tanzania for this afternoon he introduced very many words to our vocabulary.  One of them is “national vision” where all of us are required to pull together and form a visionary project. This is not a monopoly of any one individual but a concern for all of us. I thank His Excellency for introducing another word, “communication” to mean that we should stop broadcasting and thinking that seeds will grow on their own. Rather we should communicate and make a symbiosis with our people.

We will never stop thanking Tanzania. They have been a leading example to Africa since independence and they continue to lead by example up to today. I hope and wish that Your Excellency had visited us a week earlier because I am sure we would have gained greatly from your wisdom. I would like to ask that as you retire, please leave behind a Mkapa Foundation that will build a political institution in Africa to train our young in matters of politics as you have rightly observed. Thank you very much. (Applause)

5.03
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This evening is a celebration of 44 years of continuity, which has produced regularity in Tanzania.  

Tanzania can be seen as a garden with a good farmer who ploughed the soil, planted seed, removed the weeds and grew fruits for others to reap. We are reaping from the painstaking efforts of Mwalimu Nyerere, the first President of Tanzania. He sowed seeds for his country, answered the call of his people and produced a way of looking at society that has produced regularity. President Mkapa is a product of that period and effort. That is why we must thank the late Mwalimu Nyerere for those efforts and for his vision as President Museveni has already said.

Mr Speaker, this is a celebration of a positive change in the region, one that has seen retiring Presidents calling on their colleagues and bidding them farewell, something we did not have before. (Applause) In the past, Amin could not shake hands with anybody because he was such a disaster for us. Similarly, Obote was overthrown and left power twice. Kenya on the other hand has had continuity that has continued with the present President. Change has occurred in the region and we must protect and nurture this change. The conditions that favour regularity and continuity must be promoted.

Mr Speaker, President Mkapa is known for his tolerance and patience. I remember when we convened for three days in Moshi in 1979 for a conference. We the Ugandans failed to agree on who should be in the conference and groups were beginning to form in the corridors and compound of that Police College where we were having that meeting.  President Mkapa who was then the Minister of Foreign Affairs came to us the organizing committee asking, “How far have you gone and what can we do?” and he kept going back and forth. 

Anybody who read my speech at that opening conference will recall the proverb I quoted which said, “It is better to feed somebody with a bad stomach than to feed the ungrateful”. I said this because the Ugandans were obviously misusing the hospitality and efforts that Tanzania had extended to us for three days. Fighters in Uganda were moving on and we were the ones holding back the progress because of our disunity. Benjamin Mkapa nursed us together and we succeeded in completing that conference. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you and remind Ugandans that we should never get into a situation where our neighbours have to intervene. 

Mr Speaker, as President Mkapa has pointed out, leaders are produced by society, whether that society has experienced good or bad things. We are a product of the colonial period but fortunately man is a learning animal as you have said. We can improve and indeed we have improved. For example, the Uganda of 1979 in which you played a part is no longer the same Uganda. I believe we have improved. Many people in the audience here have aspirations of being presidents. There is no doubt about that and they are free to do so.  

However if there is anything to learn from your presence here, it is your obedience to Tanzania and to the system in which you serve. (Applause) How can you be a minister of Foreign Affairs and then become an ambassador and answer to a permanent secretary who was below you? Ugandans who are aspiring to become presidents must emulate this quality of patience. Those who get angry because something has happened to them must learn from Mkapa who has been -(Applause)

I take this opportunity to thank you for all you did during the meetings of the non-alignment and for all the efforts you have made in promoting Africa. I certainly agree with those who say East Africa and Uganda will need you. Please continue to be with us. There is still that conference on Kiswahili which you were supposed to support and I hope that it will still go on even when you leave State House. Thank you, Your Excellency. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just been advised that we are now encroaching on other people’s time.

5.11
MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Mr Speaker and Your Excellencies, having listened to the wonderful debate, I beg to move that the question be put.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question on the motion moved by hon. Mike Sebalu.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I note that we have other items on our Order Paper but because of the importance of this occasion, and the moving address given to us by His Excellency the President, I believe I should give you time this evening to go and internalise all this and use it possibly for another time. Therefore, we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned to Monday afternoon. However committees will start sitting tomorrow morning to consider the Budget.  

TANZANIA NATIONAL ANTHEM

UGANDA NATIONAL ANTHEM

(The House rose at 5.20 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 29 August 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


