
Thursday, 24 August 1995


The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary Building, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

(The Council was called to order.)

ITEM NO. 2

MOTION

MR ZAKARY OLUM:  Mr Chairman, I beg to present for the Council’s consideration and approval, the report of the Standing Sectoral Committee of this Council on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  Tabling the debates on the Ministerial Policy Statement and the Committee’s observations and recommendations on the Ministries as it makes of both the requirements and development expenditure for the Financial year 1995/96.  

The Ministerial Policy Statement as clearly pointed out the importance of agriculture in the economy of this country.  The livelihood of our people is very much dependent on agricultural productivity which involves more than 95 percent of the population if we look in the rural areas.  This greatly underscores the strength and importance of agricultural sector in earning forex exchange for our country.  

Over the past few years, we have had to discuss to the ministry on how to co-ordinate agricultural activities in this country.  And we were saying here at one time, to urge the Ministry especially to look at how the planning and evaluation and monitoring of their programmes are carried out.  At one time, this House did report there their concern at so many projects which are in this ministry, but not properly coordinated, evaluated and monitored.  

I am happy to report that this year, the ministry has made a recommendable effort in creating a new department called Agricultural Planning Department which is going on a normal task of planning, evaluating and monitoring the projects.  I think this is something that the Members should really acknowledge. (Applause)  A good start has been made in several areas in this ministry especially concerning food security, irrigation and agricultural financing.  But we do note that there are several problems which must be overcome before this can be put in place.  For instance, we need to have a master plan on irrigation, and the ministry has assured us that, they are working towards creating this body, which will be able to plan irrigation on a more organised manner.  And I think Members have been demanding for this for many years.  

One issue which has been troubling this House has been the issue of financial management in this Ministry.  We have all heard the concern and especially the work which has been carried out by the Public Accounts Committee of this House, that there have been distorts and mismanagement of finances in the ministry.  There are two projects of grant which have raised a lot of concern.  There is the Japanese Grant totaling about 23 million dollars and also the Canadian Grant.  We are all aware for what has been going on in the press especially on the work of Public Accounts.  The Committee would like to record their appreciation for the Public Accounts Committee for coming out very clearly in solving out these problems (Applause)  

However, I would like to make that appreciation, the hard work being carried out by the Ministry in trying to re-dress these serious menace in our Ministry.  They have put in place a mechanism for strengthening the financial administration; storekeeping and discipline within the ministry.  We have been assured by the minister and the Permanent Secretary and all the officials that they are going to work day and night to recover all the money which has been misappropriated.  And I think, this is something that the Ministry - I think this is something very commendable because a break must be carried out to stop this menace.  And we would like to thank the ministry of this tremendous task which they have taken upon themselves to fulfill.  There is therefore, a new image being created in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  It is not the same image which we have known for the last three or four years.  So, we look forward to a discipline, hard working and really prosperous ministry. (Applause)  

We also looked at a new department or a re-arrangement of the Land Resources Department.  This is the department which deals with land resources and development.  I know my brother hon. Elly Karuhanga will be very happy to hear that, this is the same department which deals with water; and how water is good for the animals.  And this department has just been re-aligned and streamlined to be able to handle water for both human and animal resources.  

Some years back, this House did pass a law creating NARO - which is the National Agricultural Research Organisation.  This has done a tremendous job in trying to streamline research activities in this country.  Several varieties of crops which are grown in this country, have been developed by NARO.  The Committee has noted with appreciation; they consider the effort made by NARO towards this development.  The research priorities of NARO have been led out on the basis of the need of this country.  There is a lot of basic research which has been done in this country before, and continues to be done.  But there is need for this country to focus on the necessity to improve the farmers’ output and to create a linkage between farmers, researchers and extension.  Water has been lacking in this country before it has not been the lack of research; but I think it has been, because we lack the linkages for those who do research; those who will consume it, and how to pass on that information.  And I think NARO has done a tremendous job; they have now existed for 1,000 days since this House passed that Statute.  We are looking forward to the day when we shall celebrate the 1,000 days; and I hope this Ministry will have the courtesy to invite you, to attend that day because this is something that has been created from this House, and I believe the Members of this House should be invited together with you so that we can all share and enjoy this great achievement through NARO.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  While the Chairman of the Committee continues to praise the work of NARO, we found in our deliberations in the Committee of Natural Resources we found a project under NARO, being budgeted for in the Ministry of Natural Resources Head 129.  May be NARO seems to have so many projects that they are not aware where some of them are being managed from.  Thank you.  And that project is Agro-Forestry Research Network.  Thank you.

MR OLUM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform hon. Dr Byaruhanga that, NARO is fully aware of all the projects which are being carried out by them.  It has only happened that, the coordinating agency for this particular project happens to be the Ministry of Natural Resources.  And as we are aware, the National Environment Management Authority is coordinating so many projects and the management agencies can vary from place to place.  Some are being managed at the University, others at different spots.  So, really, I think the Ministry is fully aware and we did discuss it in our Committee.  So, I would like to assure him that these people know what is going on.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I like him for - we should remember this; our emphasizing or under emphasizing a topic, makes it poor.  Now, too many cooks spoil the food. (Laughter)

MR OLUM:  Mr Chairman, this House would not be exciting without hon. Obwangor.  He always keeps us happy and I think I know what he is talking about.  Talking about NARO, I would like to raise one fundamental issue which is very cardinal in its operations.  We have the livestock research institute which this House did pad in 1993, that it be located at Tororo.  The former East African Tsetse Control, UTRO.  There are other government agencies that have been using this place in the past.  At this station, we have had Animal Disease Research, and also Human Disease Research especially on tsetse control and these disease-carrying infectors.  There are moves which government has decided that, this station be moved to the Ministry of Health.  But we should remember that, historically, this has always been under the Ministry of Animal Industry and Agriculture, in the former East African Committee.  And it is this very House which put this institute by law, under the Ministry of Agriculture specifically under NARO.  The Committee feels that, there is need for us to request government to re-think about the step being taken, to remove this institute with the entire infrastructure which are under different ministries.  Because, what can be done, the two can exist side by side.  There is no conflict, we are all serving the same nation, and we are all solving the same problems on both human and animal diseases.  And I think the Ministry of Health and the chairman of the Social Services has already been approached on this matter, we believe a better coordination on this matter should be carried out so that we do not loose the importance which is being carried out on research in those two areas.  

I would like to end by speaking on one issue which is of great importance to this House, that is the extension services.  This matter for the last three years has been be-devilling this House, and we have been trying to explain, as a Committee to this House, that does exists extension services in the country.  Like all other services in this country, they have all undergone problems which must be overcome.  Government has decided deliberately to unify the extension services.  This makes a lot of sense, we have debated it in our committee for the last four years and we are convinced that, this system works.  However, I would like to call upon Members that, we have problems.  Since the decentralisation programme started in this country, many districts have started laying off the very essential staff who should carry out this extension.  You cannot carry out extension without personnel.  So, I did not like to appeal to the Members here to talk to their different district administrations to really make sure that the personnel required for extension services are in place.  The Central Government is really concerned and the Ministry is very concerned about the reduction by local authorities without taking into consideration the need for agricultural extension.  We are all been crying out that, we need to train farmers.  We need to extend new knowledge to them, new technology to them.  This cannot be done without the required personnel.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the Chairman of the Committee that the extension services in Budadiri county and indeed in Mbale, the personnel are not there.  And if there are there at all, the Ministry should tell me what they have done.  As we write a new leaf with the new Minister and my sister here from another Musita, because there are some other Basitas in Budadiri; the new leaf is that they should come and identify themselves with the people in order to get extension services opened up and do some work which can be shown around.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OLUM:  Mr Chairman, in 1993/94, we had seen the complaints like this from many Members of this House, and my Committee decided to go up to the field to verify for ourselves. I would like to report in all honest that, may be some Members do not take trouble even to call at the Agricultural Offices.  What I am talking about are the front line extension; there is man at grassroots who exists in the villages.  And these are the people we are crying out for.  I think if you talk about people at the higher level, these people are available.  What we heed, however, is to equip all the extension workers with transport; pay their allowances, we should supervise them; then we shall deliver.  

Our appeal to this House, at this moment is to request government to make funds available.  What we need, however, is to equip all the extension workers with transport; pay their allowances, we should supervise them, then we shall deliver.  Our appeal to this House, at this moment is to request government to make funds available to pay these allowances to the extension workers to be able to provide them with a basic transport like bicycle and motorcycles.  These people are there, but we must facilitate them.  And I think we can together with government be able to procure a better delivery of extension services to our people.  

With those few remarks, I beg to move that the report of the Standing Sectoral committee on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and fisheries as presented by me, be approved.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.  The question is that, the report on Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries. With those in favour of the report presented to you by hon. Olum say Aye to the contrary Nay.

(Question put and agreed to.)

CONSIDERATION OF RECURRENT ESTIMATES

VOTE 010: PAGE 48

Programme 01

Programme 02

Programme 03

Programme 04

Programme 05

Programme 06

Programme 07

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, under this Programme 07, I would like to know whether this kind of training is for staff or for farmers.  If they are for staff, in this kind of training, being approved to all the personnel in the Ministry of Agriculture without any discrimination, I am saying this because there seem to be a common practice now where certain districts are being discriminated upon when they come to this kind of Overseas Training, Mr Chairman.  I need clarification.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order pleas.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, training is definitely for staff and it covers short courses in different disciplines, and it goes according to priorities.  There is no discrimination, but not all those who could qualify in a particular year could be sent for courses at the same time.

Programme 08

MR WANENDEYA:  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like the Minister to inform us in connection with sub-Vote 60; 10; turns us to schools and high education institutions of higher learning to which these answers are sent to.  And why not vote money direct to those institutions rather than going through this?  In addition, even if this is in connection with the vote, but I note that the Minister of State for Agriculture is there, but the Minister in the Ministry of Finance is the one who is doing this; I do not know whether this is -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Take your seat please.

MR OLUM:  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Wanendeya and the House that, this is the money which is used for training agricultural station workers for the various training colleges like; Arapai, Bukalasa and Busitema.  So that money is purposely used to train extension workers in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry.

Programme 09

Programme 10

Programme 11

Programme 12

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr Chairman, I ma proposing that to deduct Ushs1,000,000 for this Programme 12.  For the reason that for the Fisheries Department, this House has been crying about this deadly weed on our lakes.  The weed has eaten all the fish; I do not see why you have a department for fish.  After all, there is no fish to be fished.  We can as well forget about the department unless we can get some assurance from the minister that something is being done.  Otherwise, why do you buy the nets when there is no fish to catch?  I am proposing that we deduct UShs 1,000,000 - from this Vote, Mr Chairman.

MRS RWABYOMERE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to assure the House that, everything possible is being done to deal with the problem of the water hyacinth and that this UShs1,000,000 is not deducted from the Fisheries Department.  Because after dealing with the water hyacinth, we shall continue developing the Fisheries Industry.  

As we are here, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, you will realise the hon. Minister is not here.  They have gone on a tour of the lake with the Prime Minister to look at the water hyacinth.  And as he has been following, it is not just to look, but you see, you do not deal with something that you have not looked at.  You have to look at the magnitude.  And while all the other measures are being worked out, I want to assure the House that, shortly this problem will be dealt with and solved.  I thank you. (Applause)

Programme 13

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 4,935,945,000- under Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DEVELOPMENT ESTIMATES, HEAD 110: PAGE D.48

PROJECT NAME; FARMING SYSTEM SUPPORT PROJECT

PROJECT NAME: SMALL WHOLE COTTON REHABILITATION 

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I know that sub-Programme under 211 and 221, Mr Chairman, as we go along this way, I mean as Development Projects; I would like you to know an estimate of how this money for consultants and all term experts is budget.  Because, in some case, the amount of money being spent on each of these Programmes is more than what is budgeted for.  Therefore, it is a doing on our resources and we as a Committee on the Economy had said that, some of these programmes or the negotiations should be carried out by a Member of the Committee so that, it is done in proper manner, and we did point out this in our reports.  I know what would be done in future to minimise this kind of consultants and all term experts which is quite draining some of our loans and hence the way loans increase from 2.2 billion to now over 6 billion; is a problem to work on this.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MR OBWANGOR:  I agree entirely with my hon. Friend, Wanendeya.  I am not an agriculturalist, but I am a student by agriculture as a student of economics.  There are two main ways in which we are wasting our money in the system of consultancy.  Uganda is as per se 90 percent primarily and agricultural country.  I was a student in which I was a chemist in Makerere had produce chemists; then I think I am in flat so in chemists.  One cannot believe we did it so in Arapai Agricultural College in 1975.  Yes, we did it.  We struggled with soil in Arapai, not by Europeans or Indians; but Ugandans should be praised. (Applause)  

Therefore, let us value our knowledge to understand our own strength.  Something here, this is all the period of chemistry; people laugh.  But what is important, save money to make Uganda progressive and to increase the welfare in the rural areas.  If we do not do it, it is a failure.

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member through you Sir, that the matter of the costs in these projects has already been brought to the attention of the Minister of Finance, who has kindly agreed to look at a study of which I have carried out of a number of months, which this morning, I gave to my secretary to type.  So that it can be made available.  I think it is fair to say that, the government has recognised this problem and set a unit called National Execution Unit so that it can study how to save the money on consultancies and other areas, so that savings can be effected.  I think it is fair to say that, the Minister has acknowledged this problem.

THE CHAIRMAN:  It has been answered, take you seat please.

PROJECT NAME: COTTON SUB-SECTOR DEVELOPMENT

MR KANYOMOZI:  My only worry is that, the problem of coordination.  This same project appears in three ministries.  It is in Agriculture, it is in Finance, it is in Industry.  May I know from the Minister as to why they cannot sit together and do one thing and get it over?

MRS RWABYOMERE:  Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, the hon. Member who has put forward this question to the Ministry is well aware that, the approach of this government is to have an integrated approach.  So, it is No. 5 of the Ten Point Programme.  It is for us to have a National Independent Integrated Self Sustaining National Economy.  Now, when you have this under the Ministry of Trade and Industry, this does not absorb the Ministry of Agriculture of its primary responsibility for example of ensuring that, we have good quality and really standardized quality of cotton that we have.  We remain responsible as far as research is concerned, but we are integrated with the Ministry of Trade and Industry, for the reasons that I have explained.  We are integrated with the Ministry of Finance and Planning as far as planning is concerned, for the same reasons, I hope this can be appreciated.  

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, with all due respect to Madam Minister, I do not think that is the issue.  The issue is that, overhead costs by duplicating this same programme over and over again, is the thing I am after.  I am not really questioning the integrated self sustaining; I am just looking at the cost of having three people doing the same thing and ending up doing nothing.  I think the hon. Minister will have to look at that statement.  Because it is not the issue that we do not want integration.  It is the fact that, the money is thinly spread and as a result, to end with nothing.  Secondly, people tie the person, the back.  You go to agriculture they say, no, no.  That is the responsibility of Ministry of Finance. You go to Finance, they say, no, it is the Ministry of Industry and you end nowhere.  That is the question which I am asking and the repetition of overhead costs, Mr Chairman.

MRS RWABYOMERE:  Mr Chairman, just in one sentence, if I can attempt to satisfy the hon. Member.  This project really has to remain under the Ministry of Agriculture as well, so as to benefit from the services of the unified extension services that we have.

PROJECT NAME: MANUFACTURE OF AGRICULTURAL TOOLS

PROJECT NAME: ORWENYI RICE IRRIGATION SCHEME

PROJECT NAME: UGANDA SEED INDUSTRIAL RATIONALIZATION

PROJECT NAME: PAN AFRICAN RINDER PEST CAMPAIGN

PROJECT NAME: DIARY DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

PROJECT NAME: RURAL MILK PRODUCTION AND MARKETING

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, I would like to know the policy in light of the statement from the Minister of Finance just two days ago; regarding the proposal for privatising the Diary Corporation.  In light of that, are they still going to fulfill the master plan for the Diary Industry?  Or is it going now to be left to whoever buys that industry?

MR OBWANGOR:  Mr Chairman, milk is very important for our children for better feeding and for ourselves.  It is a vital and a necessary commodity to life.  We would like the Minister of Agriculture at least when he comes to Teso, I will organise to throw eggs at the Minister of Agriculture. (Applause)  I will organise and I say so, I will organise eggs.  Because, this is a man who when we talk about Masaka, so many children are dying, Arua; everywhere the Minister of Agriculture is idle.  Because milk is important in a life of a child.  And not only that, even eggs.  100 an egg.  A family of four in a month 36,000-; and I am getting a pay as a worker - a sweeper, 10,000-.  How am I going about with life?  At least, welfare should be increased in rural areas.  and the people here are just wasting time, coming to the towns; muwogo, muwogo with kimbo, kimbo.’ (Laughter)  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I was going to say that, what hon. Obwangor has said is the more reason why this project should be there.  Because it is a policy project and programme.  So that areas which have not been touched in terms of milk production and marketing are also reached and we can have enough milk around the country.  And properly that answers hon. Kanyomozi’s problem.  Because even if Diary Corporation is privatised, we still need a milk programme to be able to have the whole country to get access to it.

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, it has been answered, so we do not want to waste time on that.  Proceed please.

PROJECT NAME: FISHERIES MASTER PLAN

PROJECT NAME: LIVESTOCK SERVICE PROJECT

PROJECT NAME: SOUTH-WESTERN REGION AGRICULTURAL PROJECT

PROJECT NAME: AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION

PROJECT NAME: TSETSE AND TRYPANOSOMIASIS CONTROL, SOUTH EASTERN UGANDA

PROJECT NAME: KENYA, UGANDA TSETSE AND TRYPANOSOMIASIS CONTROL

PROJECT NAM: TSETSE CONTROL IN BUVUMA ISLANDS

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, these tsetse flies, I notice here that the project only concerns the Islands of Buvuma.  These originally were part of the Islands in Ssese Islands. Does the Ministry of Agriculture have any plans to combat the problem of tsetse flies in Ssese Islands in the same way they are doing it in Buvuma Islands?

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, I know that, the Ministry has three different projects on the same project matter which is tsetse control.  Has the Minister considered that it will be cheaper to have one project rather than have three different projects employing three different types of consultants?  Providing, duplicating all these resources which would be used if there was only one project for the whole country.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, this issue of having different projects is bound to rise in almost every sector.  Because in these cases, each project handles different components and specialised components.  Secondly, these are somehow small projects and as you know, most of the development budget over 70 per cent is financed from external donors in one way or another.  So, we negotiate those specialised components for those who accept that area.  That is why you see there are different components.  We shall overcome it gradually when these components are being furnished.  Secondly, regarding the Buvuma, this tsetse control it is a specific project for Buvuma Islands.  But it does not mean that, there is no programme for the whole country to control tsetse flies.  That component is there, you are going - it is part of the department.  But in case of Buvuma, because of the intensity of the matter, it happened to be a project.

PROJECT NAME; HUMAN TRYPANOSOMIASIS CONTROL IN THE NORTH AND NORTH WESTERN UGANDA

PROJECT NAME; WHO SUPPORTS TO TOKOKUTU

PROJECT NAME; DUOR RESEARCH PROJECT IN UTRO

PROJECT NAME; REHABILITATION OF AHRC

PROJECT NAME; ERADICATION OF WATER HYACINTH PROJECT

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, this problem of the water hyacinth, allow me to say a word about it and then to ask a question about expenditure 121 in the programme.  The problem of water hyacinth is so big that, I am amazed it has become mere politics at the moment.  With half-baked scientists writing in papers all kinds of things causing long terms research on how to eradicate it, disregarding results of research that has been carried out by able scientists.  When I say Able Scientists, I am referring to such organisations as the food and the drug administration of the United States with which we could not match even one percent.  And yet the Minister of Agriculture even have officials talking starting the test some of the chemicals that have already been tested so many at the moment.  

We have been talking about this problem for the last two days.  If we started two years ago, we would have contained it.  At that time, manual labour would have done it.  At the moment, it is so big that even mechanical devices which Mrs Ssekitoleko here defended so strongly, are no longer a match to this whole problem.  I want to put in this House that we strongly put down our feet and urge the government to strike this water hyacinth.  The Ministry of Agriculture itself says, that Uganda derives 60 percent of their proteins from fish.  Which means that, if the water hyacinth destroyed that source, we would be short of proteins by 60 percent.  It is the remaining 40 percent that even concerns the locusts, which means actually, it is a minority part of the matter that we are talking about.  

The Minister simply explained a moment ago that, the Prime Minister is touring the lake.  And now, we were born in the lakesides and all those Islands and the Minister just starting off from here; and going all over, we do not even know where he is about.  We do not even know where he is about, whether he is going by air or whether he is going by raft or whether he is taking these Uganda Revenue Boats.  I am not sure.  He would have done very well to go with his colleague in front of me here to show him where about these Islands are and where the actual problem is lies.  

The question now expenditure 121.  May be the Minister has something before I ask that.  I would stop there, in case she has a burning question.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Like my Colleague from the Island, I am equally concerned.  And not only from the Islands, but I think even other people from Lake Kyoga and other neighbouring places.  I see here quite a number of figures; I see 159,500,000 coming up for trucks.  I do not know, the Minister would definitely explain.  I wish I could even see here boats and auto boat engines which could be very helpful to us.  I could also see here a figure of 10,000,000 for the incentives and the allowances.  the water hyacinth has become a problem to us just because we seem to be looking at it as an abstract problem.  Our people would have done a lot, but if you put here just 10,000,000 shillings for incentives and allowances that may be for about five people for two months and also you have got a figure here for 61,000,000 which goes for training.  We need a bit of explanation.  Because this is not a problem.  A problem that we are going to discuss on paper, it is on us in the Islands.  And really the problem way of solving them, I hope my friend will be able to -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Take your seat; let the Minister reply.

MRS RWABYOMERE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  It is true, I mentioned that today, the Prime Minister has gone on the lake to access the extent of water hyacinth.  My Colleague hon. Mayengo appears to dramatise that fact.  But to us really, it is very important.  Because if he had not gone, it would have still been hon. Mayengo who would have complained that even the Prime Minister has not been there.  Now, hon. Mayengo even those people who are not from the Islands are concerned about the problem of the water hyacinth.  It is a national problem.  As far as the Ministry is concerned, the following has been done.  It is not that, nothing is being done.  A rapid appraisal has been carried out hon. Members.  An emergency plan is underway and will be presented in a month’s time.  

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, in this House, legislation was carried out, so that the House got expanded, bringing in workers and even the youth.  The youth are purposely brought here to learn from us those who are elderly.  Is it in order, for a veteran politician who has been in this House for many years, instead of living the exemplary life to continue behaving in a manner he is doing and this is hon. Obwangor?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.  It is not in order, but you are the Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee.  So, it is your duty to deal with him.

MRS RWABYOMERE:  Mr Chairman, I was trying to impress upon this august House to you hon. Members that the Ministry is not just sitting idle, but the following is being done.  A rapid appraisal has been carried out, an emergency plan is underway and will be presented to donors in a month’s time; harvests have been ordered for; chemical tests have been started -(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Minister to continue labouring the subject of harvesters which have miserably failed?  Mr Chairman, is it in order? 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.  She is quite in order please.

MRS RWABYOMERE:  Hon. Mayengo is getting annoyed, but I must assure him that, the Ministry is more annoyed.  Hon. Mayengo is getting annoyed, but I must assure him that the Ministry got annoyed long ago and everything possible is being done to solve this problem.  I wish he could take the assurances and be patient.  Harvesters have been ordered for, I see him not doing his head this time, chemical tests have started; I must emphasise that, chemical tests have to be applied with caution.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

PROJECT NAME: MEAT PRODUCTION

PROJECT NAME: STUDY OF SMALL REMNANTS

PROJECT NAME: AGRICULTURAL SECTOR MGT PROJECT

PROJECT NAME: TRAINING FOR ANIMAL ATTRACTION

PROJECT NAME: WATER FOR LIVESTOCK

PROJECT NAME: JAPANESE INPUT PROGRAMME

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr Chairman, I am saying that, we are likely to get a grant totaling to about 4.1 billion shillings during the year 1995/96.  The Chairman of the Sectoral Committee has reported that we have received inputs which would have fetched more than 15 billion shillings.  

I regret to inform the House that, on the account by the time my Committee visited Entebbe, it was only one billion shillings on account.  I would like to know from the Minister, which arrangement shall be put in place that when these inputs arrive, hey will be better handled than the previous ones which went down the drains?  Two, could the Minister tell us what has happened to the balance of the foreign exchange totaling 200 million yen which remained unutilized from the balance of the grants which your Ministry has been struggling with the Ministry of Finance to get it utilised.  What arrangements do you have to make sure that that money which is a grant is utilised?  Three, your officials have been saying that, the inputs from Japan are more expensive than any other inputs.  In the long run, that you cannot sell them even at two-thirds the price without paying duty and sales tax.  the inputs from Japan are more expensive than those from any other country even after paying duty and sales tax.  What arrangement do you have to negotiate better terms other than accepting whatever is being given to us?

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, this has been more or less an on going on project, and the arrangements in place for the distribution under the liberalisation, as it has been made before is that, the government or the departments per se will not handle these inputs any more.  They are going to be distributed through private agencies and they will be sold at market value.  So, he idea that they could be misused by the departments is now out.  Thank you.

PROJECT NAME; SERVICE HANDLING AND STORAGE PRJ

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 79,950,000 under Head 110 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

CURRENT ESTIMATES

VOTE 043 - NARO; PAGE R.185

Programme 01

Programme 02

Programme 03

Programme 04

Programme 05

Programme 06

Programme 07

Programme 08

Programme 09

Programme 10

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 18,502,324,000- under Vote 043 - National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DEVELOPMENT ESTIMATES - HEAD 143 - NARO

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 2,149,500,000- under Head 143 - National Agricultural Research Organisation be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)


MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Joan Rwabyomere):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume an the Committee of Supply do report thereto.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)


REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Joan Rwabyomere):  Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Votes 010,043 and Head 110 and 143 of the Ministry of Agriculture, animal Industry and Fisheries and has passed them without amendments.  I beg to report.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Joan Rwabyomere):  Mr Chairman, Sir, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGEINE:  I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Sir, I beg to present for the Council’s consideration and approval of the report of the Standing Sectoral Committee of this Council on Lands, Housing and Physical Planning covering one; the debates on Ministerial Policy Statement and two, the Committee’s observation and recommendations on Ministry’s estimates of both Recurrent and Development Expenditure for the financial year 1994/95.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for us to discuss the matter of the report of the Ministry of Lands when it is not on the Order Paper and is it Parliamentary?

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is quite in order.

MR BAGEINE:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The Sectoral Committee on the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban or Physical Planning is the same Committee which handles Works, Transport and Communication which is on today’s Order Paper. My Committee discussed in details the Minister’s Policy Statement and noted that the Ministry despite severe financial constraints continued to render its mandatory services and endeavour to accomplish its set of objectives.  The Committee noted the change of the name of the Ministry from that of Urban Development to Physical Planning which is more embracing and it extends planning to the entire country as opposed to urban areas only.  

The Committee noted that the government’s enabling policy which is championed by the Ministry is meant to facilitate individuals and private sector to construct their own houses by coordinating the provision of the infrastructure such as roads, water, sewerage and electricity, provision of land, accessibility to land, reduce interests through mortgaging and tax relief.  

The Committee observed that lack of provision of infrastructure has led to extravagant use of land and that it is difficult for the Ministry to coordinate infrastructure agencies since they are controlled by other Ministries.  

In an urban area like Kampala for example, if services were available, then one would achieve a high density of development thereby economising on the use of land.  We have a lot of land but if we go on using it extravagantly because of lack of services, in future, we have problems.  The Committee recommends, therefore, that government should consider seriously bringing these agencies under the Ministry particularly the National Water and Sewerage Corporation for coordination of provision of services and achievement of better development in urban areas.  

The Committee was informed that negotiation with the Government and World Bank and Housing Finance Company to retain 25 percent out of the sale of proceeds of pool houses estimated at 40 million dollars to boost its lending capacity to the public had reached an advanced stage.  The Committee was also informed that revision of flexible and acceptable building rules and regulations was being finalised although this has been reported now for the third year.  The Committee observed that the Ministry of Lands had accepted and tried to implement the Committee’s previous years’ recommendation on the civil service housing scheme but their efforts were frustrated by government’s refusal to finance the project.  

The Committee is also concerned that the sale proceeds from pool houses are going to Treasury for use elsewhere other than housing apart from the 25 percent proposed to be retained by the Housing Finance Company of Uganda.  We believe and recommend that more of this money should be retained by Housing Finance Company to be used on the development of proper civil service housing scheme.  The Committee also noted the confusion surrounding what is meant by institutional housing which were supposed not to be sold but we have received reports to the extent that a number of these houses have actually been sold and the committee wonders how government intends to house heads of these institutions in future.  

The Committee is also aware and it reported last year that many civil servants cannot afford to purchase large houses in areas like Nakasero and Kololo in Kampala because of the high land values and that they are nearly prompting for the real buyers and only end up with the difference between the market prices and all prices they are buying these houses at.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that these houses in these areas should not be sold the way they are being sold but should be sold on the open market in order to realise real values which can be used in building more houses.  

The Committee was also shown of housing allowances as per the monetised housing allowances of civil servants which we believe were based on factors other than realistic market rates and urges government to revise these allowances to more realistic levels.  It is worthwhile noting that these allowances small as they may be are also taxable which makes it more difficult for the civil servants to obtain and pay for reasonable accommodation on a reasonable locality commensurate with this status.  

The Committee noted the planned activities for the human settlement department and particularly the intention to continue with the development of Namuwongo Housing Estate.  The Ministry requested for funds to continue with this programme but we were informed government turned this request down.  We were also informed that a revolving fund has been set up which has more than a billion shillings and the Committee wishes to recommend that this House approves a sum of 215 million shillings which is required by the Ministry to continue with Namuwongo project.  

Let me now turn briefly to the physical planning department of the Ministry.  This department operates under the town and country planning board which was set up by the town and country planning Act of 1964 and is responsible for orderly development throughout the country.  It draws outlines and structural plans for purposes of guiding development whose enforcement however, is left to the Ministry of Local Government which more often than not does not comply hence the unplanned development taking place all over the country.  Its operations are further hampered by the obsolent provisions of planning up whose revision has been going on now for the last four years.  The Ministry of Justice is called upon to finalise this provision.  

The Committee was informed that in the field of survey, government intends t divest itself from carrying out surveys and instead concentrate on provision of control points, revision and printing of maps.  The Committee welcomes and encourages this move as it is likely to result into more efficiency and in the long run reduce survey cost to the population.  

What has been going on is that the surveyors have been employed by government, they have been paid salaries and other allowances and whenever members of the public came up for survey of their plots, they had to pay all over again so that these surveyors were getting some kind of double payment.  The Committee also recommends that governments looks for funds to try and help this department purchase a printing machine which is estimated to cost about 100,000 dollars.  The one that they had is very old and brakes down every now and then.  Let me now turn briefly to the parastatals which are under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Physical Planning.  The Committee visited and was impressed by several new projects under National Housing and Construction and Corporation at Bukoto, Ntinda where several new houses were at stages of construction and also visited renovation work at Buganda Road and Bugolobi flats.  The Committee was also informed of the intention of the Corporation to service and demarcate plots at Namungoona, the planned purchase of land at Lubowa and further land at Nalya and preparation for housing programmes for some up-country towns.  The Corporation’s estate management has been frustrated by one; persistent disconnection or failure to supply water by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation resulting on its failure to restore meters even when these were provided by National Housing and also inadequate pressure to get water up on top of flats.  

Two, the failure by Kampala City Council to collect garbage from the estates which has now become ugly.  I believe this is not the first time.  The ineptitude of Kampala City council is being talked about in this House.  Now in order to improve these estates, the Corporation has now embarked on mainly water mains a job which should be done by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation and engaging private companies to clear the garbage from these estates on a regular basis.  In line with government policy, the Corporation is selling pool houses and using the sale proceeds to build more houses.  It is the intention of the Corporation to divest itself from ownership and management by selling all houses and flats if the law is passed thus releasing the capital which is tied in these houses for use in building more houses for sale.  

This was the purpose for which the Corporation was put up in the first place.  The Corporation despite the government indebtedness of over 5.2 billion shillings in connection with houses occupied by government, the Corporation has been able to force profits and is set to perform better.  In light of the above performance, and the fact that it is already divesting itself from ownership of estates in order to concentrate on construction of new houses, the Committee was and is dismayed to learn that government intends to privatise the Corporation.  The question that we ask is, will government sell these houses at better prices than the Corporation is doing?  If what has been going on in privatisation process is anything to go by.  The Corporation presently owns assets in the form of buildings which are valued at over 90 billion shillings.  If this Corporation were to be privatised on the trade sale basis that is being used the country would lose a great deal.  We would not be surprised for example if the Crested Towers had a bid of one million dollars.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I am very pleased indeed to note that National Housing Corporation is making remarkable improvement especially in developing new houses for citizens and also rehabilitation of some of their badly dilapidated houses.  My concern is, the Crested Tower which is right now in the centre of the city, the Committee has not told us here, whether National Housing Corporation is taking any effort to rehabilitate Crested Towers instead of rehabilitating these other houses which are far away from the city.

MR BAGEINE:  I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The Corporation has already prepared bills of quantities which are being priced for the repair of the Crested Towers building and it is hoped that in fact, the Corporation will raise funds internally to carry out this job.  This move to privatise National Housing is not acceptable to the Committee which recommends very strongly that National Housing and Construction Corporation should not be privatised in the manner that other enterprises are being privatised. This recommendation includes the Corporation’s subsidiary companies namely Housing Finance Company of Uganda and Uganda Clays all of which were set up to promote an integrated approach to housing development.  We believe that if National Housing was privatised in the manner other institutions are being privatised, investors be they local or foreign would not go where National Housing is going.  

For example, the estate at Naalya which is meant to house the low income and middle lower income could not be developed because investors who are only profit motivated would not concern themselves with areas where they will not maximise their profits.  The Uganda Clays which is now a subsidiary that is owned by National Housing has had its operations also -(Interruption)- by the looming privatisation which performance over the last years has been very impressive but it cannot presently expand its operations to meet the high demand for its products through borrowing although they are in a position to pay or service any loan simply because they are being stopped by the privatisation unit in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning which we are told is preparing for its divestiture.  

Housing Finance Company which is again owned 50 percent by National Housing has continued to improve on its performance and public confidence has continued to grow as exemplified by the public deposits which over the last years amounted to 3 billion from 1.9 billion shillings in the previous year.  The company has also negotiated a loan of 1 billion shillings from Development Finance Company of Uganda who are partners in this company and also United Stated one million dollars from Shelter Crick in order to improve on its mortgage lending capacity.  Presently house loans of up to 30 million shillings - I am told this may be revised upwards - is extended to borrowers over a period of 10 years at an interest rate of 18 percent.  

The company has also agreed to provide loans up to 75 percent of the cost of house being built by National Housing and Construction Corporation for 15 years at 8 percent interest and is supporting the civil service scheme with the loan interest rates of 5 percent, charges 8 percent for 15 years, charging civil servants buying houses in the scheme.  Now, these interest rates can only be extended by Housing Finance Company under the integrated approach in housing development.  If Housing Finance Company were to be divested for example, I do not believe that the company would extend any interest rates of this low magnitude to anybody.

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee for raising this matter.  I would also like to inform the House that through your sub-committee and through representatives you sent to make constructive discussions, constructive engagements, have started between and member companies on the best way of divesting these enterprises practically with effect from 21st this month.  I am sure the management of National Housing was there, there was a seminar trying to examine various options of how to achieve the best results; one, for broad participation, two, social equities and three, economic return.  I am sure this paper which is being presented I want to assure my Colleague, is going to be a very usefully one to you of what is going on from the time the Minister presented the report here.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I see this kind of embarrassment that the whole of this House would sit down here and consider thoroughly a programme of reform and divestiture, that against such background a whole committee of this House would come up with an idea that does not support what we passed.  I do not know what must be done to bring our decisions to a kind of democratic way of understanding.  That once we pass it, even if a small group says no, we all say that we passed it.  I hope that the Committee which my Colleague chaired will eventually scrutinize and study carefully the Statute and know that a certain way can be done which will make the privatised companies conscious of what the worry is being explained, how it can be averted.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, with all due respect to the previous speaker, although we did pass the PERD Statute, I think the Sectoral Commitee’s concern has been the past application so far seen and I think that has been the main worry.  My Colleague hon. Rwakakooko and I have been concerned that even when we passed this PERD Statute which took care of the issues being raised, the implementation of that Statute has not lived up to our own expectation.  And I think the Sectoral Committee’s concern is that because hitherto all the sales we have experienced have been trade sales and definitely with trade sales with things of this nature like Housing finance, like Uganda Clays, if they were to go by trade sales, this country would be the loser and it is not true that the Chairman - not I am not speaking for him but I am sure the thinking is the same -sit is not that the Chairman is negating the privatisation.  I think Members of this House, all of us here agreed that we need to privatize; that is the mode of things.  But how it is privatised is of great concern to us.  If it is going to leave us with nothing and makes us workers, not owners of the assets of this country, then we have got to express concern, Mr Chairman.

MR BAGEINE:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and I want to thank the hon. Members for the information they have given.  Now, let me clarify the Committee’s position in this issue.  It is not that we are opposed to privatisation as a principle.  I also know that when the PERD Statute was passed, there were companies or parastatals which were put in classes and if I can recall, National Housing was not one of those which were being privatised.  

Secondly, I think the way privatisation is being handled is worrying.  I do not think that we should go out wholesale to privatise everything at ago.  I think the principle although acceptable also implies that we would be selective as to how we go about privatisation.  I do not think anyone needs to be an expert in economics for example, to know that if you dump so much on the market for sale the prices are bound to go down and I think this is what has happened hitherto in the privatisation effort that has been going on.  So, we are not against privatisation.  We think it should be selective and we think it should be gradual if we are going to attain better results.  

The Committee commended the performance of Housing Finance Company but also wishes to request that it opens branches up-country at least starting at regional headquarters to assist the would-be house buyers in those areas.  The Committee is concerned that the issue of arrears continues to bedevil the Ministry.  Presently, we are informed the amount of arrears outstanding amounts to two bill shillings and above and that this figure is likely to continue since the process of acquisition by government of properties for public use is a continuous process.  We are also informed that some of these arrears arose many years ago and keeping this money without paying people whose properties were acquired, in our opinion and view is a breach of the constitutional right of the people concerned.  

We note that only about 1.5 billion shillings has been provided for but as we know, it has been a practice of the Ministry of Finance to even withhold what has been approved so that at the end of the day perhaps the Ministry will get a lower figure with which it is expected to settle these arrears.  So we want to urge the government to start paying promptly and adequately those whose properties are acquired now and in future. 

Finally, the Committee noted with concern there is no capital development funded by Government of Uganda except under the compounded project and even then there are only four small projects which are provided for under this Ministry.  I now beg to move that the report of the Standing Sectoral Committee of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Physical Planning as presented be approved.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGEINE:  Mr Chairman, I beg to present for the Council’s consideration and approval, the report on the Standing Sectoral Committee of the Council on the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication covering one, the debate on the Ministerial Policy Statement and two, the Committee’s observation and recommendation on the Ministry’s estimates of both the Recurrent and Development Expenditure for the Financial Year 1995/96.  The Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication is responsible for development and maintenance of transport and communication infrastructure and regulation of services provided by the organisation at to review and ensure efficiency and safety.  We have gone through the statement by the Minister and we have as a committee had the opportunity to visit certain projects particularly roads up-country and we have discussed with Ministry officials on the various programmes which we have included in our report that has been circulated.  I only want to highlight a few areas which we consider to be very important.  

The first point which is on page four is in connection with the Kampala/Jinja Road.  Hon. Members will recall that during the 1994/95 Policy Statement of the Ministry, this House was informed that following immediate failure of the Mabira section of this road an understanding was reached wherein the liability for this failure was apportioned as follows; one, the contractor was supposed to pay 2 million dollars due to poor workmanship.  The second, the consultants were supposed to 175 thousand dollars dues to negligence with regard to quality control and three, the client, the government of Uganda was to pay 337 thousand and the reason was due to bitumen oxidation and excessive axle roads on the road.  

On reconstruction of this section, in accordance with earlier specifications in the contract, the section became stronger than the rest of the roads built by the same contractor and it was hence felt necessary by the Ministry to strengthen the Mabira and Jinja bridge section to give it the same life span which is reported at 13.5 years at an additional cost of Uganda UShs 9.2 billion payable by the Government of Uganda.  The Committee was concerned and wonders whether lack of strength on this section cannot and could not be attributed to the same contractor at least proportionately as was mentioned above so that he meets part of the cost.  It is also interesting to note that there were two contractors on this road and the section built by the other contractor - MOWLEM who has since left this country, has not had any problems.  This is a matter that I think needs to be addressed a bit more seriously.  

We also like to point out the issue of roads that during the opening of the Seventh Parliament, His Excellency in this House promised that there was some funding being looked for to construct roads leading to border areas.  The Committee is disappointed that nothing has been reported and indeed nothing seems to be done about this.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, on page three, I would like clarification from the Chairman of the Committee when he reports, the Committee was informed by the donors that the donors not only insist on their own consultants but also through economic criteria loan dictate routes.  For example, the Ntungamo/Rukungiri/Ishaka Road is reported being changed from the existing pro-people route on grounds of economic criteria ignoring socio-political consideration.  Can he elaborate, Mr Chairman?  Where is it being diverted?

MR BAGEINE:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The Ntungamo/Rukungiri/Ishaka road was cited as one example of insistence by donors because I am given to understand that this money is at the end of the day not free but they do insist that for a road to be built in a given area, economic criteria alone will be taken into consideration.  The explanation we were given for example, was that if it is the intention to move from point A to point B, you look for the shortest route that is cost effective irrespective of whether there are people living along those routes.  This was the explanation that we were given.  

I am glad that the hon. Member raised the issue because the issue of studies has been one of the biggest sources of loss of funds through the Ministry of Works.  More often than not, studies are done on the same road year in, year out.  I believe we have had about five studies now on the Kampala/Pakwach route and I believe more studies will be carried out.  For example, the Kampala Southern by-pass, the study on this by-pass was reported last year as having been completed and that funds for compensation amounting to about 4.5 billion shillings were being looked for.  Now, in the current statement, we are informed that there is a study one of the activities in the Ministry this year is to conduct a study on the Northern by-pass and once that has been done, then it will be possible to determine the most viable route.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, those of us who are involved in this exercise, the assumptions we put on these studies to make a world of difference and if the assumption for example, take the issue raised about the Ntungamo/Ishaka road, the assumption is that at times they only look on the volume of traffic existing at the time of the study.  They forget that if the road was better, the volume would increase and the economic activity would increase and they go on doing things day in and day out.  We end up with - as the Chairman is saying - with a hundred studies taking us nowhere.  And they are taking away all the money and most of them are foreigners anyway.  If they were you and I, there would be some idea that the money would remain here. (Laughter)  We are terribly concerned about this thing because on the by-pass we are going to get another study and then we will be told that the study needs another appraisal and in the end, it will be packed up and will get nowhere.

MR SENGO:  Point of information.  About these studies, Mr Chairman, the time lag say for city roads.  I remember some years back; they were talking of widening Entebbe-Zana road.  That was before people started building storeyed buildings along that road.  But because of the time delay, more beautiful buildings along come up.  Now after completing these buildings, these people are now talking of demolishing them.  So, there is always a danger in this time lag.  I do not know whether it is deliberate.  The Ministry is aware of the problems of delaying these studies in Kampala roads.  For example, this south by-pass.  They have talked of compensation amounting to 4.5 billion shillings.  Now, you will appreciate, Mr Chairman, that another delay of about one year will raise the volume of compensation serving line and perhaps to double the amount because more buildings are coming up and even the time value of money is coming in because as time goes on, money loses value and people tend to charge more.  So, I do not know whether the Minister will have time to clarify on this because it looks a disease in this country which is consuming a lot of our funds, Mr Chairman.  Thank you very much.

MR PETER OKWERA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, sometime in 1983, the Ministry of Works took over roads from Corner Kilak via Lira Palwo to Abilang. This is the main road that connects Kitgum Town Gulu District and Lira District to Kotido.  Since that time, the Ministry of Works has never opened the road.  The road has continued to remain a feeder road and as of now, there is no maintenance going on.  I do not know whether this road also has got complications with feasibility studies and compensating people.  But I want to inform the Minister that there are no people along that road.  There are people far away.  We do not sit near the roadside.  There is no question of feasibility study. I want clarification when this road will be opened and look the real first class murrum road.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  

MR ORYANG:  Mr Chairman, I beg to draw attention to page four to enable me to register my disappointment at the lack of attention given to points raised by Members in this House.  As the Committee rightly pointed out, it will be recalled that in 1994/95 but earlier than that, 1993/94, a point was raised towards the failure of Mabira road.  It was meant for oral question.  Instead the Minister resorted to answering the question silently.  I remember vividly in my answer to that silent answer, I did explain to what I suspected to be the failure of Mabira Road section as opposed to MOWLEM sector.  No action was taken by the Ministry.  But now, I see there the Committee was informed that following immediate failure of the Mabira section an understanding was reached when in liabilities were apportioned as you have seen here.  These liabilities would have been avoided if the attention of government was directed to points raised by Members in this House.  I was daily passing through that road from Jinja to Kampala when I was still residing in Jinja.  I even talked to the man who was hired to find out the cause of failure and I was more embarrassed when this foreigner was calling somebody from the material section of the Ministry of Works and telling me that the gentleman knew better than him.  He was wasting our money because he was brought to find out something that our man knew better.  I got annoyed and walked away.  But what I was to register here is that when Members raise points for consideration and it is ignored, it costs government a lot of money.  This is an example.  That is point number one.  

Point number two, Mr Chairman, I have been moving around the country and I came across the effect maybe of decentralisation.  First of all, restructuring –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Are you debating or you are giving information?

MR ORYANG:  I want to point out something which came up here.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Go straight to the point.

MR ORYANG:  Okay, I will go straight to the point.  If you go towards the beginning, it has something to do with physical planning.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, take your seat.  Chairman of the Committee proceed. 

MR BAGEINE:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I want to thank the hon. Members for the information particularly touching on the issue of studies and if one cares to look at the Ministry’s statement, almost every other page, there is a study going on.  Now as one hon. Member pointed out what is concerning us is that the Ministry says one of its objectives is to develop local capacity.  But at the same time, we do not know that most of these studies are actually being conducted by foreigners.  Not only that but even the constructions of the roads are still contracted out to foreign contracting firms.  

Allow me to touch briefly on the road maintenance.  I believe hon. Members must be acquainted with this phenomenon of road maintenance.  I do not know whether you call it road maintenance of failure to maintain roads. From the Ministry’s statement and also the committee’s tour of various roads in the country, it is very clear that maintenance programme has not worked satisfactorily if at all and it is alleged that mainly because of delayed release of funds.  The only visible work we noted and we are not minimising it, in some places not everywhere was grass cutting for maintenance as for parching along Jinja/Malaba road was extremely flow and poorly executed; such that no sooner is the parching done than it begins spilling off.  

Secondly, we noted that in almost all the roads there are no shoulders along roads, and where shoulders have been made for example, on the Jinja/Malaba road, an attempt was made and benching on the shoulders was carried out but it was done the other way round.  Instead of tilting away from the road so that when it rains water runs off, the benching was done in such a way that it tilts towards the road, and then water flows easily into the road which as we know, is the biggest enemy to roads.  

Where shoulders exist like on the Kampala/Jinja road, there is such a big difference between the level of the road and shoulders, which is very dangerous to surface.  If the vehicle veers off the road on to the side without difference in height it is very easy for the vehicle to roll over.  These are small issues which we thought our expert engineers would certainly know that you go round, next you are going round going home, you just observe the roads then you will see what we are talking about.   

Last year, the Ministry of Works started on a four-year road maintenance programme and to this effect a circular letter was written to all the districts and regional engineers telling them not to divert resources of the Ministry in order to ensure the programme is successful.  When my committee went out, we were disappointed to note that in some areas resources to the tune of two hundred and forty three million had been diverted to build roads which were not programmed, some of which were little more than ‘Bulungi bwansi, which are murram roads.  We think this is self-defeating and also amounts to transferring funds -approved by this House from one Ministry to the other which I believe is not permissible.

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA:  Mr Chairman, at this point I just want to inform the House on that information during the Sectoral Committee meeting on the 21st August 1995, discussing Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication budget statement for the financial year 1995/96; the committee raised a query to the effect that the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication had diverted resources, worth 232 million perhaps to work in Mbale district outside the normal schedule.  The purpose of this information is to correct this impression.  The resources used was raised through the RC.III Councils of each area where the roads were constructed.  The total length graded was 55.2 kilometres, it was just opened and graded.  In the normal circumstances, the Ministry of Works lacks resources to expedite schedule programme and yet equipments is at times available and idle.  The practice has been that the local leaders if they approach me and the CMs and CAD Members, RC IV, RC III, Cadres can mobilise resources to cater for operational expenses to serve their imprest through the Ministry of Works district if the equipment is idle.  In this exercise, a total of actually 17,450 litres of diesel was used.  Of this 11,100 litres was contributed by the local people.  They also contributed allowances for the grant operators of two million six hundred.  The need to complete work became imperative due to the impending visit to the district by His Excellency the President; this was the reason why I had to operate.  After all, some machinery was idle at that particular moment.  In conclusion therefore, the actual total cost of work done was about 17 million of which 11 million was contributed by the local people.  And about 6 million was contributed by the Ministry of Works through fuel supply to the equipment.  So, that is the actual position.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Minister right as it might be, it may look objective to him.  The purpose why he budgets and come and budget and locate resources is the concern of the Sectoral Committee.  We are not even questioning whether it was immoral but this House needs to know when we have passed the budget where the resources are going.  Because, they have totality of resource allocation.  Whether people become enthusiastic and want to do something you do not have a right hon. Minister through you, Mr Chairman, to shift money from one Ministry to another without the approval of this House and I think that is a problem of the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee.  I am sure, the hon. Member now in future will either consult the House or come back and state his case or say he is going to assist the Minister of Local Government where that programme rightly falls and ask him to do the work.  and if they do, and they want that assistance, they will hire the services from that Ministry and be able to perform.

MR BAGEINE:  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  I do not wish to engage in many debates in this particular issue but I wish to say that if the road is being talked about, had been carried out in the whole district of Mbale because of the visit of the President then may be I might have been persuaded.  But if they are localised in one or two utmost constituencies, then I do not think that is a good reason.  

Secondly, I have all the details I did not create them; in fact, I went over these roads, I drove over these roads and the length of the work done is heavy grading, culvert installation, Kangaroo bridge repairs and other things and a number of roads I have them here.  So, it is not an issue that I am trying to for example, an individual.  I think it is a principle; because we all know, that if for example as hon. Minister has said, a machine is lying idle and I want a road to be done in my area and I put in fuel I think this we would not worry about and we said this in our Sectoral Committee meeting.  But when resources which are budgeted for, for a specific project are now diverted to the extent that roads which were programmed in Mbale for the last seven months have not been touched, then we get concerned.  I promised I will give the Minister the details and I will do so when I have to do so.  

The Committee also had an opportunity to visit the Sironko/Kapchorwa roads where we saw what is commonly called the Konaid soil stabilising chemicals.  Now, we saw sections where the chemical had been applied but the road not maintained, and also we saw areas where no chemical had been applied at all.  And the Committee was impressed but this chemical seems to work.  We were explained by the engineers that the chemical has a quality of forming beams around the soil particles.  So that when it rains, the rainwater does not percolate, it does not sink into the road, it runs off on the surface.  

Secondly, we were told that this chemical can be used on any type of soil other than very fine soils like clay.  So that it would appear that this chemical if research is intensified, might be a solution to our problems of roads particularly in hilly areas where torrential rains tend to wash away this murram that is put there.  We were informed that the Ministry officials went to South Africa where the chemical has been used over the years, and they saw roads which have lasted many years and we feel that we should apply this chemical here.  The costs are more or less the same as building a first class murram road.  You do not have to worry murram to use in this chemical, and we think it should be applied in this country.  We were also told that after some years because the chemical has a tendency of seeping and going underneath, the road surface hardens and instead of building a new road base in order to put tarmac, you can actually come and put tarmac right on it.  So, believe that this should be looked into with view to solving our problems.  

We looked at the transport and licensing board and its activities one of which is to regulate and control public transport.  We are concerned that this board is not properly funded and as a matter of fact for this year only 26.9 million shillings has been provided for against the request by the Ministry of close to one million.  The Committee had an opportunity to visit particular areas in Kampala and more especially the ‘Baganda bus park.’  Traveling - public are terribly inconvenienced by a milliard idlers called brokers at the Baganda bus park.  At one time I personally witnessed a woman passenger being carried away by these brokers towards one bus; her luggage being taken to the other bus, and yet her child to the third bus.  Now, we think this is a terrible situation and we think this problem should be addressed by those authorities concerned -(Interruption)

MRS MPANGA:  Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Chairman of the Sectoral Committee that it is not only the human congestion at the place but the roads are so congested both with human and vehicles traffic.  Because the vehicles have been allowed to park along all the roads; you find these women and men are almost walking in the roads because these brake down vehicles are parked all along the road and then the special hire are parked all over the place and over the pavement; so that even moving around the place is very difficult.  Thank you very much.

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the kind of problem the Chairman of the Committee is raising could be got rid of by having the proper bus terminal like the one we used to have in the old days.  Which apparently has been sold and has been turned into a shopping centre.  I wonder whether the Committee had the opportunity to examine the possibility of having that terminal converted to its original use or even construction of a similar terminal.

MR BAGEINE:  Mr Chairman, I think this is one of the results of privatisation and we could not obviously suggest that ownership rights can be interfered with even by government unless government goes out of the way compulsorily to acquire that site in order to construct a bus terminal.  We however noted that both Nakivubo and the other road next to that - Nabugabo road are now congested and it should be close by the traffic itself.  And we saw a market across they call it Katimba market, we proposed that the bus park be extended in that direction because even if one was to acquire that land, it must be - it might be cheaper than the property already bought by Mukwano.  

The Committee is concerned that the TLB (Transport Licensing Board) has not been able due to financial and other logistical problems to inspect public service vehicles particularly up-country.  This has been a fertile ground for the traffic police to feast on the owners of those and road worthy vehicles which they allow on the road after some reasonable payment from the owners.  The Board has also not been able to inspect vehicles on the road which were old, either obsolete, old and dangerous and thus giving way legal operations, because it has no means to do so.  

The Committee is disappointed by the delay in the revision of the traffic of the road safety act of 1970.  In the last few years, policy years, Policy Statements, the Minister informed this House that the review of the Act which has been going on for the last two years, the two years before last year had been completed and a Bill was being prepared for NRC to debate and enact a new law.  Now, the Minister’s present statement says that finalisation of Amendment to the Act is one of the planned activities for this financial year.  I hope we shall come to the end of this one.  

We want to appreciate the effort being made by the National Road Safety Council, but we think it should be effected so that we can purchase materials, High Way Codes, which we think will enable it to sensitise the public.  Without the High Way Code, the committee wonders how the tractors, and learners and the Police manage to handle traffic in this country; and I believe that if you want to see what goes on some of these days drive along the Jinja-Kampala road, at the round about going to Industrial Area and if you are unlucky, a policeman come there, then I am afraid you will be packed there; because the police, once they appear on the scene, the traffic - they make it worse, and one wonders where they were trained to handle traffic.

I now move briefly to the parastatals under this Ministry.  First of all, we noted with appreciation the ability of Uganda Railways Corporation to increase storage from 494,000 tonnes last year but one 1993 to 780,000 tonnes last year.  We also were informed that government decided last year to commercialise Uganda Railways Corporation and to this effect, a Performance Agreement between the Government and Corporation were signed on the 28th of January 1994.  Under this Agreement, the Corporation is supposed to operate non-profit making services on a number of lines and on return, government would pay the sum of UShs 9 billion per annum to help the Corporation to keep running its services.  The Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications with privy to this contract and is charged with responsibility on behalf of Government of paying this money.  We are now informed and disappointed that since then nothing has been said an indebtedness now has amounted to UShs 11 billion and there is nothing - no indication whatsoever in the budget of this money having been budgeted for.  It seems that if nothing is done, then we are afraid that these services will have to stop because there is no way that the Uganda Railways can be expected to operate commercially in this kind of situation.  

The Posts and Telecommunications Corporation is one of the biggest Corporations in this country, has also been looked at, and last year my Committee recommended a kind of share holding for the privatisation that has been brought to us and this we said, the Uganda Government will retain 49 percent, the Uganda Posts and Telecommunication Corporation 5 per cent, Uganda Investors 20 percent and foreign investors 26 percent.  We are told that this recommendation was accepted by government but now it is reported that due to the complex nature of the enterprise, Government is re-thinking about the modalities of privatising the Corporation.  

We only hope that a better approach to the privatisation will be found in the process; and also we were informed that up to now, up to the end of May 1995, the Government owed more than UShs 25 billion to the Corporation in services rendered; and sometimes one wonders whether the idea of privatising some of these enterprises which are accused of non-performing is solely because Government has failed to meet its obligation and therefore, wants to fix the blame on to the Corporations concerned; because Railways is owed UShs 4 billion, now the Posts UShs 25 billion, Housing Finance Company, 5 billion and the list goes on National Housing UShs 5.2 billion.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I think that is the reason why Government is insisting on maintaining and holding such a large percentage of profit on Telecommunications so that we can have free credit without anyone harassing them.

MR BAGEINE:  Mr Chairman, the Committee last year reported about mal-practices which were nursed within the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme Project from which the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation was and is still involved and a recommendation from NRC Committee on parastatals from its debt was made.  We are disappointed that nothing seems to have been done.  The then Minister also promised to investigate and we met the Ministry we were informed that the Permanent Secretary had requested the internal investigation department of the same Corporation to go and investigate this matter.  We do not know what result we would expect, but fortunately, knowing the situation was carried out.  It is once again my Committee’s recommendation that an investigation should be mounted in these mal-practices so that collective measures are taken.  I am glad we told the hon. Minister to take up this matter and set up an inquiry to find out what exactly happened.  Now, for information of members, because I know that some of you may not have read our last year’s recommendation and also what we were talking about.  Let me just state a few instances and inform the hon. Members.

(i) The site at Wobulenzi which is in a swamp was purchased by the Corporation at the sum of UShs 7.5; when a better site could have been for using the compulsory acquisition powers of the Ministry of Lands.  We were told that the owners of plots refused to sell to the Corporation and we did not buy that one.

(ii) A certain Lukwago Construction Company was contracted to construct the Post Office Building at Wobulenzi and at the same time to build a repeater station some two kilometres away at a place called Luwube.  Now, the contractor within the agreement to build the repeater station was paid to ‘cut way’; this is a technical name they use - meaning carrying away the soil that they cut from the hill when leveling the site and it did not matter where he would put his - damp his soil and he was paid to do that.  But what he did was to transport the same soil and damp it at Wobulenzi; for which he charged and was paid the sum of UShs 225 million.  Now this in effect means that to acquire that ploy cost UShs 232.5 million.  Now the Committee is not even sure that the soil had established enough for a building to be put on it and I would not be surprised if sooner rather than later it is pulled down.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: I have passed on these roads several times and I know the very plot and the very building the hon. Member is talking about; I even know from the time when this soil was being brought - which was brought and poured on the bare sand without any hard core - anything because everyday of the week, I am ever on that road.  So, the House though it looks beautiful, it may just like a grave when inside is quite rotten and what the hon. Chairman is bringing, this particular House is likely to be very expensive for someone or some only one person not for the nation.  That, I beg to reinforce.

MR BAGEINE:  I thank the hon. Member for the information but if I may continue, the third item we notice was that at Lube and Nakasongola Repeater Stations, chain link sensing of 1.8 metres high cost 335,000/- per metre when a better fence at the Airport put up under the auspices of the same Ministry which was 2.5 metres high and also with a ground beam - a concrete beam that holds the fence on to the ground, this one cost 11,600/- per metre.  So we went up some roads at Nakasongola and Lube and there, we found that half a kilometre of road at Lube which was poorly executed, which I believe is no longer there now, cost UShs 9.5 million to build - half a kilometre and one kilometre at Nakasongola cost UShs 160 million to construct.  Now, this compares very unfavourably with the costs by the same Ministry building better roads at UShs 20 million per kilometre; and finally, grass planting on quarter of an acre which is about the size of this Chamber, less the building which was put on cost Ushs 12 million to plant grass in these areas.  If this is not corruption, then I do not know what corruption is.

Civil Aviation, if I may continue Mr Chairman, I am just about to wind up.  Civil Aviation. we noted the Civil Aviation has now settled down and is doing commendable work at the Airport.  We discovered, although we were told that the rehabilitation of the terminal building had been completed, the truth of the matter is that the building was partially rehabilitated - almost half of it is undone and what was rehabilitated cost US$ 26 dollars for members to note.  The building is about to be handed over to the Aviation Authority and you will have to look for monies to complete the repair work because some of the sections are pretty bad.  We raised the question on the quality of the materials used - that building apart from the advantage of reflecting light, we think those materials would not last.  We also noted that the Airside Aviation infrastructure mainly runways and Lighting Control Tower equipment and so on is being rehabilitated by a company known as CPI a Danish Company and the project is financed by DANIDA and will cost about 28 million dollars -it is a grant, I am told for a change.  

Uganda Airlines has also been performing fairly well and over the last year posted about 35 percent of the share of passengers going through the Airport and we are told that it acquired (another large Aircraft) but it simply means, it leased an Aircraft.  I am told the Aviation language is acquired even when you have leased.  The Corporation as I said, has already paid its historical debt and must be congratulated for doing that; the government owes the Corporation more than 4 billion which we think should be paid.

Somebody is mentioning at the back Uganda Airlines is also a candidate for divestiture.

Lastly, the Flying School at Soroti. I and a team of my Members visited this school and we were impressed by the way it looked like; infrastructure has been repaired, and work is going on smoothly.  We are told they have now 85 students all of whom are Ugandans, except one who comes from Tanzania.  The Academy lacks aircraft for training and only has eight out of the 13 that they require and out of the three procedural trainers and simulators, only are working; it is very expensive for them to keep students in the air when they should be doing it on the ground; hence the need for a new simulator which we are told costs US$ 200, I would like to request government to purchase this simulator.  

The Academy’s graduates in Aircraft engineering, piloting, and groundwork are of high quality and are internationally accepted.  The Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Defence, owes the Academy UShs 500 million and also the Tanzania Government owes the Academy US$ 580,000.  I would like to request Government to settle this debt and also assist the Academy to get its money paid by the Tanzania Government.  We are informed that the Academy is also a candidate for divestiture.  All we can say is, we think this is going too far.  I beg now to move that the Report of the Standing Sectoral Committee on the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication as presented be approved.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.  With those in favour of the Report presented to you by hon. Bageine say aye to the contrary nay.

(Question put and agreed to.)

And with that we have come to the end of today’s session, we adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m. 
     
 
(The Council rose at 6.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 29 August 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

