Wednesday 22nd August, 2001

(Parliament met at 2.31 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala   

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, as you are aware, today we shall be paying tribute to our late colleague, Woman Member of Parliament for Nebbi. I wish to announce that there will be an omnibus to take Members of Parliament for the burial on Thursday 23rd leaving at 7.00a.m. For those who want to travel by air on Friday, please let the Administration know so that arrangements can be made for you.  

Again, hon. Members, I want to inform you that today, the Parliamentary Commission sat and spent a lot of time considering areas that require improvement in as far as your welfare is concerned, and they have identified them and the process is in full hands to ensure that, what we have identified as your entitlement is achieved. You will soon be informed of the results.

With regards to the date when payment should be made to you, we have been advised that the latest will be the 15th of each month starting next month; but there is another matter which we have to discuss with you.  This is the issue of open cheques, which tend to drive you to the Bank of Uganda to receive cash.  This will be discussed with you to see whether we should continue or use crossed cheques so that you can open accounts and receive your money through your banks, instead of lining up in the Bank.

It seems the consensus is that we should have crossed cheques so that we put them on our accounts.  We shall make other consultations on other issues with you.

I have been asked by those in-charge of our security that there are different types of mobile phones and some mobiles are described as dangerous mobiles.  They are disguised as mobiles when they are actually other lethal weapons. Therefore, the security here may be forced to check on some of the mobiles to make sure that the dangerous type is prohibited.  Those who want to know the details; we shall definitely furnish you with the necessary information so that you know that the decision is justified.  

MR. ERESU ELYANU: Mr. Speaker, with respect to the last information you have given us about mobiles, our Rules of Parliament do not allow us to walk into the House with mobiles.

THE SPEAKER:  They do not allow us, but as I was speaking I saw people checking on their mobiles.  I think to be sure that we don’t have these dangerous mobiles - because it may be that you forgot, but we shall check to ensure that this kind of situation does not arise here.   But Members are not expected to have their mobiles on when they are here.  So when you are entering you should make sure that you switch off the mobile phone.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. DHUGIRA ESTHER OPOTI, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE, NEBBI DISTRICT

MRS. BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese District):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Esther Dhugira Opoti.  I beg to move that, 

“Be it resolved by the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, duly convened, constituted, and sitting in Kampala on this 22nd August 2001 that, whereas Parliament notes with deep sorrow the demise of hon. Esther Dhugira Opoti, Woman Member of Parliament for Nebbi District, which occurred on Saturday the 18th August 2001; and whereas the late hon. Esther Dhugira Opoti has had a distinguished career as a teacher, social worker, dedicated political leader, who deserves recognition of this Parliament,  Now, therefore, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda:

(a)	Do hereby convey its most sincere condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Nebbi and the entire nation upon the loss of a distinguished daughter of Uganda.

(b)	Do further register its unbound admiration and gratitude for the services that she has in the course of her life rendered to the people of this nation.”  I beg to move.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Seconded.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Mr. Speaker, it is a very sad moment that so early in the life of this Seventh Parliament, we have had to convene here this afternoon and pay our last respect to one of us.  In our traditions, it is a bad omen, but we pray that God delivers us up to the end; because we do not know who will go tomorrow. The late Esther Dhugira Opoti, who has been a Member of this august House, until her untimely death on Saturday, 18th August 2001, at Mulago Hospital, was and will remain a woman hero who died on duty during the 7th Parliament of Uganda.  

I came to know and associate with hon. Dhugira Esther, when she was elected as Nebbi Woman Representative in the former National Resistance Council; where she served diligently until 1996, when she was voted out.  During that time, hon. Opoti was outward, and she visited my constituency in Kasese District to support fundraising activities. I used to see her on several occasions interact with most of the constituencies in this country.

The late hon. Dhugira Esther Opoti was born on September 9th in 1962, in Kituli Town to Mr. Onenoth and Mrs.Vitali Opoti Jalmoi, both of whom I am sorry to say, are also deceased.  She was the fourth child in that family, with eight sisters and ten brothers, many of whom were still depending on her till her time of death. 

Hon. Esther’s educational background and career.  

As a daughter of a roving district education officer by then, she attended many schools. Namely, Arua Public School in 1969, Kitgum Public School, and that completed her primary education.  She later joined Kitgum High School, Dr. Obote College, and Boroboro in Lira, where she ended finishing her O’level studies in 1983. 

The deceased was a professional teacher. She studied for her diploma in education at Onyama National Teachers College in Gulu, as well as Nkozi - having described the nature of her father’s career – that was 1987.

Let me now describe the political career of the late hon. Dhugira. I came to learn that her father was not only a district education officer, but also a powerful politician of that time. And through his acquaintances with his dear daughter Esther Dhugira, Esther quite early in her life exhibited immense political skills to an extent that, immediately after completing her diploma, she only taught for one year. 

No wonder after teaching for one year at Erusi Senior Secondary School in Nebbi, in 1988, she joined the National Resistance Council in 1989, where her political talents came to the limelight. That is when most of us who were in NRC at that particular time, came to like and love her.

We shall remember her for her significant contribution towards democracy in this country, as a woman who participated and actively played her role.  Esther was a uniting factor; she was able to visit, listen and interact regardless of sex, and regardless of religion.  She had a developmental mind, both for the nation, and for her local community. She was a symbol for the Nebbi Community. 

Many of us will remember the powerful music instruments of Nebbi Community that Esther was associated with, and also the various community functions she organized in Kampala for her people to interact, and unite with other Members.  Of course, her contribution at the family level cannot be enumerated here.  

Those of us who had the opportunity to interact with the late hon. Esther Dhugira Opoti, as NRC Member and later, as a delegate of the people of Nebbi to the Constituent Assembly, between 1994 to 1995, can best describe her by quoting an article that appeared in today’s Monitor newspaper, written by Elizabeth Kameo – I quote, “Some people come into our lives and leave without making an impact, while others make footprints and then life is never the same”.  Indeed, the late hon. Esther Dhugira Opoti made an indelible political impact during her short time on earth, but she will live forever in our hearts, women and men, and all those who worked with her.  

We are not forgetting that she has lived only for 38 years – that is the prime age for any politician. I will remember her outwardness, and her mixing with everybody. I imagine that if Esther had lived a little longer, God had more to demonstrate to us in this 7th Parliament, and to those who did not have an opportunity to be with her.

The late hon. Member had quite a number of national responsibilities, beyond what one could imagine.  It is a pity we talk about them after people are deceased!  The late hon. Esther Dhugira Opoti was not only an effective legislator, but also held various national responsibilities, including many of which she held up to her time of death. 

She has been a Director with Kinyara Sugar Works Limited from 1991; Director Immigration Control Board, from 1994; Director, National Enterprises Corporation – NEC, from 1999; and a Member – Central Scholarship Committee, from 1994.  All the above, she still held up to her time of death.  She was also a Member of the Appointments Board at the Institute of Education, ITEK – Kyambogo and many others, which we may not enumerate. Esther’s political life is endless; it is not easy to enumerate at this sorrowful time.

However, her political life culminated into serving on the National Task Force for the Presidential candidate then, His Excellency, Kaguta Yoweri Museveni in 1996, where she seconded the nomination of the President. In the parliamentary elections 2001, she pursued her political career, got on the wagon and was successfully elected to this House.  

Therefore, we are seeing off a woman politician, whose political career had no limit and this untimely death has deprived us of a nationalist, a community worker, and a family member. I would like to describe her as a heroic woman who was a female activist; she was a feminist; she was a committed developer. During the cotton mobilisation programme in 1993, I had the opportunity to visit her constituency and I found her busy mobilising, even the community in neighbouring Nebbi, in Congo, to grow cotton in order to sell that cotton in Uganda. So her interaction and development acumen was not only limited to Nebbi and the nation but it was also international. 

Esther was a brilliant lady. She has left political challenges to women who are in this House on the affirmative action and other ranks below. Because immediately she finished her first term on affirmative action, she quickly tried it out and moved to what is known as a male domain constituency, Okoro county, and she tussled it out with several men. She was defeated by hon. Anthony Ofwori Rugete, a Member of the 6th Parliament who also passed away. She lost; that is why it is a challenge. But in spite of the loss, she could not give up her political career. 

She still found an alternative to improve on her knowledge and political skills, hence taking up a degree course at Makerere University where she successfully completed and graduated with a Bachelor of Social Sciences Degree, specialising in Political Science with a bias in Public Administration and Psychology. This knowledge, I hope had empowered her to take on the task of the 7th Parliament. God did not will it.

I do not want to take long because of the sad moment. Hon. Dhugira Esther Opoti will be specifically remembered by this 7th Parliament. Those of you who may not know her, she sat on the right hand side of the Speaker, and during the election of the Speakers, she stood up firmly and seconded the nomination of our Deputy Speaker. Alas! She has missed to see her steer this House to her expectations. We shall miss her contributions indeed.  

Esther’s attributes are endless but that is life. The 38 years she has lived have been packed with successes and achievements.

In summary, we are paying tribute to a brilliant girl, a mother to all, a practical politician who was ready to achieve and have her way. A woman activist, a founder of many women organisations at national and district level, notably the Forum for Women in Development (FOWODE) here in Kampala; a caucus in the Constituent Assembly.  

Esther was a loving person and was always there for all of us including her constituency. We pray for her family and we pray that many of us will continue to attend to her children and members of the family. I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PUBLIC SERVICE) (Mr. Okumu Ringa): Mr. Speaker, I stand to second this motion with a lot of emotion, because the people of Nebbi have yet again lost an outstanding politician, a mother, a sister, a mobiliser and one who bridged a lot of political gaps.  

I got to know the late hon. Esther Opoti Dhugira in 1989 when she braved the political scene and joined the NRM during the election to NRC in 1989. This was a time when most of our brothers and sisters in the North, and particularly in my district, were viewing the Movement or NRA not as a viable alternative to the governance of this country.  She braved it and became a member of the NRC. I was on the other side of politics of development but we collaborated well. We worked in the mobilisation process to preach the gospel of the Movement and to tell the people that the Movement is there to stay and to work towards the political superiority of this country, and we worked well.  

The late Esther was born in a royal family, which is the lineage I belong to. Her father was a very active political person in the Democratic Party and he did a lot. Unfortunately, he was also tragically killed during the rebellion in 1987. I am bringing this brief recount to emphasise the brevity of the late Esther Dhugira Opoti.  Indeed as in the Bible, Ecclesiastes Chapter 3 verse says ‘under the sun there is time for everything. There is time to be born; there is time to die. There is time to laugh, there is time to cry, there is time to sow, there is time to weed’. 

And indeed what we witness today is that process where our sister has left us. We the people of Nebbi district have suffered, because on 2nd June 2000, we lost a Member of Parliament, the late Ofore Rugette. It was also a tragic loss and the late Rugette was also distantly related to the late Esther Opoti. So you can see the tragic and the double loss and a big loss the people of Nebbi have suffered in a spell of less than two years.

I will summarise the life of the late, in a brief sentence; that she was a brilliant woman, a mother, she was a mobiliser, she was a catalyst in a sense that her actions and activities cut across political, religious and above all tribal boundaries.  All Members of Parliament will sadly miss the late Opoti.  But I would like to assure you my colleagues that, we shall try our best and work as a team to bridge this gap. When a tragic incident like this happens, and after a bitter electoral contest, particularly at constituency level, many things will be said acrimoniously and there will be many thoughts and finger pointing.   But I would like to a sure you that we as political leaders will work to bridge that gap.  

The late Opoti was admitted on the 1st of August in Mulago hospital.   I personally went and saw her many times, discussed with her and encouraged her to be strong, but the last four or five days of her life were very difficult and here we are.  We mourn our sister, political leader, a mother, a mobiliser and a feminist.  May her soul rest in eternal peace.  Amen.

MRS. BETTY AKECH (Woman Representative Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to say something about my late friend and colleague, hon. Esther Opoti.  I first knew the late Esther Opoti in 1994, when we were both in the Constituent Assembly.  She was then in the NRC and the Constituent Assembly.  In the NRC, she was on the women’s seat, and in the Constituent Assembly, she was one of the few women who had come in through the open ticket, having tussled it out with men.  She was a very young and vibrant politician by then, definitely younger than me, but very intelligent, very approachable and very friendl;, and it is then that we got together, united by our thinking on the issues that affected women and children.  

Out of that relationship, Esther, myself and Winnie Byanyima together with the hon. Loyce Bwambale and hon. Margaret Zziwa, formed what they call the Forum for Women in Democracy.  Esther was then our general secretary, while I was the vice chairman and Winnie Byanyima was the chairperson.  Through that NGO, we were able to tackle a number of women’s   issues, and I do remember Esther giving us very good guidance on how we could tackle the problems of women at the national and local levels.  When you listened to Esther’s speech at that time - she had not got her first degree - you would know she was really a very bright girl; very, very bright.  

In 1996, we had the opportunity to work together in the Presidential campaigns, and I would like you to know that the President in his wisdom chose her to nominate him at Kololo; she did that together with Haji Moses Kigongo.  There were definitely many women from whom the President would have chosen to nominate him, but the fact that he chose her was because he saw a different quality in her; young, intelligent, a very good mobiliser and a committed movement supporter.  We worked together and the President won. We remained a close knit group. We were five women in the Presidential task force at the national level. One of us was a former Minister, Betty Okwir, and the others were Fiona Egunyu and Jamwa Tezira.  We remained a close group and we called ourselves ‘Force Four’, because we took the word task force and said we were force four; and as force four, we did a lot of work for the movement and ourselves.  I do remember the young Esther working so hard that she had to be retained.  After the Presidential elections, we had to go home to look for votes; she still volunteered to remain behind to help in organising the Parliamentary elections of 1996.   Because of that hard work and commitment, Esther was unable to be home as much as the electorate wanted, and I think you all know what the electorate is; Esther lost her seat, but she remained doing her work.  

I remember when she was asked whether she would want to work or study, she chose to study; she did not want the short cut.   She knew with studies, she would get more credentials and be more powerful. I must say that, whenever she set her mind to do something, she would do it and she did her studies very well; she graduated and we had hoped that the fruits of Esther’s studies would be seen.   But I think God did not want it.  I wish to say that we have lost one of the most brilliant young women in Uganda. 

I also want to say on behalf of the Ministry of Education and Sports, where she was on the Central Scholarships Committee, that we have lost a woman with a very analytical mind, who was very firm in her work, who discharged her duties without fear or favour. May Esther’s soul rest in eternal peace.

MR.OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Esther has become number one to die in the Seventh Parliament. This House will recall that in the Sixth Parliament, we lost 14 Members of Parliament out of whom, the last one was from Apac and she happened to be a lady Member of Parliament. That was Rosemary Kerwegi. 

I come from where Rosemary Kerwegi was buried. I know what is now happening in her family. I know the condition of the properties she left undone, for instance, a building which she was constructing. I am saying this in follow-up of what happens when a Member of Parliament dies as it has happened here. Rosemary Kerwegi’s house, which was under construction, is now falling apart. There is no relative who can come forward and offer to complete the construction; yet, this is a lady who served this country, and was prepared to continue serving it. This gives a challenge to this House; a challenge of what do we do with our Members? How do we assist them, even when they are dead? How can we assist the immediate family with immediate problems?  

We have a Budget. When a Member dies, as it has happened, relatives and friends will always come running to the offices in this Parliament to get some funds to assist in burial arrangements. I have experienced that some of this money we get from this House is not enough. I remember when we lost the late Adyebo, I happened to be a member of the organising committee. That day when we were here preparing to take his body home, we were advanced Shs.700,000 but that money was not enough even to cater for two days, and yet there was nobody around to assist us. 

I rise to question the fairness of the budgets that are always given to such occasions like these. I also want to suggest that in a circumstance where Members die as we will continue having it that way, this House should come up with a programme of assisting the bereaved families, the children and immediate relatives so that they do not feel shattered.

I knew Lady Esther fairly short enough when this Parliament opened, but I had confidence in her that whatever she was, she was prepared to serve this country. I now want to request this House to come up with a way of assisting the children. I know there are two children left behind, but without support from us, without support from Government, without support from this House, they may find it very difficult. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

MR.OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand here to condole the loss of my sister, Princess Esther. At merely 38, it is accomplished. The whole life was concocted and compounded despite her royalty, despite her having just attained her degree, despite her having just made it to the Parliament yet again. It is accomplished. We might have come by different ships but sooner or later, we shall all find ourselves in the same boat. It is accomplished. 

My sister, Princess Esther, was very special to us. She has been a fighter for the goodness of the people of Nebbi even during the five years that she stayed out of Parliament. When the first Bishop of the Catholic Diocese of Nebbi was ordained in May 1996, His Excellency, the President had a celebration to mark his victory and therefore could not come to be with us in Nebbi. But through hon. Esther Opoti Dhugira, the President was able to grace us with his presence and later on flew back to come to Luwero where he was having that celebration. 

Princess Esther did many things, which I cannot mention now. Having seen the problems of the people of Nebbi, being committed to their common destiny, hon. Esther was one of those who came to me. I was very comfortable serving this nation as a General Manager with Uganda Commercial Bank Limited in March 1999. Princess Esther came to me and said, “if only you could come to Parliament, I will not bother to come to Parliament.” We had a gentleman’s agreement, I accepted. We went with her through the referendum campaigns. Even when His Excellency, the President came to Nebbi in May 1999, we went together with Esther, and being the beloved daughter of the President, she later came back with the President in the same helicopter. 

Even during the presidential election, I worked together with Princess Esther.  The people of Nebbi will miss Esther and I believe this Parliament will miss her. 

This is the fourth serving Member of Parliament that Nebbi has lost. In 1960 we lost hon. Oringi who was Deputy Minister of Health and was also a Member of Parliament. We lost hon. Amin Wadriff, an MP for Jonam. We lost hon. Anthony Ofory Rugete who was a serving Member of Parliament; now we have lost Princess Esther. 

As we continue to mourn her, I urge every one of you to remember Esther in your prayers. Before we started active deliberations here in Parliament, Esther and I, and five other Members of Parliament went to Christ the King Parish where we had a special prayer, and I am not surprised that my sister Princess Esther died having fully reconciled with her Lord.  May her soul rest in eternal peace.

THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: (Mrs. Bakoko Bakoru): Mr. Speaker, I want to join the rest of the Members of Parliament on this sad occasion when we are mourning our colleague Esther Opoti Dhugira. For us, as Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, this is a very sad occasion because Esther Dhugira is one of the very rare women who had qualities which would have helped build the women folk on the political, social and economic sector in this country.  
While Esther was in hospital, very many of our colleagues visited her, and I thank them for that on behalf of the Ministry of Gender and of the people of West Nile. I also want to thank your office, Mr. Speaker, and that of the Clerk for the support you gave us when we lost our dear sister. You gave us a lot of co-operation and we are grateful that we were able to receive a quick response in the preparation for the demise of our late sister and even in transporting her body tomorrow to Nebbi district. For those of us who are still in Parliament, and Woman Members of Parliament, I want to say that this is a gap and a big challenge as well. Whenever we lose a woman Member of Parliament it is like ten times the other sex we have in this House, because you look at our proportion; we are 72 and they are about 300 Members - it is about 1 to 4. And so for us, it is a very big challenge because we still have to go out there and catalyse the other women to join us in politics and economic development for this country. 

Very many people just look at women as people who should still play their role in the kitchen, but you have heard what Esther Dhugira has done in her career as a politician and a teacher in this country. We shall, as people from West Nile, remember Esther as one person who would be working together with us closely to bridge the gap with other parts of this country. I appeal to you to emulate her example and let her candle continue to burn. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

MRS.HYUHA DOROTHY (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Such moments are usually very difficult moments to talk or to give a speech. Hon. Esther Opoti in this 7th Parliament was a Member of the Committee on Social Services, which I chair. It is very unfortunate that the late attended one Committee meeting when we were electing the leadership of the Committee and she effectively participated. Some of us who have participated in campaigns to become Members of Parliament know the pains and the loss. You can visualise what the late went through her victory and expectations. All this is no more, Esther is dead and we are mourning. 

I would like to recognise the effective contribution of the late Esther Opoti and the Committee of Appointment’s Committee of which she has been a Member and I am also a Member. She was a strong advocate for the people of the North, and in particular West Nile, especially for effective equitable sharing of political positions. 

As we stand here, Esther is no more, to the Members of Social Service Committee and the Members of Appointment’s Committee and the entire Parliament. As we have heard from the background of her politics, we had hoped to gain a lot from Esther. It is no more. It is very sad that before we benefited from that profile of her political background, Esther is dead.  

To our Parliamentary Commission and Government as a whole, l feel this is an eye opener.  As you have heard from one of the colleagues contributing, a colleague from Apac District, in the 6th Parliament, we lost quite a number of our colleagues, and here we are hardly two months in the 7th Parliament, we have lost another one.  I have one disturbing question from my head that given what the late Esther Opoti went through, the losses she has made in the Movement politics, where you stand on individual merit and you look for your own resources in the struggle to serve the nation.  Here we are, our colleague has just spent all the resources, possibly all what she had in the spirit of Nebbi District and the country at large as we have heard from her book profile, is no more. The disturbing question which I put to the Parliamentary Commission and Government and entire Parliament is; what happens to her family?  What next?  It is quite disturbing. We members of the Social Services Committee will miss our colleague who had just joined us and she is no more.  May her soul rest in eternal peace.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (TRADE) (Mr. Rwendeire):  Thank you, Mr. speaker, and hon. Members.  Let me also join the previous hon. Members who spoke before me in mourning our very good friend, hon. Esther Opoti.  I came to know hon. Esther Opoti when I was Minister of State for Higher Education and got to really like her for a number of things; but one of them was one element that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister likes to say; this is time management.  She was extremely cautious of being in time, as well as ensuring that whatever was to be done would be done in time and without wasting the resourceS.  She was extremely dedicated to the job that she would be given, and certainly would put all heart to it.

She was a great defender of the truth.  She always wanted to make sure that the truth comes out. when we were dealing with applications for scholarships, hon. Esther wanted all the time to go to the bottom of the truth; and you know, hon. Members, that this Parliament definitely wantS to go to the bottom of the truth.

One thing that I like to remember about hon. Esther is her way of relating with the people; she was very humorous.  I recall one occasion, when I first visited Nebbi and met her there - l had travelled from Pakwach, where I had a function and I was going to Nebbi; and just before Nebbi, I saw some buildings with a green roof and I asked; “Do these building belong to Government or what?”  She looked at me and asked; “Well, you are a professor from Makerere?” I said; “No, I am a Member of Parliament.”  She said, “Okay, but you came from Makerere and you are supposed to know.  So well, you shoot me questions and I will tell you.”  Then she said, “Well, you have been to Parliament, tell me who is the most outspoken Parliamentarian now”  This was 1999; l searched for the person, honestly I could not remember; l thought maybe it was hon. Kazoora; she said no, you have failed.  So I scratched, I said maybe hon. Karuhanga Elly; she said no, you have failed.  Then I told her I am not going to try the third time because I fear failing again.  And she said well, have you heard of the Member of Parliament of Padyere?  I said, “Yeah, hon. Okumu Ringa”. She said, “Yeah those are his buildings.”  But you can see the way she made me feel comfortable in Nebbi where I had gone for the first time, and that was Esther.  She used humour to reach people and to put her points across.  We shall dearly miss Esther, and may the good Lord rest her soul in eternal life.  Thank you.

MR. JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Soroti):  Mr. Speaker, when I stand to speak and pay my last tribute to Esther, I may find it very difficult to begin, because since 1994 when the Constituent Assembly was sworn in, and Esther was one of the delegates and I had the privilege of being a delegate to the CA.  I know very well at that time when I got interaction with Esther, I discovered one quality; a very soft and humorous, but firm delegate to the CA.   

As earlier stated by hon. Betty Akech, as you may recall, having been also a delegate at that time to the CA, was a body of people who were elected from different localities with different concept and interest; who were to meet together to forge a common destiny for this country.  At that time, I did not have a clear concept of affirmative action, but when I met Esther and others like Betty Akech with whom she used to move together most of the time after the conferences, for example, we had to drop them home, because at that we were very poor delegates you remember, we did not have transport. I begun to develop the concept of affirmative action and I realised that the pivot at that time amongst them was Esther Opoti.  When time came to handle crucial issues to be adopted in the Constitution, Esther gave me a very invariable advice and I acted in accordance with that advice. I think out of that advice, we have reached the destiny that we have reached in the writing the Constitution of Uganda.
 
But when the Constituent Assembly was over, I met Esther in 1996, when she was a member of the Immigration Board. At that time, I was trying to set up a Salt firm and we needed expatriate labour and we knew the regulations governing immigration in this country. Esther helped me and advised me on how to go about that kind of thing. 

But more important, in that interaction, I came to know Esther’s two children and the family in general. At that time, Esther was putting up a house in Mbuya, and that interaction gave me the opportunity to realise that Esther was both a father and a mother of those two children, and I know them personally. 

The issue I am trying to bring out here is that, those children were very close to their mother, they loved their mother and she loved them. That family coherence since Esther passed away is no longer there. What do we do to those children? They need love; they need a future, and want to live like any other child in this country. We have a hand that we can give individually or collectively to those children.

Another thing I would like to raise for the consideration of other Members of this House is the question of hazards of duties as Members of Parliament during the 7th Parliament. Since the 7th Parliament started, you have given us a lot of communications from the Chair, but more significantly you have told us about Members of Parliament getting accidents during the course of their duty. I believe we are going to have more of these things happening.  

You may recall in the 6th Parliament when you were a Deputy Speaker, we had a case where a Member of Parliament from Rakai, hon.Patrick Kiggundu was involved in an accident. It was so bad that this Member of Parliament could not discharge his duties properly as he was reduced to a wheel chair. I know these things happen and they are beyond our control and we cannot eliminate them. But is there no other way by which we can try to cushion such situations when they happen both to the victim and to the dependants?

In my closing remarks, I would like to send my condolences and those of the people of Kaberamaido, to the people of Nebbi and to the family of Esther for their loss which has come too soon and very unexpectedly. May her soul rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I think we have come to the end of our tribute. I will now call the Prime Minister to speak on behalf of the Government. But there are two points which have come up during this tribute. When a Member of Parliament dies, what happens to his/her family? What happens to a Member who gets an accident while transacting business of the House?  

Earlier, I told you that the Commission had sat this morning and considered all possible issues pertaining to the welfare of Members of Parliament and how to improve on the current situation. Among the issues that were identified was the issue raised by hon. Omodi Okot, now alluded to by the hon. Member for Kaberamaido. We have explored this; unfortunately or fortunately, we intend to work as if we are in a retreat. But we think after the retreat, the outcome will solve a number of problems, which you are raising now. So bear with us, we are aware of the problems, but we opt to work as if we are in a retreat, but very soon you will know the results.  
Now I give opportunity to the Right Hon. Prime Minister to make his contribution.

THE PRIME MINISTER  (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to support the motion, and on behalf of the Government, wish to convey our very deep condolences to the family, to Nebbi district and to the whole nation on the loss of hon. Opoti. 

She was, as we have heard from many contributors, a diligent manager of time, gracious, very understanding and patriotic. These are very scarce resources, which we are groping for, and when a person who possesses them dies, it is a great loss to the family and to the nation at large.  

But let me add that she was also an effective victor of the Movement politics, especially in Nebbi district. Her loyalty was not divided. I repeat, her loyalty to the Movement was not divided. 

When she took Political Science in her training, she was getting requisite skills to manage the electoral process; and we are not surprised that she was able to enter NRC, Parliament and other important institutions where she performed quietly but effectively. I have said time and again, that it is not necessary to make a lot of noise in order to be known to be contributing. There are many people in this legislative body who do not make a lot of noise, but are quietly contributing to the political and economic development of this country. And I want to declare that she belongs to this category.  

When I went to visit her in Ward 3D, she was having a lot of pain and I was hesitant even to greet her. Indeed, her daughter was graciously caressing her in order to reduce the pain and the staff were also doing their best to reduce the pain. I even asked whether she could not be given more tablets to reduce that pain, and they replied that it was unethical if they gave more tablets to her in order to reduce that pain.  So I stood and looked at her and she finally stretched her frail hand to greet me and it was clear that she was actually saying farewell.  It was very sad indeed, but here we note that although she was having a lot of pain, she was courageous.  

I would like to appeal to different stakeholders, including the mass media that there are what we call the right to privacy of the sick and the dead. Let me read Clause 41 of our Constitution.  It says: “Every citizen has a right of access to information in the possession of the state or any other organ or agency of the state except where the release of the information is likely to prejudice the security or sovereignty of the state or interfere with the right to the privacy of any person.” 

May we be careful as we record the problems afflicting those who are sick unless we have been clearly given the permission by the members of the family. May the Almighty sustain the bereaved.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, with this we come to the end of this particular item on our Order Paper.  I now want to put the question to the motion, which was tabled by hon. Loice Bwambale, Member of Parliament for Kasese District, which was seconded, by hon. Okumu Ringa to pay tribute to the late Esther Dhugira Opoti.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: You have heard the tribute and I do not know whether the body is still outside or is being taken to the church; many people have approached me. They say they want also to go to church, but we had business to transact.  I do not know whether it is proper to continue with the debate or Members go to church so that they pray for the deceased.  So with this, we come to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.50 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday 23rd August 2001 at 2.00 p.m.)


