Monday, 29 August 2011

Parliament met at 11.11 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good morning. Hon. Members, we are running a race that is a bit tight. As I keep repeating every beginning of sitting, we have to finish this process by the 31st of this month and that is how many days ahead? One day. And we have a holiday coming in, and this morning I see the House is not as full as it should have been. I am very concerned and I am sure you also notice that the attendance is not good. We agreed that we will start at 10.00 O’clock today. By 10.00 O’clock I was monitoring on the screen and this place was completely empty. I think we should shape up so that we can finish this process. The whole county is waiting for us to finish this process because we are tying down money that should be going to the health centers, schools and money that should be helping this country. We are tying it down by not passing the Budget in time. We should really do something about it. 

Chairpersons of committees, please, as agreed on Friday afternoon, let us finish this. Let us have the reports ready and then we can move on.

Secondly, I would like to give an apology from Parliament to the Muslim community in Uganda. We have not done very well over the last years. The Muslim community has a big ceremony waiting but we are pushing our Muslim colleagues to be with us here today and Eid-El-Fitr may be tomorrow or the next day. By now they should have been free to be with their people mobilising and organising for the celebrations but they are forced to be with us here because of the urgency of the matter. But I am praying that there will be a time when we can deal with this matter finally and we have a good setting for it so that once a date is known, we can set aside two days, at least for Parliament, even if the whole country is not doing two days, to allow our Muslim colleagues to celebrate their big day. It has come as a great concern to me this time around that up to the end of today, we have to push business and whichever day the holiday will come, the very next day we should be here so that we can finish this process. So, I apologise to the Muslim community but also undertake to have this matter fixed finally in the future. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) THE REVISED REVENUE EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012

II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Following the procedure we adopted earlier, I hope the shadow minister in charge of gender issues is here. Mr Chairman, proceed.

11.17
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nokrach): Mr Speaker, I stand here to present the report on behalf of my committee. In accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and in accordance with rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, like any other parliamentary committee, is mandated to critically examine Government recurrent and capital estimates and make recommendations thereto.

The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development considered Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. It critically examined the policy statement from the ministry and raised issues for response by respective ministers. 

The committee held meetings with ministers to discuss the ministerial policy statement and other methods incidental thereto and now reports to the House as follows:

Mr Speaker, I am reading my executive summary - which I think has not been attached - to save time so that we complete early. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in the Financial Year 2010/2011 was allocated Shs 26 billion of which Shs 2.310 billion was for wage recurrent, Shs 13.395 was for non-wage recurrent while Shs 8.9 billion was for capital development.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development reported several achievements in the Financial Year 2010/2011. Most notably, the ministry continued to empower communities to harness their potential through cultural growth, skills development and labour productivity for sustainable gender responsive development. 

The committee in this report observes, among others, that perennial under-funding has limited the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to effectively perform its mandate. The release received by the ministry for the financial year ending was much lower than the approved budget despite the fact that the budget ceiling of the ministry is very low. Even in the budget for this year, the budget for the ministry is just 0.4 percent of the total budget.  

I am not reading the report line by line because we do not have enough time. So, let us turn to page 18 for observations and recommendations. 

Community Mobilisation and Empowerment

The National Cultural Centre: this is a semi-autonomous institution comprising of the National Theatre and the Nommo Gallery. Money, which is collected from the properties, is spent at source and annual financial reports are not availed to Parliament. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development supports the institution through a wage subvention each fiscal year. The committee was informed that land titles for Nommo Gallery and National Theatre main building had been secured. However, the land title for the National Theatre car park that is Plot 2-4 Dewinton Road has not yet been secured. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development informed the committee that it is in the process of acquiring the land title.

The committee further observed, with concern, that Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development does not have land titles for the ministry’s land, which the committee had recommended last financial year.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the National Cultural Centre avails annual reports on its performance to Parliament. 

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development expedites the acquisition of the land title.

The committee further recommends that the management of the National Cultural Centre works out a business plan in order to generate revenue and ultimately become self reliant. This business plan should be presented to Parliament.

Traditional or Cultural Leaders

The committee appreciates that the Constitution provides for the recognition of traditional or cultural leaders by the government. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development budget ceiling caters for only 12 traditional cultural leaders and yet the recognised cultural leaders are 16. 

The committee was further informed that the Iteso cultural institution has not provided adequate documentation on the ownership of the land on which to build the palace despite several reminders.

Recommendations

Resources for the additional four leaders should be provided by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The Ministry of Gender should expedite the drafting of regulations to operationalise the Institution of Traditional or Cultural Leaders Act.

The Iteso cultural institution should provide the documents required by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social development.

Functional Adult Literacy (FAL)

The committee noted that FAL instructors are not adequately facilitated to carry out their duties effectively. This requires a total of Shs 7.200 billion per year. In spite of the FAL budget being static over the years, the programme has expanded to cover the whole country.

The committee further noted that some districts lack materials needed for the FAL programme to be effectively implemented. 

Recommendations

The funds proposed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should be availed to facilitate the programme. The budget for FAL programmes should be enhanced to cater for districts, which do not have such programmes.

The programme should undertake to facilitate people with disabilities, especially the visually impaired, by providing them with Braille learning materials and sign language for the deaf.

Local Governments

The committee observed that local governments are not adequately facilitated to mainstream gender into their plans. The Community Development Officers (CDOs) in local governments are not adequately facilitated to carry out community development functions, yet they can become change agents for government programmes.

There is no policy on utilisation of community development officers. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should have a streamlined strategy regarding utilisation of CDOs. The monthly allocations for operations of CDOs is Shs 30,000 per month and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development requests that the amount be raised to Shs 300,000 per month per lower government. The overall total will be Shs 3.44 billion for over 1,040 lower local governments per year for meaningful delivery of services to society.

Recommendations 

The Government should provide the funds for CDOs allowances and a policy on utilisation of CDOs should be put in place by Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Establishment of the Kiswahili Council

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development informed the committee that it is a requirement by all the East African states to establish Kiswahili Council for better delivery of services.

Out of the five member states, it is only Uganda, which does not have the council. The estimated cost for the council establishment is Shs 500 million.

Recommendations

The Government should facilitate the establishment of the Kiswahili Council by providing the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development Shs 500 million needed for its commencement as soon as possible.

Mainstreaming Gender and Rights

Elimination of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM):
The committee noted that in the last financial year, Rehabilitation, Education and Community Health (REACH) received Shs 100 million for FGM activities. However, in the third and fourth quarters, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development did not get funding to undertake monitoring activities. However, the affected local government continued to monitor the risk activities.

Recommendations

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should increase funding to REACH programme so that the fight against FGM is scaled up to cover the areas where the vice is reported to be picking up.

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should develop a monitoring and evaluation tool to efficiently monitor and supervise activities of REACH.

There is also need for cross border collaboration to track those who escape to neighbouring countries to evade the law.

On the Equal Opportunities Commission, the committee observed that the commission requires Shs 1.160 billion and the budget ceiling for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is Shs 0.600 billion. The wage bill is Shs 0.570 billion leaving no funds for operations of the commission.

The committee recommends that the Equal Opportunities Commission should be given self-accounting status, and allocated its own vote charge on the Consolidated Fund as stipulated by the law effective this financial year.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is tasked to provide a progress report to Parliament on the matter within six months.

The National Women’s Council

The committee noted that the Electoral Commission has not conducted women council elections due to lack of funds.

Recommendations

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should work closely with relevant ministries and bodies to ensure that these elections are conducted.

Gender Responsive Auditing

The committee observed that gender responsive auditing and budgeting is not being done. The guidelines for auditing gender and rights mainstreaming are not in place. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for purposes of scrutinizing sector budgets, require sectors to adhere to the budget call circular directives on gender budgeting.

Recommendations

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development develops benchmarks for measuring compliance in respect to gender budget call circular.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development plays a coordinating role of ensuring that the budget call circular on gender budgeting is followed.

Promotion of Labour Productivity and Employment

The Industrial Court:
The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development informed the committee that the Industrial Court is not yet constituted. This is because appointment of the judge on an interim basis from the Judiciary has not yet been done. 

The Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act, 2006 provides for the establishment of the Industrial Court and its functions. The committee recommends that the Industrial Court should be fully constituted. The law should be reviewed and clearance be sought on the terms and conditions of service for the chief judge and other members of the court. The gender ministry should follow up the constitution of the court within this financial year given the huge backlog of cases.  

On Occupational Safety and Health (OSH), the committee noted that the OSH department is currently understaffed and has inadequate resources to undertake its mandate. The committee last financial year recommended that a study be undertaken to assess the viability of establishing an independent authority, which was not done. The committee further noted that the department has not adequately performed as expected and as such, is unable to show value for money. 

The committee recommends that the gender ministry should conduct an assessment for the creation of an occupational safety and health authority in order to execute the mandate given by the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2006. 

The committee further recommends that the permanent secretary takes keen interest in the operation of the department to make it more functional.

Regarding social protection for the vulnerable groups - we begin with the youth and children affairs: The committee was informed that the gender ministry, in collaboration with the National Planning Authority, is to review the skills development in the country and the results will be taken into consideration in the development of the curriculum. The Ministry also intends to subject the trainees from the youth institutions to trade tests. 

The committee also noted that the youth centers under the ministry: Mobuku Youth Training Centre, Kasese; Ntawo Youth Training Centre, Mukono; Kobulin Youth Training Centre, Moroto; Kabalye Youth Training Centre and Apac Youth Training Centre are not fully functional with most of them having vacant posts.

The committee recommends that the gender ministry should fast track the review of skills development in collaboration with NPA, in order to develop the youth capabilities in different vocations for their livelihood. 

The committee further recommends that the ministry should rehabilitate these youth training institutions, and that their staff structures be fully provided for in order for them to function effectively. 

Looking at street children, the committee noted that the problem of street children has continued to persist despite several interventions as set out in the ministry’s policy statement and intervention of Kampala City Council Authority. The Children’s Act is silent about child labour. Children as young as three years are being used as beggars to make money, especially on the streets. Urban centers particularly Kampala, Jinja, Iganga, Busia, Tororo and Mbale are the worst hit with children, adults, female youths, and young males, mainly from the Karamoja sub-region. The committee observes that the rehabilitation centers and reception homes supposed to receive the children before resettlement are not fully facilitated to handle the number of street children and equip them with life skills to keep them busy.

We recommend that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should be tasked to ensure that Uganda Law Reform Commission urgently reviews the Act. By reviewing the Children’s Act to include issues of child labour, it is likely to reduce the number of children being used by adults on the streets to beg. We also recommend that the gender ministry budgets for and holds sensitisation campaigns especially in schools and mass media on the Children’s Act and child labour. 

The committee further recommends that the gender ministry urgently embarks on the strategy to deal with the problem of street children. The Ministry should renovate Kobulin Youth Centre and provide for the full staff structures for the institution to function effectively. 

The committee noted with concern that the gender ministry is losing grip on issues that fall under its docket. These include, but are not limited to, issues of street children and the youth fund currently under the finance ministry. The committee recommends that the gender ministry takes lead in implementation of projects that relate to their core function and not lose grip though other stakeholders are giving a helping hand.

Regarding policy, planning and support services, the committee observed that several positions within the ministry are not filled, leading to low performance of the sector. The committee was informed that the sector developed a comprehensive recruitment plan and all the vacancies, which fit within the wage ceiling, were submitted to the Ministry of Public Service for approval, for filling and to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  

The ministry informed the committee that the recruitment plan shall be executed in a phased manner. However, the committee was disappointed that despite several invitations to the Ministry of Public Service to meet the committee and discuss the issue of filling vacant posts as raised in the policy statement, none of the invitations was honoured.

Our recommendation is that the Ministry of Public Service should honour committee invitations so as to work together harmoniously. The committee further recommends that The Ministry of Public Service explains to Parliament why they failed to honour the invitations. 

On the other hand, we recommend that the gender ministry expeditiously handles the matter of vacant posts. It should collaborate with the ministries of Public Service and Finance to recruit the required staff in order to enable it to effectively execute its mandate.

On office accommodation, the committee observed that the gender ministry pays Shs 1.9 billion annually for renting Simbamanyo Building. The committee is concerned that this is a lot of money for a building that may not adequately address the accommodation and vehicle parking needs. It, therefore, recommends that the ministry identifies land where it can put up its own building to house offices financed by the Government. The gender ministry should discuss with Ministry of Finance the possibility of getting funds to build its own office. This can be directly from the ministry of finance or in form of a loan serviced by annual rent payments, which are already committed.

Mr Speaker, the proposed budget for the ministry for the Financial Year 2011/12 is as follows: 
•	Wage is Shs 2,255,477,430;
•	Non-wage is Shs 13,344,413,572;
•	Domestic is Shs 6,471,330,907; 
•	Donor funding is Shs 2,274,378,900;
•	Taxes are Shs 2.2 billion; and
•	Arrears are Shs 1,491,250,000. This gives us a total of Shs 28,036,850,809. 

The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development recommends that Parliament approves funds for the ministry as already read. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. (Applause) Very good! As we agreed earlier, I now invite the Shadow Minister for Gender and Labour to make a short response to the ministerial policy statement, and then I open debate. The debate will take 30 minutes and your statement will take five minutes. Is it enough?  

11.42
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR GENDER AND LABOUR (Mrs Florence Ekwau): Ten to 15 minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good. Ten minutes.

MRS EKWAU: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I do beg for your indulgence. When we parted last week, at least gender was about No.5 from among the reports to be presented. I have a copy but yours will be coming in less than five minutes. I do beg for your indulgence. 

I wish to thank the committee, especially the chairperson, for the commitment in scrutinising the ministerial policy statement. 

The Ministry of Gender - Vote 018 and Votes 500 to 850 for the Local Government is what I am reacting to. I will go straight to the budget allocations and the role of donors.

It is really ironic that this sector receives the greatest physical marginalisation at all times. Like I made my comments here last time, it ranks among the last sector in terms of budget allocation, after ICT. This financial year of 2011/12, the allocation is only 0.3 percent and the budget has been provided amounting to Shs 29 billion. You remember the component for ICT is only 0.1 percent. Whereas the ministry’s mandate is key in discussing the above items that have been well ably discussed by the committee, you can see that it is only 1/23 of the budget that is provided for the Ministry of Defence. Even those programmes that exist under this ministry are mostly donor-funded and if we are to think about the Ministry of Gender as one that looks at the most important components, we have to look at the component of funding. 

This ministry has the highest number of ministers and personnel running around on programmes that are irrelevant to the needs of the poor. In fact, most of the monies that are in this sector, as has already been said, are donor funds and the little that remains is now meant for organising international days like the International Women’s Day, International Labour Day, International Youth Day, World Culture Day, Family Day, International Literacy Day and the National Library and Traditional Institutions, with all the wages appended to those institutions. 

So at the end of the day, there is one cabinet minister and four colleagues assisting. We are not minimising but we are saying that we either re-channel this ministry or make it more meaningful. You cannot have five ministers running around Shs 28 billion together with all that personnel. This is unacceptable -(Applause)– moreover on a budget that is 1/23 of the total budget of the Ministry of Defence. I think this is unfair. 

The role of women in poverty and development: over 85 percent of the population lives in rural areas and of this, women are the majority and also the ones who are totally engaged in agriculture. But what do we have for them? They produce crops that do not have market and at the end of the day, they are forced to give them out at give away prices. You heard what was said of the bananas in Bushenyi – a family will have to sell the entire bulk in order to pay fees for one child in Makerere! Hon. Minister, that is injustice to our women and the agriculturalists in the countryside. (Applause) We need markets for these commodities in order for the country to move forward.

There is the question of HIV/AIDS. We are worried that despite efforts of over a decade of protracted warfare against this scourge, the gains on this front are getting greatly undermined in many ways. First, the Government is at the moment emphasising male circumcision, which is making our men in the country side become even more reckless. (Applause) This message has put ABC to the backyard and will definitely lead to more risky sexual behaviour among the males.
  
There is the issue of dealing with stigma and discrimination towards vulnerable groups, which cannot protect themselves and access ARVs – we request and implore the Government to look at juggling other strategies other than concentrating on some of these things and then we are having the scourge escalate.

Then I will comment on the question of the street children, if you allow me to give an in-depth view of this: the ministry has reported that the multi-sectoral strategy on street children has been implemented, but we are concerned that much as this strategy was aimed at reducing or eliminating the problem, street children continue to become common on the streets of Kampala and other towns in this country! We then wonder what sort of strategy was implemented and if this was implemented successfully, the ministry would then not be planning of only evacuating the street children as the only one stop gap measure because according to the plans you have given in this year’s ministerial policy statement, you are planning to evacuate 1,260 street people from Kampala for each of the next three years, which would not be the solution.

Our view is that rather than dealing with this post mortem, the government should confront the underlying causes of family breakages and poverty. Whereas the ministry talks about having implemented a multi-sectoral strategy on street children, these people are still seen on the streets of Kampala. So, we do not even know the basis you are projecting this 1,260 per annum. What do you use as the baseline so that you talk of this 1,260 and yet the same children still come back to the streets?

We recommend that Government:
(a)	Stops the inhuman hostility, harassment including rape, arrest and imprisonment of these vulnerable people;

(b)	Sets up education facilities for the re-settlement of these children with adequate infrastructural facilities, with teachers who are committed enough to bring back and help the social support of these children;

(c)	Integrates education with poverty reduction measures whereby a “cash for school” programme is initiated for the parents to compensate them for the opportunity cost of their children going to school.

(d)	Re-introduces the multi-sectoral street children strategy that includes solutions to the casual factors. Based on this, Parliament should be able to allocate additional funds required and unfunded priorities amounting to Shs 2.1 billion as reported by the ministry, so that we deal with the question of the street children once and for all. 

There is this question of support for the youth that was ably mentioned here. The youth are more than 69.3 percent of Uganda’s population under 24 years. Unemployment rates are still very high but in spite of this, efforts to design and implement youth-oriented programmes are only disjointed in nature. In the last fiscal year, a total of 1,700 youth were provided with seed capital and 200 youths were trained in vocational skills while 100 were provided with tool kits. The ministry also trained 225 youth in entrepreneurship and business skills and in this fiscal year, the ministry plans to provide seed capital to 3,000 youth and other groups, train 680 youth in entrepreneurship. This appears to be different from the announcement by the ministry of finance about the Shs 44.5 billion for the youth employment, which is greater than the entire budget of the ministry of gender. Why do you get this bulk of money and put it to the ministry of finance and then you are using only meager programmes to train the youth. Shs44.5 billion if you see is greater than the Shs 29 billion that is allocated for the five ministers in the ministry of gender. So, we are saying, this is unacceptable!
 
You have allocated Shs 4.5 billion as grants for district women, youth and disabilities councils and last fiscal year, you promised to develop a national action plan on youth policy. Where did this policy go? What has it done because it was meant to guide the matters of youth development? If you developed this, why then do you grapple now and take this bulk of the money to the ministry of finance, and yet you claimed to have been doing action programmes and plans for the youth. 

Three quarters of the population are youths and there is no dedicated one-stop centre committed to action plans as promised by the ministry in the last financial year. In the absence of this, we are saying, what you are trying to do as youth programmes will come to nothing because it cannot help.

For the last 22 years, Government has not carried out a human resources survey and there is no purpose job creation that is meant to target the youths. With lack of this, the few jobs that are there are concentrated in urban centers. The bulk of the youths are in the countryside. Those who are in the urban centers are idle and disorderly. When there is a small riot, they are all like bees on the streets. So, until you come up with a programme to target the youths, you will not even move one inch.

I touch the question of minimum wage as well. Since October 1957, according to the Council’s Act Cap. 221, - this was when the law on minimum wage commenced - to this day, we still have people in employment full time paid Shs 50,000 per month equivalent to less than US $20 a month. Security firms, factories making juice and hardware shops are some of the biggest culprits involved in this abuse.

Section 21(13) of the law states: “The minister may, from time to time by notice duly published, appoint a minimum wages advisory board for any specified area or for any employees or group of employees in any occupation in which he or she considers that it may be desirable to fix a minimum wage and to determine other conditions of employment.” 

I still believe that it is the responsibility of Government to stop wage discrimination and suppression that borders on slavery and abuse of individual rights. That is why the law was enacted and that is why the minister should not have waited up to now to have effect on this law. The minister should be talking about it as an unfunded priority, and if you look at this year’s budget, the question and mention of minimum wage is not even among the unfunded priorities. The minimum wages advisory board is not even there whereas we have boards of other ministries effectively working. 

Whereas we say the budget of this ministry is very minimal, the minister should also take initiative to make sure that some activities come to boost the budget of this ministry. This advisory board should be treated like a part of them to deal with the minimum wages so that we have this discrepancy -

Social Protection

I am proud to say that at least Kaberamaido District is among the pilot districts to benefit from this programme, and will be opening the office on Friday next week. We are concerned about the ad hoc manner of implementation and lack of Government funding. Why do you give this to donors and yet these are your people who have worked and contributed to have this country reach where it is? The joy that we all share today is the effort of these elderly and vulnerable groups. So, our concern is that, why should you take five years over a pilot project that is going to benefit only less than 20 districts and yet the mandate of the ministry is to fight all forms of discrimination? What type of discrimination will you be fighting in this case?

We recommend that Government halts the hasty implementation of SAGE and brings a comprehensive policy framework for social protection. If not, it will begin polarising Ugandans over cash transfers and turning the matter into a political one.

There are some of the miscellaneous issues that touch basely on this ministry. One of them is the question of the National Library and the Industrial Court and the cultural institutions. 

On the libraries, I have this to say, fees are charged for daily use at Shs 1,000 a day and one month’s subscription is Shs 10,000. The books; if you go to the libraries at the national libraries, you will get the Encyclopedias, the dictionaries, the books of records, a few democracy books in the African section and some management and research books. A cross section of the users at the time is mainly children reading their own school books, and they come along with them. The National Library of Uganda that aims at collecting, managing and preserving Uganda’s documents heritage for both the present and the future stands up to be a place where those who go there, go with their own materials but not with the intention of getting materials that are already there. 

If the Government put much more money into the libraries, you would find that the libraries would stimulate a reading culture and if it continues to stock books of the Stone Age, which youths will go there? And at the end of the day —

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying that they were writing books during the Stone Age?

MRS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are talking about dot.com. You go with the times not that the books of the old age are irrelevant. We need dictionaries, we need encyclopedias and we need all this but what we say, the youths who go to read in these libraries, some of the books of current fiction would improve them. We have always had it mentioned time and again that, “If you want to hide anything from Ugandans, put it on the shelf. Just write a book and put it there.” So, why don’t we try to work on this reading culture by going digital, going dot.com and going current and then we stock books that would make the youths enjoy reading? 

There are books that teach us about daily life: books like Rich Dad Poor Dad, one time someone talked about Who Stole My Cheese, talk about the Pay Status, African Writers; these are some of the books that would try to make you fight to reach the library in order to read current issues.

The other issue is the question of the Industrial Court. It has been mentioned in the report of the committee but the amount allocated to it cannot secure an accommodation even for a court, and more operational funds are required. Only 61 district labour officers are needed to coordinate activities in districts. Why should the Industrial Court continue to be kept in limbo?

Mr Speaker, by the time we end this budget, and mid-next financial year, the ministry should have brought here the measures they intend to put in place to help the Industrial Court. Otherwise, the labourers of this country, and especially those who work under hard conditions, will continue to suffer and sacrifice. Activities should be geared towards making the Industrial Court functional. 

On the cultural institutions, what is happening at the moment seems to be discrimination yet this ministry should gear its efforts towards minimising social injustices. Why should a ministry be involved in discriminating traditional, cultural institutions? And how does it select those to support with the funding they have? There are some cultural institutions that have not been catered for. I speak for the one of Teso. The minister explained that they had not presented the relevant documents. We are going to put pressure on the other side to make sure that those documents are provided, and then we will see what happens next. Otherwise, what is happening at the moment is not pleasing to the people from the other regions. If you want to facilitate cultural institutions, then let all be accorded equal treatment.

For this ministry to run effectively, the ministry will need an adequate budget, which will not be subordinated to donors. This sector should not be allocated only 0.3 percent of the budget. As I mentioned earlier, Government should recommit itself to the long-time virtue of gender balance and equitable development. You cannot do this by giving the ministry of gender 0.3 of the total budget. It is like a gimmick by Government to appease the women of this country, keep them voting while the benefits of economic growth continue to be shared but excluding women and other vulnerable groups like the youths, the disabled and so on. 

On land ownership, the Land Act which was enacted was important for affirmative action against gender discrimination and yet continues to be largely unimplemented. To date, whereas women present about 70 to 80 percent of agricultural labour, only seven percent have control over land. Land disputes in the rural areas continue to disfavor the venerable women and at the end of the day, the women cannot afford the court processes. If you go into a land conflict that involved men, at the end of the day the woman would just give up. Some of them cannot defend their rights on land until you make use of the Land Act. So, we recommend that you set aside funds for the full implementation of the Land Act if the women are to benefit and to use land equitably. 

On population, Government has continued talking about the population; especially the President. It is a debatable subject. Whereas a big population is good, we want you to look at it from the aspect of maternal health and the plight of the women who end up under very hard conditions. Consider quality and substance of a population and not one that will be exploited by those who can afford. Again, on the population, we should aim at eradicating poverty so that we get a constructive population that will benefit all of us.

On the issue of a functional adult literacy, I want to ably report that each time the Ministry of Gender appeared before the Public Accounts Committee, the most abused funds were the funds for functional adult literacy. Whenever the ministry of gender runs broke, the first funds they ran to re-allocate are those for functional adult literacy. The women are left to buy books and pay their instructors and at the end of the day, you are not doing any justice to those women –(Interjections)- the disabled, the old and vulnerable include both women and men. But in functional adult literacy, the majority are women; I speak for both the men and women of this country. But if you go to the grassroots, you will find the women are the most oppressed at the end of the day.

The laws we request the ministry to implement are the equal opportunities law, which law was passed in 2007. The Equal Opportunities Commission must be set up together with a minimum wage board in order to cater for the children.

We recommend that the Government should halt or re-allocate the Shs 44.5 billion meant for the youths until a comprehensive employment policy is put in place. As it is at the moment, the money is not going to the youths as long as it continues to be managed by the ministry of finance. The youths were not involved in the designing of the programme. Government should hold on to this fund and borrow a leaf from the failures of the past youth entrepreneurship schemes, which were designed and implemented in hast and they all failed. Otherwise, we will hold Government responsible for politicising those programmes.

On the Industrial Court and the operations of the labour offices in the district, they should be revamped and their mandate supported. Without this, it is unthinkable how else Government can ensure labour justice.

Mr Speaker, the mandate of the ministry is huge without adequate facilitation. We want Government so show its commitment to matters of gender, labour and social development rather than relegating the ministry to celebrating public holidays. 

They transferred NSSF from this ministry and took it to the ministry of finance in 2004 and the funds were rocked by scandals, yet in Tanzania, the fund is supervised by the ministry of labour. These contradictions in the sector cause doubt on whether Government is still committed to the eradication of all forms of discrimination as a means to equitable social development. Thank you for your kind attention. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much and congratulations! We have heard applause from both sides of the House; that is a big achievement for you. We will limit debate to 30 minutes. Let us hear from hon. Ogwang, Youth Eastern.

12.11
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): First of all, I want to thank the committee and Government for the continued support they have given to the young people. To begin with, on page 24, you speak about youth and children. I would like to seek clarification from the minister on what the ministry is doing to the dwindling funding of the National Youth Council. 

I have always raised this issue on the Floor of this Parliament. I am aware that the only money Government sends is about 800,000 per quota. So when I read only one paragraph, talking about the youths, then I get worried. Where are we heading as a Government? 

Another issue I want to talk about is the Shs 44 billion we raised on this Floor. We agreed that this money should go to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I am also aware that the minister was at the forefront then. She was a Minister of Finance by the time that capital venture fund was created. How sure are we that the same partners whom we are trying to protect are not going to follow up the money in the responsible ministry again, because she was at the apex of the identification of these people? That was her docket. Today, we are saying the money should go to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. How sure are that the likes of Enterprise Uganda, Uganda Youth Convention and others are not going to follow the money there on pretext and we fail to get value for money?

I partly want to disagree with my honourable colleague when she says implementation of the project should be delayed. No. I would like to request the august House and THE DEPUTY SPEAKER that the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development vets and puts more input into how the funds should be utilised but not delay implementation. We, the young people, are crying loudly that we need jobs. If we are going to delay again, does it mean that you want us to go to the next financial year for this fund to be operationalised? I do not agree with that.

Another issue I want to raise is about the ministry charged with the responsibility of looking at our issues of labour. It is the same ministry, which has vacancies. That beats my understanding! We, the young people, are looking for jobs. I am reading here that there are vacant posts. What is happening? I know that the Public Service is responsible for recruiting civil servants – I think let us move faster to see how the Ministry of Public Service advertises these jobs and more people are given.

On page 7; support to youth councils. I want to stress this because I have been a member of the youth council in those districts. If we are talking about young people not been involved in mobilising, not being involved in Government programmes, this is because there is no money. But here, we are seeing that Government does send money to local governments. I am kindly requesting the minister, more so officials in the ministry of finance, if we are to mobilise these young people, please help us and send more money to these youth councils. It will even prevent these young people from running to us politicians all the time for support. Even issues of balls they call you, “We need balls.” 

On youth centers: I do not know whether the ministry knows of a youth centre in Soroti Municipality, which was built by Nile Breweries on the land, which belongs to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I am already seeing here plans of the ministry in other youth centers but I am not seeing this one. This organisation built for us a very good youth centre but it is not being put to use. I am kindly requesting the ministry to take keen interest in the youth centre in Soroti Municipality. It is housed under the land, which belongs to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have been very clear. It is three minutes, please. We do not want the bell to go for you so, do it yourself. 

12.15
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. 

On community services, I want to agree that the allocation is too low and there should be consideration to increase that amount. However, there is no mention of youths and street children. I think our Government has forgotten that they have approved children’s homes in this country. There is no mention of children’s homes yet these institutions cater for orphans. In my district of Moyo, there are 68 orphans. Recently, when I was going home, there was a baby who was supposed to be taken there but because of lack of beds, the child was stopped from being taken there. I appeal to the ministry to have keen interest in the home.

On cultural institutions, the report has not mentioned why the other four institutions are not considered for support. We do not belong to that committee so some of us are interested in knowing. Otherwise, my suggestion will be, let the allocation for the 12 institutions be shared with the others because they have already been recognised by Government. Why leave them out?

Those are my concerns. Thank you very much.

12.18
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee. Most especially, I want to thank my shadow minister for a very elaborate and comprehensive response. 

I am going to focus on interventions for the youths. I wish to decry the intervention that the ministry of finance continues to hijack the responsibility of the ministry by holding onto funds that are supposed to be operational through the ministry. I appeal to colleagues that we restrain the ministry of finance from holding onto funds of the youth and disburse them directly. I do not know why this House should continue seeing the ministry of finance overstep its boundaries by holding onto funds that are supposed to be used by a ministry? And this one does not only happen in the Ministry of Gender; it is cross-cutting. Is this a ploy by the ministry of finance, through its henchmen, to abuse these funds because the mandate is not in their ministry? You cannot call them accountable. I wish the ministry of finance could come here and explain to the House why it continues to hold onto money that is supposed to be for operations in other ministries.

We need very -(Interruption)

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, for accepting. Mr Speaker, I want to inform the honourable members that the Shs 44 billion talked about in the budget is co-funded by the Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Finance and DFCU Bank. The Ministry of Finance contributed Shs 22 billion and DFCU contributed Shs 22 billion. This fund is going to be managed through DFCU. It is not the Ministry of Finance managing this fund. Thank you.

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member but I have very elaborate information about that fund. It is going to be disbursed through Enterprise Uganda and –(Mr Ogwang rose_)- I have the information. I do not know if they are not eating into my time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are eating into your time.

MS NAGGAYI: I wish the ministry of finance could clearly remove its hand from the money that is supposed to be – I think it is only the minister of finance who can clarify this. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, when you accept a point of information; that is part of your debate. 

12.21
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will limit my debate to two issues because of time. 

The issue of functional adult literacy: I note with grave concern that the caliber of instructors in the functional adult literacy programme remains wanting. Some of the instructors in the villages are actually drunkards. Some of them are primary six dropouts. If we really must achieve value for money, I think there is need for us to attach certain minimum academic standards for one to become a functional adult literacy instructor. Otherwise, you will find that the students may end up being the teachers of the instructor, and that is very unfortunate. 

I had the opportunity of going through one of the sessions and found students who were being instructed more knowledgeable than the instructor. They were correcting him and he had to admit his error. So, I think there is need for us to attach a minimum standard for one to become an instructor under the functional adult literacy programme.

The issue of traditional leaders: I have read from the response of the Shadow Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development that there is contradicting information. In the website of the ministry of gender, they talk of 11 recognised traditional institutions; in the ministerial policy statement, there are 12. One would wonder if the ministry is not aware of the institutions they are handling then who is best placed to do that?

Secondly, I would like to urge Government to desist from the temptation of meddling itself in the processes leading towards election or appointment of a traditional leader. I am aware that the Busoga Kingdom has had a number of challenges all arising from some attempts by the Executive to meddle in the affairs of the kingdom. Let the traditional institutions handle themselves the way their cultures so befit without undue interference from the centre. What is the role of a Minister of Local Government in this whole process, having to call chiefs for a meeting in the ministry? I think that kind of scenario will only propagate more confusion.

Still on the issue of cultural leaders, I would like to concur with my honourable colleague from Moyo. There is need for us to avoid a discriminatory approach in facilitating these institutions -(Member timed out_)   

12.25
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In response to this report, I want to raise a concern of over 1.5 million young people who need your help: the scouts and the girl guides. These were established by an Act of Parliament in 1963 and in the 60s, 70s and 80s, the Ministry of Education used to support the Uganda Scouts Association but it has since then abandoned it. The role that scouts have played in developing leaders in this country cannot be doubted. Recently, the Paramount Chief of the Acholi confirmed to us that you are what you are partly because of scouting. Scouting gives values to young people: values of love for God, love for country and helping a neighbour every single day. 

I want to invite my colleagues that beginning next financial year, we support a recommendation that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should establish a vote to cater for these young people. (Applause)

Secondly, in response to the report again, on page 22, the committee raises an issue of gender response auditing. In the National Audit Act we said that the Auditor-General should audit gender issues in every ministry. Therefore, we need to crosscheck whether this is done by the Auditor-General. I know that the ministry of gender should be establishing guidelines but also we should follow up as Parliament to know whether this is being done by the Auditor-General.

We would want to see the ministry reaching down to the ordinary woman in our villages. When I am in Ndorwa West, I don’t feel this ministry. Can the minister tell us that this financial year you are going to reach the ordinary woman in my village? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.28
MS GRACE ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to add my voice to that of the Members who have talked about the ministry of gender, which has a lot of issues to do with people of Uganda, being under-funded. I am a member of the women’s council, and I am in the top executive. I even feel shy to say that I do not know what now happens in the women’s council because our time is long overdue. I would think that maybe the minister would be able to give us the time as to when the elections will take place so that we get the women’s council out of the way. We are holding a mandate that is no longer ours.

I would also like to say that whereas youth money is handled by ministry of finance, I am also aware that the money, which goes to the women’s council, at the lower level, is handed by the ministry of finance direct to the districts. And it is the same thing with the special grant for people with disabilities, which also goes direct. So, I am wondering, is this ministry not trusted? Because whenever we ask questions, they say, “Please go to ministry of finance.” We do not have answers to give our people. I think we need to correct that. With all the ministers there, they need to be given their mandate. 

The National Council for Disability is one of the less funded councils compared to the youth and the women’s council. These people are supposed to monitor programmes that affect people with disabilities at the lower level but all the money ends up in having meetings at the district with the technocrats, and we don’t get other reports. 

So, there is need for us to see that this council is facilitated. The truth is, they are supposed to have structures up to sub-counties but these structures are not in existence, so we have challenges of getting down to the lower levels. So, maybe the minister will also give us guidelines on how the disability councils are funded this time around. 

In the area of recruitment, again I go back to women councils, and the minister will agree with me, the executive secretary of the women’s council for the last four or five years has never been put in place and I don’t know whether public service has been adamant for all those years. We don’t have a substantial executive secretary and yet this is the person who accounts for the funds of the women’s council.

The other area is the Equal Opportunities Commission. I was one of the people, before I became a good politician, who moved within the civil society to say, “Let us have the Equal Opportunities Commission put in place.” However, this Equal Opportunities Commission is under-funded. I have tried to meet the Commissioner in charge of Disabilities, and he says that the only thing I can do is to move around Kampala and a few districts. But at the district level, we do not have any structures. So, how do we advice the people we represent on where to take their issues. I would need answers to this. 

The other issue is of Functional Adult Literacy. I know the report of the chairperson has hinted on it. Our people with disabilities – because of the structure, the facilitation does not go down to the homes of these people -(Member timed out_)

12.30
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman for his report and also thank our shadow minister for the very good and elaborate report.

I want to talk about cultural leaders. We have 16 cultural institutions and yet the ministry chooses to pay only 12 cultural leaders. How did they arrive at that and why did they leave out the four? Bugisu, which was a republic, has also fallen into the trap that we also have a cultural leader - the Omukuuka - and this Omukuuka has not been facilitated. So, I urge the ministry that they must also facilitate the cultural leader of Bugisu. 

Street children: the ministry should do an analysis to find out why these children are on the streets. The children are on the streets because they are looking for food to eat. There is poverty in the villages, and that is why they have moved on to the streets of Kampala, Mbale, Tororo and elsewhere. So, the ministry must find a solution. They should put up a centre somewhere where they are going to feed these children and create employment for the people. These are the reasons why these children are on the streets, and we are embarrassed when we get visitors and these children run around. The ministry must do something. A ministry with six ministers, a country with 76 ministers! Do we need all these ministers? Government spends all the money on administration and we are even creating more districts! So, there can’t be money to run this ministry because all the money is spent on administration. Therefore, all the institutions in this ministry are not going to function because all the money is spent on administration and on ministers.

Accommodation: this ministry spends Shs 1.9 billion on accommodation. I even keep asking whether we have economists in the ministry of finance who can think and budget. If you took this money and bought a plot and built, surely the ministry wouldn’t be spending Shs 1.9 billion. Even for Parliament to spend Shs 14 billion on Baumann House - don’t we have economists in this country who can plan and say, “If you took Shs 2 billion and bought land in Nakasero and put aside Shs 6 billion, you can come up with a wonderful building?” But this Government keeps spending money on rent and we know the owners of these buildings! 

Before I sit down, I would like to comment on the minimum wage. This country has really ignored workers. These people toil and work and get a minimal Shs 100,000 a month and yet the cost of living is so high and you people are seated here and you do not think about these Ugandans who are suffering –(Member timed out_)

12.34
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will thank the committee and I am interested in your observations about gender-based violence on page 14. In the Eighth Parliament we passed a Bill here and I thought by this time we would have had a policy in place. I am interested in the issues of children that are raped and when they get to hospitals, there is a fee that these children have to pay for medical examination. I expected the budget to have something to do with women who get to the Police and are not listened to. Women have no representation in court when it comes to issues of gender-based violence and at the end of the day, give up on litigation because they cannot afford representation. 

I am also interested in the HIV/AIDS test that rape victims have to go through. When a child or woman has been raped and goes to hospital, there is a test that has to be done and there is also immediate treatment that she is supposed to get. I would like to know if this budget has taken care of those small but very important details that have to do with gender-based violence. 

The second issue is on our FAL instructors. Indeed, somebody has observed that they are very sub-standard; but they are sub-standard because they have never seen their pay. In the district that I come from, whenever we ask for the instructors’ fees, we are told that the ministry does not provide for this money. So, when you find somebody offering a free service when he is drunk, you are not going to ask him why he is drunk because nobody is paying him for the service. 

Thirdly, is the issue of our children begging on the streets: the Eighth Parliament had a whole plenary talking about that issue, and I expected the ministry to tell us whether the recommendations that we made in this Parliament were successful or not. Everything was being pegged to the Karamoja drought and to the Karamoja situation but I now see babies. It is no longer children; babies are being used to beg on the streets. So, what happened to that report that we made in the Eighth Parliament? Was that business of using children to beg on the streets curbed or is it still ongoing? 

Finally, the women councils every year get money from the districts. I would like the ministry to tell us what else this money does beside the 8th March celebrations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: After hon. Arinaitwe, I will ask the minister to make a short response of five minutes and I will have the chairperson conclude in three minutes and then we will go to the next report. 

12.38
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee. I rise on a concern on decentralisation of labour officers. Labour officers were decentralised and out of the 112 districts today, we have only 15 labour officers. This has affected labour supervision in all districts of this country. We used to have labour centers in the country and there are no more labour centers today, and that has also affected the performance of labour supervision in all districts. 

On the issue of the minimum wage, today’s demand and supply of labour is determined by the market. Although we agree that we are in a liberalised economy, we must protect our citizens in this country. I represent workers in this Parliament. The workers outside there are suffering day and night and it is a matter of negotiation and sometimes they are not paid at all. We cannot allow this to continue in this country, and I call upon Members of Parliament to make sure we protect our workers in this country. It is true that CDOs are paid peanuts, as the report says, and it is not only the CDOs but everybody in this country is being exploited at the hands of sometimes the Government and the investors. We need to revise this with seriousness. I thank you so much. 

12.40
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start off by congratulating the Muslim Members of Parliament for getting close to the end of Ramadan –(Applause)– Allah Akbar!  

The mandate of this ministry is quite broad and we, in the ministry, have named it the “People’s ministry” because it handles all issues concerning people from the time one is born up to the time one is called by the Creator. So, the mandate is quite broad and there is no way we can implement this broad mandate single-handedly, especially with the kind of funding we have. So, we implement much of the mandate through collaboration with other ministries and the donors.

Many issues have been raised and most of them are being addressed under the Social Sector Development Investment Plan Phase II. When we bring it to this House you will see that most of the issues the honourable members are concerned with are being addressed. I will, however, comment on a few of them. 

First of all, I would like to correct the honourable colleague who said that we are six ministers in this ministry. Unless we add the shadow minister, we are five ministers in this ministry. (Laughter)

My colleague, the honourable shadow minister, raised concern about the ad hoc way in which social assistance empowerment grants are handled. This is a very important programme, which is meant to ensure that all the disadvantaged people - those who live in chronic poverty, the old, people with disability and the young people who cannot access Government funding because of excessive poverty - are being brought on board. 

So, this is an important programme and we have started in 14 districts. We could not start it full-fledged because we do not have the money. The initial stage is going to be donor-funded but Government has committed itself to provide funding in the medium term to roll out this programme to all the districts. 

On the much-talked about youth fund, this is to confirm that the youth fund -(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, Madam Minister, for paving way. I have heard you talk about the minimum and marginal funding in this ministry. You were in this ministry before you became the minister of finance. While you were in the ministry of finance, what did you do about the funding gaps in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development? (Applause)

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, that was not a clarification; it was a question but nonetheless I will respond to it. 

According to the size of the cake, I increased the budget for the ministry of gender. I remember I provided Shs 500 million for external labour development. I provided another Shs 1.0 billion for the youth department but because the cake is small - I was not saying the size of the funding was a problem. What I was saying was that the size of the national cake is small and, therefore, what we are getting is not adequate to cover all that we need. But when I was in Ministry of Finance, I did whatever I could to expand within the size of the national cake.  

On the youth fund, which has raised a lot of enthusiasm -(Interruption)  

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. I would like to find out from the honourable minister whether the certificate for gender compliance would not have indirectly helped the ministry of gender to tap into the resources that are available in the other sectors? For the last five years or more, this House has been asking both the ministry of gender and the ministry of finance to adopt a certificate or to put in place a requirement for the certificate of gender compliance so that when the law and order sector comes here, whatever money we give them we are sure that the gender gaps under that sector are addressed. When education comes here we address those gaps. So, I would like to know whether the ministry of gender has really passed the issue of a certificate of gender compliance in order to help top up the little resources that you have. 

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for raising that important issue. The gender audit is the starting point for the gender compliance report. We have made a start. Quite a number of officers from different ministries have been trained, and more are yet to be trained on gender budgeting because it will be difficult to have this certificate when there are people who are supposed to see whether the gender components are not captured. Otherwise, it is a very good idea and I will request colleagues to ensure that all the committees in this Parliament ensure that the gender components are taken care of in the various budgets.

On the youth fund, which has generated a lot of heat, as has already been explained by one of the colleagues this is a public/private partnership. And because there was so much need for this funding, before the implementation modalities were discussed and agreed, people started getting excited, criticising it and raising all sorts of issues. But I would like to assure the honourable colleague that dialogue is going on between the main partners: ministry of finance, the private sector and the ministry of gender to work out acceptable implementation modalities. This fund is very important. We would not like it to take the same path like earlier funding did. Because if you want to trace the impact of the YES fund, it is not there but we would like to ensure that this fund, when we work out the modalities, has permanent effect especially on the empowerment of the youth who it is supposed to benefit -(Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to clarify whether it is prudent for us to pass the money through the budget as negotiations and agreements are going on. How can we budget for an item whose process is still ongoing with the involved parties? Is it really financially prudent for us to pass the money before the process is streamlined?

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to clarify to my young sister that the path Government is taking is the most prudent because now we are going to budget or discuss the modalities with a high degree of certainty after the funds are available. If we started discussing the modalities before the funds are available, we would have a lot of uncertainties; but now I think we can do it when we are sure.

On the issue of the Industrial Court, we have a huge backlog of cases. Some of us even wanted the Industrial Court to start ad hoc but we were advised by the Law Reform Commission that we need to amend the law before the Industrial Court becomes a reality. So, the Law Reform Commission is in the process of amending the law to work out the gaps within the Industrial Court, and once they are done we will request the Industrial Court to handle the backlog expeditiously. 

On the touchy issue regarding the vulnerable Ugandans, the street children, we need a comprehensive approach and that is what we are working on with all the stakeholders, including Members of Parliament, because this problem is much broader than what the Ministry of Gender can handle single-handedly. We are looking at the push factors because we need to understand why these children are coming to the streets and especially why they are mainly coming from one part of the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you have one minute.

MRS BBUMBA: So, we are working out a comprehensive plan including rehabilitation of the reception centers for these children.

This ministry is working out innovative ways of augmenting our budget through inspections by the Occupational Safety and Health Department but we need staff to do that. The Ministry of Public Service has promised that they are going to avail the staff who we need for this department to do the work and raise the money.

On the headquarters, the land is already identified at the cultural centre. We needed to get the titles and I am happy to report to this House that the various titles for the cultural centre have been secured, and we are in discussions with potential donors to help us set up headquarters for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs.

The last issue is on elections to the women councils. This is outside our mandate because it requires funding. But I have been told that the elections to the women councils are going to be held together with election of the lower councils.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, for the record we will not hold you -

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, it is the Electoral Commission, which is the body empowered to conduct elections and they are responsible for setting up the calendar.

In conclusion, allow me to thank the Members, the chairman, vice-chairperson and members of our committee for a job well done. They have really carried out a thorough analysis and in a special way I want to thank my shadow colleague, for also augmenting what the committee did and to thank colleagues here because the issues, which have been raised, will go a long way in helping us to perform better. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Mr Chairman, you have three minutes strictly.

12.54
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nokrach): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me another opportunity. I want to thank the Members for their contributions and I want to pledge that all the points I have raised are very important. My committee will take them very seriously at committee work so that we all move together.

Most of the issues have been answered by the minister. However, hon. Epetait raised one issue that on the website 12 cultural leaders are being supported but people are saying 11. This is true because the 12th cultural leader does not pick the money and that is why the number is 11. The Kabaka of Buganda does not pick the money; people want to know this. But this Government is, at the moment, supporting 12 cultural leaders, including the one of Buganda.

As I promised, we are going to look through all the points raised and at the Committee Stage, we shall continue with the debate because as the minister put it, this is the people’s ministry. When we talk about people, we are all inclusive and, therefore, we need to improve it so that it provides good services to everybody.

We would have loved to hear from the Ministry of Public Service because they never honoured our invitation for a discussion but at an appropriate time, the committee will call them again and we shall continue with the debate.

Mr Speaker, according to rule 177 (2) of our Rules of Procedure, I take this opportunity to move that this Parliament approves the budget of the ministry. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Move that the Parliament adopts the report of the committee. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I could hear hon. Byabagambi being very restless even before he hears me, and I want to simply ask that we get to the bottom of this issue. How can a committee ask public service to appear before it and they refuse? And we just let it go? How do we do oversight? How do we get an explanation? The Minister of Public Service is here and I think for the record of this House, she should tell us why the ministry refused to appear before a committee of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, did you refuse to appear before the committee? If so why?

12.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker, I want to state that our ministry was invited by the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on 04 August 2011 at 10.00 a.m. The Ministry of Public Service was also invited by the Public Service and Local Government Sessional Committee on 04 August 2011 at 10.00 a.m. This fact was communicated to Parliament through the Clerk that we were not able to attend because we had another sessional committee to attend.

We waited for another invitation, which we did not receive. That is the issue I want to correct that we were called on two committees, and we attended the one on public service and the communication was done.

The second issues that has been raised in this report is on the wage bill -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, if you are done we have finished with the report. Next!

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

12.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Atwooki Kasirivu): Mr Speaker, I want to present a  report of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries as mandated by Article 90 of the Constitution, Section 6 of the Budget Act, 2001 and rule 161(a) and (d) of our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have 15 minutes.

MR KASIRIVU: Very good. Mr Speaker, this is a big sector, which has very many votes. Vote 010, which is under the ministry, Vote 142 under NARO, Vote 152 for NAADS Secretariat, Votes 500-850, which is a combination of local government votes for the district extension services and the district agricultural production and advisory services under NAADS. We have also got Vote 155 for Cotton Development Organisation, Vote 160 for Coffee Development Authority and Vote 121 for Diary Development Authority.

During the Financial Year 2010/2011, the agricultural sector grew at 0.9 percent compared to last year of 2009/2010, which grew at 2.4 percent. This slow growth was driven by a decline in the performance of the cash crop sub-sector, which registered a negative 15.8 percent decline and the fish sub-sector, which also registered a growth rate of 0.4 percent. This is in comparison to the growth rates of 2.9 percent and 2.6 percent respectively, which were achieved in 2009/10.

Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As you are not going to read the whole report, you could lay it on the Table.

MR KASIRIVU: I am being guided by my talking notes – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had asked you to lay the report on the Table then continue with your notes.

MR KASIRIVU: Yes, I will lay it on the Table after because I have to consult it in the meantime. 

Mr Speaker, greater performance was hindered by: drought, which was in some parts of the country; floods –

HON. MEMBERS: On which page are you?” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just state the page you are on.

MR KASIRIVU: It might be difficult to tell them the page but I will request Members to be attentive and take notes. 

Floods in some parts of the country; rampant diseases; decrease in soil fertility; poor quality of seeds; lack of mechanisation, among others.

Looking at the soils, our soils are increasingly getting sick hence the poor harvests. We need proper diagnosis of our soils and have a proper prescription so that we can get good harvests. We recommend, therefore, that an activity for land suitability mapping is undertaken to provide guidance on what nutrients are in the soils, what is inadequate and what type of remedy can be provided. One of the remedies is fertilizer usage and we must have a deliberate way of providing fertilizers. In the long-term, Government should set up industries to manufacture fertilizers but in the meantime we should import them.

As for seeds, presently, the seed industry was privatized but the seed companies do not owe Ugandans anything apart from making their profits. Therefore, Government must come up and set up a seed multiplication centre in order to make sure that the seed quality and availability is guaranteed. The committee recommends a policy shift in order to make sure that the seed industry is made vibrant. For vegetative seeds, like the cassava cuttings and potato vines, these need to be availed to farmers in good quantity and quality. 

Regarding post-harvest handling, farmers usually lose their produce very fast after harvest and so we must make sure that farmers are helped to avoid these losses. This produce can be stored at farms or Government can come with a programme of storage. A deliberate Government policy to set up silos should be undertaken to ensure that the abundant harvest that we usually experience is stored well. What usually happens is that business people descend on farmers at the time of harvest, buying produce at give away prices. So we recommend that an indicative price is instituted at the time farmers go to produce. That way, Government will guide them on what price they should hinge their produce on. 

We also recommend that a fund be instituted by Government to make sure that at the time of harvest, it buys off some of the produce into the silos. This is already being done by our neighbours and they are even buying off from our farmers, taking it to their countries for storage.

On mechanisation, our farmers are still relying on the hand hoe in the 21st Century. The committee notes with concern that we cannot continue like this. Therefore, mechanisation is the answer. When you open land and do timely planting and weeding, you get good produce. We recommend that a fund be availed to farmers and those who are able to buy tractors at an affordable interest rate different from the commercial rates. Coupled with that is agriculture credit; some of the farmers who need to buy tractors and other inputs will need cheap credit which is in single digit. This may require a fund instituted in a bank or an agricultural bank is set up by Government.

Looking at NAADS, despite impressive figures on its performance in some areas, this programme has focused on few farmers – the innovators and early adopters, leaving out the vast majority of our population and the late adopters. And we noted that NAADS has diverted from its original objective of providing extension education and is now concentrating on input provision and increasing household incomes rather than food security. In its expansion to the second phase there was no evaluation of the six farmers at parish level – because they are recommending now to go to a hundred. We, therefore, recommend an overhaul of the NAADS Act and also a review of the extension approach that is being applied to NAADS.

Regarding value addition, after harvest, as I had earlier said, farmers are tempted to sell off all their produce and moreover in its primary form. The committee recommends that value addition at farm level must be the answer. For example, maize, if it was to be milled in the areas where it is predominantly produced then we expect maize bran to be produced. This maize bran will be utilised by the poultry farmers. We know that the poultry industry is growing and it is still in its infancy. So it needs to be supported to make sure that the majority of our small farmers who are concentrating on poultry production take advantage of that value addition in rural areas.

Disease Control

The committee noted the efforts that the Government is putting in to control diseases of crops and livestock. However, there are rampant diseases of livestock that are on the increase. Uganda has over 10 million head of cattle and in spite of that we do not export meat or meat products. 

A country like Botswana, which has got about three million head of cattle, exports meat and meat products and gets an amount of over US $300 million and Uganda is not getting it. We would expect this country to start a deliberate programme to make sure that our diseases are controlled and to also make sure that Uganda qualifies for certification from the International Organisation for Exotics, which is mandated to give certification.

When you get certification, you are able to export meat and meat products to the international meat market. The meat in Uganda is very good as it has very low levels of cholesterol and therefore would fetch a very good price on the international market. 

Whenever there is a disease outbreak, there was a provision of an emergency fund in the ministry of finance. However, by the time the ministry applies for this money from the ministry of finance coupled with the bureaucracy it has, the diseases are on the increase. We therefore recommend that this emergency fund for disease control is henceforth transferred to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

The Animal Breeding Programme

The Government set up an organisation called the National Agricultural Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank to undertake animal breeding. However, this organisation is financially starved and yet it has a very important programme to produce animals for our farms of good breed. It even has no vote and we are therefore recommending that a vote for this organisation that was set up by an Act of Parliament is instituted and resources that are adequate enough for the breeding programme are provided.

Coffee and Cotton are very important and strategic crops in this country but we still export these crops almost in their primary form –(Interruption)

MS BOONA: I do not know whether it is me alone; the report is very interesting but is he reading from a summary? We would like to participate later but we cannot follow. Can he tell us how we can move along with him?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we said that at the beginning. He is going to present from his notes and so you will take your own notes and then make responses because he has not been able to extract an Executive Summary from it.

DR KASIRIVU: I thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very huge report for which you will need two days to read. As I was saying, we recommend that the country takes deliberate efforts to make sure that we do not export coffee beans and cotton lint. We should have soluble coffee powder produced and cotton processed into cloth.

Fisheries

I am about to wind up. Uganda has abundant water bodies and a lot of fish is being exported and is bringing in a lot of revenue to the country. We recommend that our bodies be further restocked and regulatory services and enforcement be met to make sure illegal fishing is curtailed. We should also invest in aquaculture.

This is a big ministry and the crop sector is very huge, the livestock and fisheries sectors are also very huge. The committee still strongly recommends to Government that this ministry should be split to create the Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives. Co-operatives is somewhere in the Ministry of Trade and yet it should be together with agriculture.

The committee is also recommending re-allocation of the resources within the Ministry to make sure – now for your emphasis, go to page 50. In order to improve the effectiveness of the Government to deliver quality services and refocus public service efforts for delivery of quality outputs, a proposal was made during the budget speech to reduce wastage, laxity and limited responsiveness. As such there was a proposal to cut advertising budgets of all ministries and agencies by 50 percent; 30 percent was to be cut on allowances, workshops and seminars, welfare and entertainment, books, periodicals and newspapers, special meals and the purchase of furniture for selected ministries and agencies; freeze the purchase of government vehicles except for critical areas such as hospitals, Police and security services. 

In line with the above, we have attached an annex behind here which is demonstrating the impact of this proposal on the sector budget, indicating what would have been the actual estimates for the Financial Year 2011/2012 for the above identified items if they had followed what was read in the Budget Speech.

The committee considered three institutions or votes in the sector to be affected by the above pronouncement in order to provide funding in critical areas that require additional funding or provide funding as indicated in the summary below on page 52. We have recommended as a committee that 50 percent - 30 percent should affect MAAIF headquarters, NARO, NAADS, PMA Secretariat and there was a provision of renting office space. 

The Ministry wants to shift from Entebbe to Kampala and rent but the committee has refused to approve that money for rent. They should remain in Entebbe, build and then shift to their offices in Kampala rather than renting.   

In addition, other areas were identified as explained in the report to provide resources for funding critical expenditure requirements of the sector. These included PMA Secretariat and rent for MAAIF headquarters as I said, were viewed as non priority areas in the sector. 

The total amount of savings in the sector amounted to Shs 19.870 billion if we apply the 30 and 50 percent which is distributed as follows; we want this money distributed and provide money for land suitability mapping, provision of silos and other storage facilities and then some money for NAGRIC which we think, are our priority areas.

On page 53, we provide on how this money should be ­(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not on record. One minute for the chairperson to lay the report on the Table.

DR KASIRIVU: I beg to lay the Report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the Ministerial Policy Statement and the Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2011/12. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Can we have the hon. Shadow Minister, Dr Epetait who has ten minutes? 

1.22
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Francis Epetait): Mr Speaker, I beg to respond to the ministerial policy statement on Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries whose goal this year is that Uganda aims to reach a higher path of economic growth through agriculture-led development intended to reduce poverty, hunger, food and nutrition insecurity and to facilitate the expansion of exports and ensure income security.

The goal is very beautiful. However, Government’s priorities in budget resource allocation clearly indicate that the beautiful goal envisaged in the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy and Investment Plan will remain a dream for a long time to come.

This year, the ministry was allocated Shs 437.03 billion, representing a 4.4 percent allocation of our total national budget. That is an increment from 4 percent of the last financial year but when the prevailing high inflation of over 18 per cent  and the annual population increase of about 3.4 percent  are factored into the budget equation, it will be realised that much less will be achieved in agricultural development in the this financial.

In any case, even Shs 437.03 billion that we have talked about is still questionable because when the allocations for each vote are totalled, one would get Shs 433 billion and we did not get satisfactory explanations from the ministry regarding the variance in the figures. The table on page 3 speaks for itself, I am not going to read the details in the various tables but what I would like Members to note is that when you total the amounts given to the NAADS Secretariat and then the allocation to the NAADS programmes at the districts. The NAADS alone takes 70 percent of the overall budgetary to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

The main concern of the Opposition in Parliament is the alarmingly inadequate funding and technical support for the administration and functioning of the Ministry of Agriculture. Issues that we concerned about include;

Inadequate Budget allocations to agriculture investment vis-à-vis the huge potential for agricultural productivity and high proportion of the labour force engaged in agriculture.

We also have the ineffective control of high levels of pests, vectors and diseases affecting both crops and animal resources coupled with inadequate provision of technical back-up for small holder farmers.

We are concerned about the inadequate generation and poor promotion of improved technologies and strategies. We are also concerned that the adoption of the new technologies is very low.

In the last financial year, it was reported from the ministerial policy statement that only 100 households were trained on how to operate a walking tractor. At that rate, I do not know how many years we would need to go mechanical.

The poor regulation of the fisheries and aquaculture industry coupled with rampant illegal fishing and over-exploitation of fish stocks is also a matter of concern.

We also note that there is inadequate dissemination of the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy and Investment Plan and poor promotion of the new Agricultural Technology and Agribusiness Advisory Services (ATAAS) whose primary objective was to link the primary stakeholders and to coordinate the NAADS and the NARO interventions.

Unfortunately, for millions of poor Ugandans expecting improved agricultural productivity and corresponding increase in income, deeper poverty, disappointment and disillusionment are a certainty. 

This financial year, we have the following observations to make. Arising from the policy statement of last financial year, government failed to allocate more funding to develop the agriculture sector which has inevitably resulted into poor performance of the sector and the consequent worsening poverty and food insecurity.

We also noted that in the State of Uganda’s Population Report 2010, an estimated that 1.9 million people in Uganda are food insecure while six million are at the risk of becoming insecure. Out of the children who are under age five, 22 percent are stunted, seven percent are wasted, 10 percent are underweight, and 33 percent are anaemic. This is further collaborated by other reports including the FAO report which reveals that nine million Ugandans currently face an acute food shortage.

I want to note paragraph D on page 6 that Government has continued to blame poor rainfall and drought as the major factors affecting the agricultural sector. Whereas a lot of blame has been put on adverse weather effects as the main factor causing low crop yield, there are large expanses of water reservoirs that are largely under-utilised and most of the rain water goes to waste due to poor water harvesting mechanisms. The main problem with agriculture in Uganda is not drought but rather lack of planning, management and monitoring of the use of water for agricultural production. Instead Government has continued singing about irrigation schemes since 2006 to no avail. 

In a number of policy statements, Government has continuously talked about irrigation schemes. If I could refer members to page 8 of the ministerial policy statement of 2008/2009, I just want to quote: “MAAIF is now responsible for water for agricultural production. We are developing a policy and institutional framework for water for production. In the meantime, the farmers’ needs for water cannot wait. We shall undertake pilot water for agricultural production at Rwengaju in Kabarole and pursue funding for rehabilitation for Mubuku, Olweny, Doho and Anagoro.” That is 2008.

In 2009, as if they thought that we had forgotten, on page 7, they again said, “Ongoing programmes include the rehabilitation of dams and valley tanks under the NALIIP and rehabilitation of Mubuku, Olweny, Doho and Agoro irrigation schemes.” That is 2009.

This year also, Members are aware Olweny, Agoro, Mubuku, Doho -(Laughter)- that is their story and I vouch that even by the end of this financial year, we will still be talking about those schemes. They think that we have forgotten.

Our observation this financial is that the smallholder farmers lack access to affordable financial services that would enable them to raise their incomes by improving and expanding their production and establishing small agro-enterprises. Whereas Government allocated shs60 billion to the agricultural credit facility for the last two years, there is no impact to show on the ground. 

This year, a similar intervention has been proposed but without a change of implementation modalities. This unexplained intervention coupled with the limited value addition and lack of commercialisation is what has led to the declining GDP share of the agriculture sector in Uganda and this must be addressed.

We recommend that Government should improve access to affordable and reliable agriculture-oriented financial services. There is an urgent need for Government to create an Agricultural Development Bank. This was highly elucidated by our Shadow Minister for Finance. A serious forensic audit should be done to establish how the agricultural credit facility was utilised and who the actual beneficiaries were.

Mr Speaker, the small holder farmers also lack the necessary inputs and recommended technologies to help them reduce pests and diseases to increase production, add value to their products. But Government should realise that in its current structure, NAADS has lost focus and will never lift the population out of poverty. Whereas initially NAADS was supports to be a reincarnation of the Agricultural Extension Services formerly directly supported by Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries (MAAIF) it has not served the purpose. Instead its leaders have concentrated on lucrative procurement contracts and have been sacked up by corrupt deals. 

It is also of concern that the funding to NAADS from Agricultural Technology and Agri-business Advisory Services (ATAS) are not clearly explained by the ministry. Hon. Members, the committee was informed that there is a project called Agricultural Technology and Agri-business Advisory Services (ATAS) which also contributes about 60 percent of funding to NAADS and 40 percent to NARO, a project funding other projects. The ministry also failed to explain to us clearly when that ATAS project started. 

In their presentation to the committee, they talked of ATAS having had a shortfall in its budget in the year 2009/2010 of Shs 25 billion. But later they disowned their own submissions and said, “No, we think it started last financial year,” yet we have it on record that it started in 2009. In any case why should Government create a project to fund another project? If they realised that NAADS and NARO required funding, Government should have injected money directly instead of creating another project to finance other projects. 

NAADS requires restructuring as a public institution and it should realign its programs to re-establish an effective extension services that would help in sensitizing farmers. We also need the ATAS project to be reviewed.

We are also concerned that Government had not taken serious steps to tackle the increasingly adverse effects of climate change on rain-fed agriculture despite always blaming adverse weather conditions. Governments should allocate funds to conduct feasibility studies to establish micro-irrigation schemes rather than giving us the lullaby of Olwenyi, Agoro and Mobuku, year in year out. We should establish micro-irrigation schemes.

Disease and vector control functions are not properly coordinate; given that diseases and vectors do not recognise any boundaries, there is a problem of disease and vector control in a decentralised service. This has particularly affected the livestock sector where notable diseases have gone on rampage. The FMD, Lumpy Skin Disease – name them; they have gone on rampage. 

At this rate, our country runs the risk of being a repository of diseases in the region. To date, Government cannot even tell this country how many cattle dips are functional. Tick borne diseases and Nagana continue to kill our livestock due to a breakdown of vector control services. It is important to note that before the Ministry of Animal Industries and fisheries was merged with that of Agriculture, disease and vector control programs were running on very smoothly and the livestock sub-sector was flourishing. 

I, therefore, would like to re-echo our appeal to the Executive that we need a split of this ministry so that we can re-focus our attention to these various sectors.

Therefore, we demand that budgetary allocations to the Ministry of Agriculture should be increased to match with the growing population and indeed even the current inflationary rates. We talk about increased agricultural productivity and improvement of food security through mechanisation and irrigation – not just singing irrigation but actual irrigation, use of fertilisers and provision of better extension services to small-holder farmers in order to increase adoption.

We also recommend that you put up a robust strategy for better storage of food; the chairman has already alluded to that. And we need marketing strategies to be streamlined with the distribution of the agricultural produce. 

Lastly, smallholder farmers should be facilitated with access to affordable financial services to enable them to improve and establish viable Agro-enterprises so as to achieve higher income. Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members for listening. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we need to agree; it is 1.40 p.m. now. I propose that we stand over the proceedings for 45 minutes and we come back and open debate when we are energised. And I should also notify you that we may have a long hold today because the legal committee is ready so we will do the debate of this particular sector of agriculture and when we close on it then we will start with legal. So, let us break off for lunch and come back after 45 minutes. The House is suspended until 2.30 p.m. 

(The House was suspended at 1.38 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 2.45 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me; there is a short communication here. Thank you very much hon. Members, and thank you for coming back on time. When we suspended the House; I was approached by the minister in charge of disaster preparedness in the Prime Minister’s Office. We already had an Order Paper and the communication from the Chair was complete. The Order Paper had been approved but I am using my prerogative under rule 22 to make a small alteration on the Order Paper to allow hon. Musa Ecweru make a statement on what I consider an important matter for the attention of the country. Then we shall continue with the rest of the business.

Because of the nature of the things we are doing; I have gone through the statement he is going to make. It is informative, it is stating certain facts. I do not think it will draw any debate. Make the statement. If there are some two or three points for clarification, after that, we shall move to the rest of the business. Hon. Minister?  

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I think copies of the statement are being distributed. Early this morning, that is 29 August 2011 at about 2.00 a.m.; three landslides occurred in three sub-counties in the Elgon sub-region following very heavy torrential rains.

In Sisiya sub-county, 12 houses were buried with 20 people feared dead. As we talk now, 15 bodies have already been excavated. Five are still missing.

In the neighbouring sub-county of Buluganya, four houses were buried with nine people dead. Three bodies have already been recovered and four are still missing. Two people were recovered alive but sustained serious injuries.

In Lusha sub-county, six houses were buried. Fortunately, no person was injured.  

In what we call Upper Bulambuli, 11 sub-counties are at a high risk with signs of houses cracking; presenting very grave danger to the occupants of these houses.

While hundreds of hectares of sweet potatoes, maize and vegetables were damaged; a large number of livestock were also lost. As I was coming here, my team that we dispatched to the Elgon region this morning communicated to me that in the neighbouring district of Kapchorwa; there is a sub-county called Munaria where a boulder rolled down after the soils had been saturated with water, killed a child and caused injury to the mother and father who are now recovering in hospital. 

What are the emergency responses that Government has undertaken? 

A team led by Maj. Gen. Julius Oketa from my office left this morning to join the Uganda Police, the Red Cross and the local leaders who are already on the ground to coordinate the process of recovery in what we call search and rescue, particularly Bulambuli -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Also UPDF?

MR ECWERU: The UPDF is equally on the ground. 

We have also dispatched two trailers with different types of food. They were expected to arrive in the disaster area by 4.00 p.m. today. More relief commodities are being organised.

As we talk now, the survivors and those at high risk are being registered. We are trying to relocate them to safe homes in preference to settling them in what we call camps. The host families together with the hosted families will be provided with enough relief food and non-food commodities continuously until the situation normalises. This arrangement was instituted in Bududa District two months ago whereby the Disaster Department delivered relief and other commodities to the District Disaster Management Committee who in turn served the host and the hosted families.

The LC V Chairperson and the RDC of Bulambuli and now those of Kapchorwa are using the local FM stations to inform the people at risk to move to safe homes as they continue to register.

Consulting the meteorological department; they have indicated to us that the rains are intensifying. We expect more landslides in most of the districts in the mountainous areas such as Manafwa, Mbale, Sironko, Bududa, Kapchorwa. We expect floods in most of the low-lying areas, including Teso sub-region and the districts of Butaleja, Kween, Tororo, Nebbi and Moyo. As we talk now, much of Teso is already water-logged and five sub-counties in Butaleja are flooded. I want to add that yesterday I was in hon. Alice Alaso’s constituency in a county called Kasilo where you can be visited by a stench of rotting cassava many meters away from the garden. If you fly over the place, you will not see water; but certainly, there is every indication that the places are suffering from water logging and, therefore, the crops are all rotting.  

We are also experiencing hailstorms and destructive strong winds in much of western Uganda and parts of central Uganda. My office has activated the National Emergency Operations and Coordination Centre with Maj. Gen. Oketa as a national focal point officer. We have sent circulars to all chief administrative officers in their capacities as chairpersons of the District Disaster Management Committees and the district focal officers. We are also working with the headquarters of Police to send circulars to the District Police Commander to make them responsible for relaying information from the districts to the national centre. 

We sympathise and stand with the people of Bulambuli and those in Kapchorwa. We will proceed to treat the victims and decently bury the dead. 

Medium Term Intervention 

The Government plans to procure land as I indicated to this House sometime back. Government plans to procure more land every year, to resettle close to about 10,000 people who find themselves in these steep hills in the country.

All district local governments will be required to recruit district disaster management officers and have in place a district emergency contingency plan and fund. All this is being worked on with the support of my ministry. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR FOX ODOI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to register my condolences to the families affected by disaster of such national magnitude. I would also like to note that this is not the time for the blame game. However, I have two issues that I want the honourable minister to clarify on. 

Do we, as a country, have a disaster early warning mechanism? If the answer is yes, then my second question is: how effective is this early warning mechanism? I thank you.

2.55
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the statement. In the same vein, I pass my condolences, on behalf of my people, to the bereaved families. 

I remember sharing with the minister the disaster problems in my constituency, although in an informal way, but I remember he had committed himself to responding to it. Unfortunately, I have not seen it in his statement. So, I wanted him to clarify because I had informed him that part of Agago District is waterlogged. Many sub-counties in my district are receiving so much rainfall that some crops that were ready for harvesting, for example groundnuts and millet, are getting spoilt because there is no sunshine. So, I had expected the minister to put that into consideration. 

Lastly, I was in a workshop, which the minister also attended; he even gave a speech. He was informed about the disaster threats in Manafwa District. I am wondering why this did not come out in his statement? 

The ministry is called the “Ministry of Disaster Preparedness” and not the “ministry of disaster response”. So, I would expect the minister, after receiving information from a Member of Parliament - for example, the Woman MP for Manafwa who was requesting the ministry to act very fast, to relocate the people who are there because the area is under threat. They were expecting the kind of thing that happened in Bududa to happen in Manafwa. I wonder why this is not coming out in his report. I thank you.

2.58
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much. As the Opposition, our sympathy goes to all those who have lost their dear ones and their property.

I would like to find out from hon. Ecweru, according to information we received, you were aware of the looming disaster in Bulambuli. Mr Speaker, I was in Bulambuli last week when the President was there. A statement given to us was that the minister was aware of the looming disaster and that he had supplied food. So, where did things go wrong? 

Secondly, could you lay on the Table copies of the detailed plans and advice you have given the Government departments that are engaged in construction of infrastructure, like schools and roads, now that the country is experiencing disasters like floods? Unless there is a plan, all the roads being constructed now will be washed away. So, could the minister lay on the Table copies of detailed plans and advice that he has given the Ministries of Works, Health and Education who are putting up such infrastructure. Thank you.

2.59
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness for the statement he has given. My sincere condolences and sympathies go to those who have lost their property and life. 

On 20 July 2011, a similar disaster occurred in Koboko where hailstorms destroyed hectares of gardens and as a result, food which was supposed to be harvested in July, August and September. Over 500 people were affected. Their maize was all flattened; the rice which had been planted was carried away; the beans and cassava was destroyed. Even in Lobule, cassava is rotting. So, people are desperate and they have nothing to eat now. I followed up the issue and went to see them and they were weeping. They were asking the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to give them nothing but seeds so that they can hurriedly plant something during this remaining season. The minister promised me something. I am hearing that there are more disasters than those in Koboko and it has been confirmed by not having Koboko in this record. 

Mr Speaker, my people are equally affected and I would like to see that they are considered. They seek the request of beans, maize and sim-sim. Otherwise, I have already informed them about what the minister promised me and what Government intends to do. Thank you very much. 

3.02
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Gomba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for giving us information about the disasters in the country. 

Last week, in Gomba we also experienced a disaster in parts of Kyegonza where there were hailstorms. People lost food, chicken and animals. People are asking Government to come to their rescue. 

In your report, hon. Minister, you have noted that in parts of Buganda and Western Uganda, hailstorms have been experienced but you are not telling us what you are going to do to help the people who have been affected. Can you, please, let us know and let our people know; for those who have lost their food, animals, those whose houses have been destroyed; what do you have for them?

I also would like to know what plans you have, as a ministry, in terms of disaster preparedness and not disaster response, as my colleague said. We really want to know what plans you have because we are experiencing these disasters year in and year out and we run around as if we are never prepared. I want you to assure the country that you are really the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness. 
 
3.03
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. May the souls of the departed, as a result of the disaster, rest in peace! 

What is happening right now is due to the change in the weather patterns. Scientists are trying their best; they have made some progress but they also have certain failures. They can no longer predict weather patterns with accuracy. So, it is a natural calamity, which is beyond us. 

My humble request is for us Members and the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness and maybe the Minister of Water and Environment to strengthen the laws regarding settlement in wetlands and on the slopes of mountains. For instance, Bwaise is a low land and is supposed to be a wetland and it is not supposed to be a settlement area. So, let those laws be strengthened. 

Secondly, this has also happened in Moyo and –(Member timed out_)

3.05
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join those who spoke before me to thank the minister for his statement and to also thank him for the quick response he has made this time about the disaster, which has taken place in that part of the country. As said by my colleague, in Koboko District, we had such a serious disaster but for two months now, we have not had any response from the minister and we wonder what criteria he uses to respond to such issues because when something of that nature happens, there is definitely dire need for them to respond quickly. Even if there is nothing done, it is important for them to come with a write up to say, “We are sorry for what happened but we are going to do this and that”, so that people can be assured. I thank you very much. 

3.06
THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you so much. It is with a sense of regret that these landslides have killed people, destroyed property and we share the grief with all those involved in this tragedy. But, Mr Speaker, let me share with Members an experience I have encountered in the field. I recently visited Bukwo, Kween, Manafwa and of course, passed through Kapchorwa and Mbale. Clearly, you can see that people have encroached on the mountains and the trees that would be holding soil and land from these landslides have been destroyed. When you try to persuade people not to encroach on these areas, it becomes a real battle –(Interruption) 

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Minister, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that the head of state in this country is, as I speak, preparing to give away Mabira Forest to investors well knowing the implications of such misuse of executive powers. Thank you. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, you can clearly see that this is misinformation. (Laughter) I am talking about a mountain, which is almost like the seventh wonder of the world, with water oozing out from the top but being held by these vegetations on the top. But this vegetation is being wiped away by encroachers and you can see that disaster is looming. 

When you warn them - and this is a matter for each one of us - the tragedy we have is that some of the encroachers are voters of some of you, hon. Members and they find it very difficult to advise their voters against impending dangers. The challenge of leadership here is that we must stand up and face this, instead of always lamenting when these things happen. Ugandans are free to settle anywhere. It is provided for in the Constitution. Why don’t we say it boldly and avoid this tragedy? Thank you very much. 

3.10
MRS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister but I have only one question that I would like to ask. He clearly stated here that all district local governments will be required to recruit these disaster management officers and I would like to know the level of communication between the national level and the district disaster management officers. That is because Oyam District has been affected with hailstorms and all the crops have been destroyed but I do not see it captured here. So, what is the level of communication between you and the people at the district? 

Secondly, what is the level of facilitation? Most of the time when people go to the district, they are turned down and they are told, “There is nothing”. And what does Government have to really facilitate or to give incentives to the affected people down at the district - the farmers – in as far as disaster (management) is concerned? 

3.10
MR JOHNY SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of the Members in sending condolences to the people of Bugisu and Bulambuli in particular. I also thank the minister for the quick response he has made, for the first time.  However, I would like to give you further information that Bulambuli borders Sironko and the Buginyanya sub-county that you talked of borders Butandiga sub-county. So, some of the victims are from the sub-county of Butandiga and there, four houses were buried. So far, three people have died in that sub-county. Last week, there was a landslide in Bukyabo sub-county. Bukyabo is also in Sironko and it borders Butandiga where two houses were buried and one person died. 

This brings us to one thing. These districts have always made it clear and they have written to the ministry concerning the anticipated landslides but so far, no communication or response has been made. We were in Bulambuli and the LC V Chairman categorically made it clear and wrote to your ministry informing you about it. The chairperson LC V of Sironko also informed us and gave copies to Members of Parliament from that area. It is very unfortunate that you can be very quick at responding when disaster occurs instead of getting prepared in time to go and respond before the disasters take place. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am going to request for a standard procedure for this House. For an honourable member to rise and raise such matters, I will need to see a copy of the letter that has been written to inform the ministry about the situation. We should not just wait for opportunities like these and start raising matters that happen one week early when we have not informed the concerned people. It is not fair to the people you represent. So, if you have not reported this matter to the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, I will not give you audience in the House. Come with a copy of that letter indicating that you have given these people notice but they have not acted on it, and then you will have your chance to speak. Otherwise, we are wasting time here. 

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, first of all, I want to thank the Members for the concerns and sympathies they have expressed to the people of the Elgon sub-region. Before we took over office from the Deputy Leader of Government Business, we found that he had started a process of preparing a disaster preparedness and management policy. I am happy to report to this House that all these years, we have been responding to disasters without a guiding policy but now, we have a ready policy that Cabinet has approved and that now we are doing everything possible to operationalise.

In that disaster policy, the emphasis is on prevention. I want to make it clear to this honourable House that there are two types of disasters. There are preventable disasters and there are those disasters that cannot be prevented and can only be mitigated. As we sit here, there is a hurricane approaching some parts of the United States that even with the sophistication of the United States, all they can do is only mitigate the effects of that hurricane but they cannot prevent it from hitting the state. That is precisely what we are aiming at doing. Therefore, I want to let this House know that we have prepared a disaster policy and fortunately, it has received a lot of support within Cabinet and from the partners who work with the Government of Uganda. Its operationalisation is on course.

My brother, hon. Fox Odoi, asked whether we have an early warning mechanism. Until recently, we have had an effective Department of Meteorology but we sat and we allocated resources to the effect that we want to upgrade the Department of Meteorology to an authority and some resources have started percolating to that department. As we talk, they can predict to some extent, something that borders accuracy. (Laughter) I do not want to tell this House that they now can, with mathematical precision, say, “This is going to happen,” and it happens.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Ecweru. I agree with you to the extent that there has been a problem with meteorology but also the problem has been with the executive in the ministry. We passed money under CHOGM to have new radar and other equipment that meteorology handles. It was diverted. 

During the AU Summit, money was passed again and that money has also been misused. Even at the moment, those of us who fly more frequently, our lives are at risk because there is a problem with the radar at Entebbe because Government has failed to provide the money. 

MR ECWERU: I am told that hon. Okupa may not have enough evidence to that effect but what I want to make clear to this House is that the Department of Meteorology is hosted in the Ministry of Lands and they will be coming to make a statement. We utilise their services and it is in our interest that they improve their capacity to predict the weather.

I shared with the hon. Member for Agago, the question of Agago, like I have shared with many other colleagues. We have compiled a list of districts, counties and villages across the country that are in need of intervention at different levels. But one thing I also want to make abundantly clear to honourable members is that when we send assessments, we can confirm that damage happened here, but if in our thinking the community is able to cope on its own, we may not make an intervention. We will go to those communities that have been put in a position that they are not able to stand on their own and those are the communities that deserve emergency response. 

Therefore, we will be doing everything possible to respond to all those other stations and districts that suffered, including Koboko, and other districts that have brought their plight to our attention.   

In Bulambuli, the honourable member said that while we were there with His Excellency the President, it was indicated that we were aware. This is not correct. What happened in Bulambuli was that we have been battling the consequences of a long, devastating drought that stunted the crops immediately the maize started flowering. So, what we have been battling is the consequences of a long drought and not the consequences of a flood or a landslide. Unfortunately, the weather has become very unpredictable, like it has correctly been observed here, from a long drought that devastated the district to a landslide because of too much water. The overall position is that in the Elgon region, we had indicated to the communities that there are areas which are susceptible to water logging and, therefore, they will have landslides and the communities must relocate. 

What we have done - it is possible in our assessment. If we are to relocate, it will mean relocating almost the entire Elgon region, which is not feasible right now.

We have asked the people from the steep hills to come down to the low lying areas so that they are hosted by host communities and then we support those communities as Government as we do piecemeal relocation of the communities to areas where we have secured land. I am happy to report to this House that about 3,000 victims of Bududa have resettled in Kiryandongo and they are recovering. They are adjusting to the new environment of Kiryandongo -(Mrs Ogwal rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I was preparing to roll this up now. Please, briefly. 

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Minister. I have observed that Maj. Gen. Julius Oketa is now the focal point to deal with disaster and then for the districts, you have also said in this paper that the district police commander will be responsible for relaying information related to disasters. Have we now shifted our administrative approach from dealing with disaster as part of the operational management of Government to militaristic command of the situation? What is happening? I believe disaster, whether hunger or floods must be administered properly. The districts have the capacity and the departments to monitor the level of the floods and to relay the information. Now you are expecting the military personnel who may not even have the technical training to deal with disaster situations to handle it?

It is important that we focus correctly. I know that the militaries are required where military intervention is required but where administration is required and we have districts with personnel there, what are we using these people for? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, hon. Minister, wind up.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, world over, the army is used because of the nature of its organisation. Particularly, when it comes to search and rescue, they are the most organised and easily commanded people. I will sit with hon. Ogwal conveniently somewhere and take her through how we do things. But that will be another day -(Interjection­s)- I will choose the venue. 

Cabinet met recently and decided that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness will remain to do the co-ordination work when it comes to emergencies but the relevant sectors that get affected will be the ones that will champion the actual rehabilitation. For example, if a disaster befalls a place like it has happened in Butaleja and all the food gets washed away, the ministry of agriculture will be the one to deliver the seeds and to ensure that the community recovers as far as planting is concerned. The Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness will just co-ordinate the response. 

Our work will be majorly to do the relief part of intervention but the recovery will be handled by the sectors. For example, in my office, we have a record of 19 schools, which have lost roofs. We have about 11 health centers across the country, which have lost roofs. The roofing rehabilitation of those institutions will not be the mandate of the ministry. The ministry will only co-ordinate. The relevant sectors will do the rehabilitation of these institutions.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Members, particularly the group that now has come up to form what we call the Disaster Preparedness Forum of Parliament. I am taking them through some drills. We have got some resources so that they first of all know the question of disaster preparedness. I am particularly happy that hon. Ogwal is a member of that committee. (Applause) So, I am going to help her to understand what happens. Otherwise, I want to thank you Members for your support. We will continue to support the entire country and the criterion for support is just that you must be needy. There is nothing else we consider. The moment you are in distress, we will respond appropriately. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, this is one of those sad moments for this country. I would like us to rise and observe a moment of silence in memory of those who have departed.

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT OF THE BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have two reports after this one to finish today. So, I am going to limit the debate on this one to 30 minutes. We will stop at exactly 4.00 p.m. then we go to responses.

3.26
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for this very detailed report. I would like to speak on very specific issues and one is the politicisation of NAADS. It is now documented that for one to benefit from the NAADS programme in districts like Soroti, Serere and Kumi, you must be a renowned member of the NRM. 

It is very unfortunate if we want to make interventions that save our people. I would like Government to issue a directive because these are public funds and no matter your political party, people on the grass roots should benefit.

The second issue is that I would have loved to see in the committee report something about maize, bananas and cassava, reason being that it is now documented that about 11 million Ugandans are food insecure. If this is so, what should they eat? It is maize, bananas and cassava.

I will speak for the cassava situation in Teso. Some mite has destroyed the existing cassava. A few minutes ago, hon. Ecweru talked about water logging destroying the remainder. What we need is cassava stems and if you do not give us the cassava stems, the continuous cycle of flooding and drought in Teso will make the famine situation worse. That is my plea.

The third issue has to do with Foot and Mouth Disease. Last week, hon. Rwamirama told this House that his ministry was going to give a partial lifting of the quarantine particularly in Serere. It is over a week now and the quarantine on Foot and Mouth Disease still holds. What is the problem? When will the people be free?

Lastly, on the agricultural credit facility, twice this House has passed money but nobody knows the criteria for benefiting from this money. I would like Government to come and tell us how they chose the people who benefited from the billions of agricultural credit facilities. Thank you.

3.29
MS VICTORIA RUSOKE (NRM, Woman representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a few observations and I begin with the marketing strategies for our people. Our farmers are trying their best and with Government strategy of improving or mechanising agriculture, if production increases with these very low prices, I do not know where our farmers are going. Our farmers try their best but they do not take their children to school because at the peak period, the prices are so low. I wish we would borrow a leaf from other countries to regularise and project so that our farmers get commensurate prices for their crops.

Secondly, I observe that the NAADS programme needs a total overhaul. This programme should be revised to be all inclusive, so that the youths can directly get their share, plan, package and they do the production.

There is also no consideration for urban intensive farming in the NAADS programme yet some of our people and many of them at that live in urban areas. There are no skills developed to consider them.

When it goes to disease and vector control, Uganda has a very big problem. There is no specific programme for vector control although scantily, some work is done but a lot of animals are dying. The most risky part of it is when these animals die massively, the farmers derive a quick strategy of disguising by selling them as roasted or dry meat, which our people eat and it is risky because the farmers cannot bury all those animals and see their capital diminishing.

Finally, I will talk about irrigation mechanisms. This morning you heard someone’s submission and Kabarole is one of those areas where irrigation has been promised to Rwengaju area, year after year but up to now, we have never received anything. I would wish to get the responses from the responsible ministry. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, thank you. I was wondering whether my eye is not seeing properly. We are discussing the budget and I do not see the Minister of Finance; unless there has been a reshuffle! This is the sector, which employs 80 percent of Ugandans. Are the ministers thinking that we should just speak to ourselves? Can we suspend the matter? I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the line ministers are here.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the Budget is handled by Finance. The Committee of Agriculture has a very serious issue of funding, Members are talking about issues of funding in this sector and it has never been in the history of this country that we are debating the budget and there is no single Minister of Finance here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have just ruled that the sector ministers are here. We can proceed.

3.33
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank you for the revolutionary and fundamental guidance. I am sure it is going to eliminate speculation by some Members.

Agriculture remains the backbone of our economy and I would like to see the funding of agriculture match that statement in the Budget Speech. We should invest where we have a competitive advantage and I am very sure you will agree with me that Uganda can only invest in agriculture so that we realise being the food basket of this country.

I agree and support the increased funding and implementation of the seed multiplication centers, animal breeding centers and fish multiplication centers because we have been talking about this year after year as it has been stated but this time, we would like to see practical implementation.

I agree and support the implementation of post-harvest management by setting up silos at sub-county and regional level so that we store. This will save our farmers from premature selling of their produce. Therefore, it will increase household incomes, which we all demand for.

I support and agree with the commercialisation of agriculture because this is the only way we can attract the youths to this sector and, therefore, solve the unemployment problem. You might all agree with me that Uganda has the largest and sufficient water bodies; why should we continue depending on nature for rain to grow crops? We should implement water for production through irrigation. We should support the Ministry of Agriculture so that this programme is implemented. Thank you.

3.36
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I congratulate the committee for coming up with an excellent report. We only pray the implementation will be a reality that will transform the lives of our voters. I also thank the Shadow Cabinet Minister for that appraisal. It is a wonderful one and I hope that the ministry will borrow some of these good ideas for the good of all of us. We are not here to criticise Government but to make sure that whatever it does is good for our people.

I wish to draw your attention to the part of the report where CDO is singled out as having done best in the sub sector. I have looked at the audit report for the year 2010 on page 44, and it shows that CDO, in defiance of the Public Finance and Accountability Act does not even have an audit committee as required by the law. It has only one personnel as the internal auditor and the only person who is supposed to monitor and give a report to the audit committee. 

So, I can only say that some of these numerous projects under the Ministry of Agriculture could be created just to siphon money for personal use and we need to investigate activities of some of these programmes. CDO is one of these because we have complained year in and year out but it has continued to come with a budget of Shs 5.7 billion claiming to buy oxen, spray pumps and seeds. 

I am a farmer and this year alone I have planted almost 100 acres of cotton. I am telling you there is not even a single cotton seed that has been given free of charge; all farmers have bought seeds, including me. There is no farmer who has obtained a free ox-plough and every year we are told that tractors and spray pumps are bought for farmers and yet I know that they are sold to farmers –(Member timed out_)

3.39
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. All Members have thanked the committee for the elaborate report which has called for our attention. My concern is a general one; the agriculture sector constitutes about 90 percent of Uganda’s source of revenue. But when you look at the percentage of the money allocated to this sector, it is four percent of the total budget. I do not know whether the people who drew the first estimates of the budget put it in mind that in agriculture, the more you grow, the more you export. 

I do not know whether we are fighting poverty in this country by allocating four percent to the agriculture ministry. If we are to transform this country into one that will compete with others – because all the markets along the coast are open - we are exporting to Rwanda, South Sudan and we are supposed to produce more for domestic consumption. With four percent, what are we going to do with this economy? Mine is to open up the minds of Members of Parliament; if we are to deliberate and transform this country, we must concentrate on agriculture. A lot of money is being taken by other sectors, leaving out agriculture and yet we keep on claiming that agriculture is the backbone of our economy.

Regarding the animals which die due to diseases, in Ntoroko district, cows die of Nagana but they are not buried. The meat is smoked and it is sold to the neighbouring districts as dry meat. Are we really eating good meat or disease? (Laughter) What has the Ministry of Agriculture done to see that these dead animals are buried? It is a very big problem. The other time, we reported about people who die in Ntoroko and their bodies thrown into the water. The environment minister - I do not know whether it was that ministry or it was crosscutting – they were supposed to provide land in the park for burial. This would not take up much land in the park. And we would have avoided the fish from eating dead bodies; this fish is consumed by people in Bundibugyo, Kabarole, Kasese and even Kampala. So, you are also eating dead bodies. (Laughter) We need to come up with strategies of handling emergencies as they occur -(Member timed out_)

3.43
MS IDAH NANTABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for this wonderful report. My first point is on irrigation. I can see in the report a proposal for micro water harvesting and irrigation demonstration. We appreciate that Uganda is a country endowed with natural resources but they have been left untapped. We have the source of the Nile but we look at that water flowing from Jinja to Egypt all year round. Egypt has tapped that water to irrigate and 100 percent of its agriculture sector depends on the River Nile waters. If we are to establish irrigation schemes, let us look at establishing them in areas bordering water bodies because it is very cheap.

On NAADS, this programme has continued to be a source of robbery. In my district, these people are still getting money from the farmers. They are requesting them to pay Shs 50,000 as registration or whatever they call it and in the end, they give them seeds that are of poor quality. 

Recently, they gave them hoes and beans - they would give them 10 kilograms out of which they would get three and the rest was all wasted. Therefore, I call for immediate intervention in the way NAADS is carrying out this programme in the villages because it is robbing our farmers in the villages.

Lastly, on mechanisation of agriculture, you talk about mechanisation and you are removing taxes on hoes which I do not think is applicable because it is a contradiction. If you are talking about mechanising agriculture, then you subsidise the prices of tractors other than removing taxes on hoes. I thank you.

3.46
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): I thank you very much. Regional trade opportunities are emerging for this country at an unbelievable pace for most of us. Therefore, this must be the time when we must be sleeping in the gardens trying to cultivate and rear animals among others but this unfortunately, is not happening.

We are trying to spread our resources thinly on many opportunities and forgetting that by doing that, we are not going to realise anything. Some time back, we had the Strategic Investment Programme focusing on certain sub-sectors of the economy in the agricultural sector. I remember we had about eight sub-sectors and I think we did quite well. We had coffee, cotton, Irish potatoes and tea. The tea we are talking about in the western region today was because of that Strategic Investment Programme. The Irish potatoes that we see on the market today were a result of that programme but I wonder what happened.

It is now time that we started seriously thinking about focusing on certain sectors. I was reviewing the fish sector as an example and I observed that this country has a lot of idle water resources. A number of lakes where we do our fishing are all lying idle. We have this project at Kajjansi that is producing fish fries that are not being adequately utilised. I was looking at opportunities lying ahead of us in terms of river-based aquaculture, lake-based aquaculture and normal aquaculture that we have in ponds. These valley dams that we have dug in various places - these resources have not been exploited and if we focused on fisheries alone, we are doing some studies and we established that this country would earn trillions of shillings. Fish alone would earn us trillions. 

What I am labouring to present to the august House is that we need to focus on certain strategic sub-sectors in agriculture -(Member timed out_) 

3.49
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): I thank you. I thank the committee for a job well done both in terms of quantity and quality. It is a voluminous report with a lot of useful material. 

The state of our agriculture is worrying. In the last financial year, the cash crop sector registered negative growth. The food crop sector only registered 2.7 percent growth. Aquaculture registered 0.4 percent growth and this is matched against 3.4 percent growth in the population. 

We all eat food that we grow and if the food production levels of Uganda are lower than the production levels of our citizens, then it means that we are headed for a disaster and it is very easy to see why our agricultural productivity does not match our population growth. 

If you look at this year’s budget, the Ministry of Finance proposes to exempt taxes on the hand held hoe. How can we produce like we produced 100 years ago? At the time Jesus Christ was born, the Jews –(Interjections)- this is a historical fact; the Jews had moved away from using the hand held hoe and were using horse-drawn ploughs. Now 2011 years later, we are still promoting hand-held hoes –(Laughter)– in the year 2011, Anno Domini, after the birth of Christ and the Uganda Government is still promoting the use of the hand held hoe and then we argue that we want to make our people rich from using the hand-held hoe! This does not add up.

I will request this honourable House to reject any policy that promotes backwardness. (Applause) There has been a lot of talk about mechanisation. When you are talking about mechanisation, I thought you would be talking about exempting taxes on spare parts on tractors, combined harvesters and irrigation pumps, but not on hand held hoes. We must put our money where our mouth is. 

My second concern is about the use of fertilisers. It is also a recorded fact that in this region, our use of fertilisers per acre is the lowest because we still promote very primitive farming methods. We have many areas of Uganda where we rear cattle and we could very easily use organic manure -(Member timed out_)

3.53
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): I tend to get disturbed many times when I look at the way affairs of our country are being managed by the state.

You may wish to know that the Bill Gates Foundation gave Uganda US $30 million, which was guaranteed by Bank of Uganda at a level of 100 percent. But as I speak now, the lending of this money is not to the targeted beneficiaries. This money is being given to well-placed commercial farmers and Stanbic Bank is using this enormous money to lend out at commercial rates for non agricultural purposes.

It would be prudent that the ministers – it is good that they are here – that they take interest in this matter and save Ugandans from this broad daylight robbery. I put my trust in these two new ministers because given their age and experience, they will be able to retrieve what used to be done in the olden days that fed and gave glory to this country. 

This is a country that never saw malnutrition, under-nutrition; but now, so many years down the road, we are getting stunted people amidst women giving birth to quadruplets. This is stunning and disturbing.

I would like to draw your attention to water for production. If you moved around the country, there is no source or lack of water. Today, it is raining and Ugandans are complaining but three months down the road, if there is a drought - because we have not harvested water, because we have not used our lakes and rivers - Uganda will be no different from Somalia. We will be talking about how we are hungry, how we need relief because there is no water. 

How can we be so sarcastic in the 21st Century with all these fresh water bodies around us? I have been on record telling Government of Uganda that as long as you take NAADS and as long as you take agricultural extension service provision as a political instrument, you will never succeed in managing peasants because peasantry assumes that there is somebody who knows who will instruct you on what to do to better your life. But, unfortunately, the way NAADS is being managed presupposes that agricultural extension must be specifically for a handful of people who are politically lucrative to a regime to sustain it -(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to inform my honourable colleagues with illustrations from my district Amuru where I come from. Five tractors were given to Amuru in the name of NAADS. Those tractors are given to the NRM cadres. None of the community is using that tractor. I come from that district. It is true that NAADS is being used for praising the supporters of the NRM government. 

MS BAKO: Thank you for the information -(Interjections)- can I be protected, Mr Speaker?

Finally, I want to draw your attention to the way agricultural financing is managed in this country. The former finance minister in the Opposition side and myself, proposed the land and agricultural development bank. This was because we know that all commercial banks in Uganda here do not lend to farmers at less than 15 percent interest -(Member timed out_)

3.58
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson, hon. Kasirivu for the good work done. (Applause) What concerns me are the recommendations we make. Right from the Sixth Parliament and I know the chairperson of the committee has been here since the Sixth Parliament. We have made many good recommendations as Parliament but when you look at the kind of action taken on them, it is very minimal and maybe that is why the Government continues to give it four percent. 

For example, we made recommendations regarding irrigation. If you look at the budget speeches of 2001 and 2003, we talked about irrigation. If I can even quote from that Budget Speech - in 2001, the Minister of Finance and incidentally he is not here, in that budget, “Government will provide for the completion of 16 strategic dams/valley tanks in Kotido, Moroto, Nakapiripirit, completion of 15 dams/valley tanks in Ssembabule, Mbarara, Nakasongola, Kiboga and in addition, Government will complete the designs of at least five dams.”

In 2003, “Design for the construction of 50 valley tanks in Luwero, Nakasongola, Masindi and Nakapiripirit …” it continues. That is why concerns come up again. 

Regarding the improvement of cattle for export, hon. Kasirivu you know it, with hon. Muntu, they went to Botswana and they made their report to State House and even to Parliament. Right now, we are talking about the same issue. What happens to those reports about improving the livestock industry such that we can even export, apart from milk, even beef? 

When it comes to strategic interventions, so many crops were included. From 2001, they talked about tea. My colleague had talked about Irish potatoes, tobacco and Special Presidential Initiative in Cotton and even in cotton, there was a target of one million bales. 

Right now, I do not know the production. It could be even less than 200,000 bales. Where are we going? My colleague has talked about CDO. We should look at the things we recommend and we review all of them and we see exactly where we are going and how much we have achieved. We signed these protocols in Mozambique -(Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that one of the interventions as we see which has been decried is NAADS and I am perturbed that when I was attending the Committee of Agriculture, the Executive Director of NAADS came and when asked, he banged the table rudely as if he undermined the authority of the committee.
 
We all kept quiet because he had become so arrogant and I hope powerful people have not approached him to take some of the money. That is how people become arrogant. If people who are supposed to monitor them go behind the scenes and go to their offices -(Interruption)

MRS EGUNYU: Thank you very much for giving way. I am the vice-chair of the committee and I remember when she came I was there. The Executive Director never did. Is he is order to come and deceive the House when I was there and even other Members?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, can you confirm this to me. What happened?

MR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is the impression my colleague had. The truth is he was arrogant but he did not bang the tables.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was arrogant but he did not bang the table. Hon. Members, I am actually disturbed that someone can act like that in front of a committee and then you let him go or let her go. What powers of the committee are you exercising in those committees?

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, I wanted to register my disappointment with somebody who has been invited to the committee to provide information -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think your disappointment should be with the committee because the person invited to the committee and behaves in a manner that calls for reprimand and he goes away free and you are regretting and you are a Member of Parliament.

MS NAGGAYI: I hope, Mr Speaker, with your guidance, I can do the right thing so that the precincts of Parliament cannot be abused like that by officers who are invited. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, are we procedurally right to proceed without the vice-chairperson apologising to this House and withdrawing her statement for lying in this House. I think we better ask her to withdraw her statement and apologise to this House because the Chairperson of the Committee has confirmed what hon. Sebuliba-Mutumba stated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Wait. The chairman has confirmed that the man was arrogant, but he has not said that he did not bang the table. So, that is what he has said. So, hon. Sebuliba, please finish.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Mr Chairman, as I wind up, I would like to draw the attention of the ministers concerned on what was said on page 5 of the Budget Speech to the Seventh Parliament in 2003. It read, “A total of Shs 52.5 billion was provided to promote the production, processing and marketing of strategic exports.” 

I would like the ministers concerned together with the chairpersons to check how much the Shs 52.5 billion has done in enhancing the production, processing and marketing of the same. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, my time is up. I had said up to 4 O’clock; it is now past 4 O’clock. So, hon. Minister, you have five minutes and we will come back to the chairman. 

4.06
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Mr Chairman and Members of Parliament, first of all, I want to thank the chairman of the committee for the beautiful report they presented. I also want to thank the Opposition for their contributions. 

When we came to take charge of this ministry, we had a vision and I want to share it with you. First of all, we are not groping in darkness. We have developed this document known as the Development Strategy and Implementation Plan. This document answers all the concerns that you have raised. 

You have raised concerns that cover three areas. The first are the technical issues, two are administrative issues and three are the policy issues. In this plan, we have picked out most important enterprises covering crops, animals and fisheries. We ranked them and placed them against the technologies you have been talking about and we started scoring them. 

We knew that there was shortage of money to finance every activity across the board in a vertical manner, for example, from planting the crops to processing them. But we picked on what we considered critical factors to deal with under the circumstances and these are the issues that many of you have been talking about in terms of technologies. These technologies cover a range of improved seeds, fertilisers, water applications, value addition up to mechanisation, where possible. 

And if I am to comment briefly on each of these, in terms of seeds, we have got over 20 accredited seed producers. We have had discussions with them and laid out plans to improve their production as well as have them provide good seeds. But the practical reality is that even with the best of intentions; they cannot produce all the seeds required in this country. So, farmers must build capacity gradually and have farmers produce more seeds. At the same time we must encourage farmers to select their own seeds.

The second technology was water for irrigation –(Interruption)- I hope my time will be given back.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Minister for giving way. I am tickled by that issue of provision of seeds and the quality of seeds. We have one company called Victoria Seeds supplying seeds under NAADS. In Serere District and to be specific, in Kasiro County, Victoria Seeds supplied seeds but nothing germinated. Yesterday, I was travelling back from Kasiro and the GISO brought to me bags of the seeds supplied by Victoria Seeds and did not germinate. They have tried to contact them; they refused to refund the money, they refused to resupply – what are you doing about such companies?

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Well, I have just said that we had a meeting with all seed accredited companies, we have strengthened our certifications programme and we are soon putting up a seed certification board –(Interjections)– that is operational and at this point, I am talking about policy. So that can be handled administratively and in an operational manner.

We do recognise that there is need to put up water for improved seed because water is basic to life; even human beings need water. But the steps being taken cover three areas and we have developed a plan to do this; one is to harness water that is flowing around the mountains; Mt Elgon, Mt Rwenzori and so on. So, gravity is going to be utilised. 

You talked about Doho, Mobuku and so on. Those are irrigations schemes and we are going to maintain them as examples for people to see and learn. Clearly, even the most important way of utilising is rain water harvesting on roof tops. This can be done at individual farm and household level. 

The third area is of fertilisers. Critically, fertilisers are not enough and those who said that our soils are no longer fertile as they used to be were right. But we do not have the resources to increase the productions. For now, we could encourage people to use organic manure which we already have and organic soils which we are manufacturing every day. Every home in Uganda is producing ash by burning wood; these are first class fertilisers. If you add ash to organic manure, then we can have a good start.
 
But as I said, as soon as the money is available, we shall encourage Government to manufacture our own fertilisers because we have all the ingredients. We have phosphorous in Soroti, lime – as soon as we produce oil, we shall get the other materials required and we have a lot of cloud cover where we could get the nitrogen from. 

When it comes to the area of animal power, definitely in our system, we want to move away from the old tractor hire service; it does not work. We want to encourage individual farmers and co-operatives to have tractors. To this extent, I am aware that Shs 30 billion has been put in commercial banks and commercial banks are going to put a matching grant so that people who have bankable products can borrow this money and run a tractor service of their own. This is similar to the way people are running buses. Individual bus owners may fail to operationalise the tractors but as an organised system, we think this may work.

On the question of pest and disease control, for both animals and crops; this is underway. Someone raised a question of Foot and Mouth Disease. Some people think that placing quarantine is restrictive; it is not true. It is just one of the methods of controlling Foot and Mouth Disease. 

On the question of fish, certainly hon. Nankabirwa is extremely active trying to arrest those people using wrong fishing gear. This is taking effect. Of course, there are efforts to increase fish catch through the aquaculture system. 

I am moving very fast because of the time limitation. There were questions raised about NAADS. NAADS is an issue that has to be tackled carefully because it was set up by Parliament. We are aware that we must reform it. Before we do that, we have to go back to Cabinet, make your concerns known and come back to Parliament to review some of these issues. Some of you have been as radical as saying, “Let us scrap it and reform the NAADS as it used to be in the past.” Others think we can modify it. Others are saying, “Let us strengthen it by bringing in this organisation known as ATAAS.” Clearly, there is need to link this search information with the people who are conveying this research information to the farmers in the field. That one is going to be answered by ATAAS. It is an issue we cannot handle and solve immediately but we shall have to handle it in due course. 

Then, there were policy issues. Clearly, when we got there, we had developed an agricultural policy. A draft is there. It is going to be printed and will be distributed to you all in due course. I have already mentioned this book, which has also come out. It has been produced because we have a known agricultural policy. 

Another issue on administration is agricultural credit. Agricultural credit is one of those things that we are working on. We have Uganda Development Bank and we know that they are offering credit to bankable projects. The only problem I noticed and we are working on, is trying to sort out their equity ratio. They are raising 40 percent of equity ratio and we find it extremely high for an ordinary farmer. 

Someone recommended that the ministry should be split into two to create the Ministry of Agriculture and one of Animal Industry and Fisheries. Certainly, this is outside my purview to answer. But I can support the rationale used at that time by simply defining what agriculture is, in international language. Internationally, agriculture is known as that science and art of raising crops and animals. If you agree with that kind of reasoning and rationale; those who decided to merge the ministry were correct. That is the only way I can answer this question because the question of dividing it into two is clearly beyond our purview. 

Someone raised the issue of shifting to Kampala. That was done and approved by Government some time back; but there is also recognition that we should seek for additional funding to be able to build our own headquarters in Kampala because both ministries are here. Fortunately, we all have land in Kampala and want to ask and persuade the Ministry of Finance to give us the money to put up that building because we also do not want to continue living in rented premises. 

I think I have covered all the concerns. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Minister. 

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, I have raised the issue of agro-finance for this country. Taxpayers’ money is used to guarantee that credit facility. This facility sits here in Stanbic Bank, US $30 million. That is a lot of money and the minister has not pronounced himself on it and the guarantee is by taxpayers. This money is being used as an investment capital.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, could you make a response?

MR BUCYANAYANDI: First of all, this question would have been answered by the Ministry of Finance –(Laughter)- but since they are not here, I will take responsibility to find out and report later.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kasirivu Atwooki): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank Members for their responses and support to the report. I promise that the Committee on Agriculture –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have three minutes.

MR KASIRIVU: I promise that the committee on agriculture will endeavour to follow up the recommendations we have made. I thank hon. Abia who observed that the ministry has two very knowledgeable old gentlemen who I am sure, together with the committee and their colleagues who are young and committed, we shall steer the sector.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I prefer you refer to them as senior.

MR KASIRIVU: They are senior citizens. I beg to move that Parliament adopts the report of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, a proposal is made. I put the question to it.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, it is not my intention to delay any debate but we are dealing with a motion that Parliament do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of the revised revenue, expenditure and then the budgetary proposals. The motion has been moved by the Ministry of Finance. Mr Speaker, I would like to beg –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have ruled on that point. Let us go to the next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure has something to do late this evening. So, we are bringing it forward using my prerogative under the rules to allow the Physical Infrastructure Committee report to be presented, then the one for Legal and Parliamentary Affairs will come immediately thereafter.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have ten minutes, Mr Chairman. 

4.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Mr Speaker, pursuant to articles 90 and 155, Section 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and in accordance with rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and Sections 9 and 11 of the Budget Act of 2001; the Committee on Physical Infrastructure considered the ministerial policy statements of Ministry of Works and Transport and that of Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The committee now wishes to report on the budget estimates of sectoral votes covered by the two ministries and propose recommendations.

Methodology

The committee considered the following documents:
Ministerial policy statements for Ministries of Works and Transport, Lands and Housing, the Budget Speech, the National Development Plan and also the findings based on field activities. 

The committee met with a number of entities during its deliberations. They include: Ministry of Works and Transport, Uganda Road Fund, Uganda National Roads Authority, Civil Aviation Authority, Uganda Railways Corporation, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Uganda Land Commission, Kampala Capital City Authority and Civil Society Budget Advocacy Group led by Forum for Women in Development, which was a special arrangement, because they had petitioned the committee to appear before us. 

I will move straight to the observations and recommendation of the committee. Because of the limited time, I will only highlight the items that were discussed by the committee. 

Uganda Railways Corporation, page 4. Railway transport remains the cheapest means of transport for bulk cargo. The committee appreciates Government’s renewed interest in revitalising railway transport through provision of funds for undertaking feasibility studies to reopen the Kampala-Kasese and Tororo-Pakwach railway line. 

The committee was informed that these studies have been ongoing –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, just a brief interruption. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am asking you to designate somebody who will be holding the docket of the minister of finance because by the note you have given me, none of them is available in the country. Otherwise, I am going to designate the shadow minister to take charge. (Applause) You should designate somebody to help us steer this process or I may designate somebody else. 

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would have equally been happy if I were the shadow minister but since I am not, I will not share in his happiness. However, I would ask hon. Kamuntu to take charge for now. Thank you.

MR AJEDRA: Thank you. I was in the process of saying that the committee was informed that these studies have been going on since the Financial Year 2007/08 but to date the reports have never been concluded. 

The committee requested for the progress reports regarding these critical activities but it has not received the reports. The committee, therefore, recommends that the minister should provide progress reports regarding these studies to the Parliament within six months and in addition, the ministry should provide total budgetary requirements to have these studies concluded. 

With regard to the performance of RVR consortium; in November 2006, railway services were concessioned. The role of Uganda Railways Corporation changed to monitoring the railway concession agreement and providing technical support to Government regarding railway matters. 

The committee noted that the concessionaire breached several of the provisions in the concession agreement, including those relating to the payment of concession fees totaling to about US $800,000. 

In 2009/2010, Parliament was informed that the government was reviewing the concession agreement with RVR with a view to terminating it. 

The committee was surprised to learn that instead of Governments of Kenya and Uganda terminating the agreement, they have maintained the concession agreement and have only changed the management of RVR. Additionally, RVR has been re-capitalised without the due diligence as in the original agreement. 

The committee recommends that Government should Table to this Parliament the details of the original concession and the current arrangement entered into between the government and RVR. 

In addition, the Government should review the agreement to include provision of passenger services since this was not in the original agreement. 

On air transport services, the committee observes that air traffic and passenger numbers at Entebbe International Airport has been increasing steadily and yet facilities have remained inadequate. For example, there are inadequate storage facilities for aviation fuel, space for expansion of offices, travelers’ rest areas and shops. 

In the last financial year, CAA admitted two new airlines, namely, Turkish Airlines and Qatar Airlines and plans are underway to continue admitting more. Besides, CAA has to facilitate Uganda’s race to host the United Nations Humanitarian Action programme, awarded to Uganda in 2009. 

The committee was informed that CAA is in possession of a title of land, measuring about 132 hectares, which was originally an animal holding area for the Ministry of Agriculture. However, a presidential directive was issued on the said land to be split between the two entities, that is, CAA and Ministry of Agriculture. 

The committee recommends that the land at the airport, which is measuring 132 hectares be given to CAA for the expansion of the airport. 

Regarding the development of the alternative Southern route, the committee notes that the country’s challenges, as a landlocked country, where most goods in and out of the country go through Kenya, supply lines and routes sometimes get disrupted in cases of civil strife, just as it happened in 2007.  

The Government has adopted a policy of diversification and agrees with the government of Tanzania for the development of an alternative Southern route, that is, from Mwanza up to Dar-es-Salaam. 

While the Government of Tanzania is reported to have completed rehabilitation of its line from Dar-es-Salaam to Mwanza, the Government of Uganda has not undertaken any substantial initiative to improve Port-Bell or develop an alternative inland port close to Kampala city. This financial year, no budget allocation has been made. 

The committee recommends that the ministry takes the development of the Southern route on Lake Victoria as a matter of priority and fast-tracks the development of a proposed inland port at Bukasa.

One issue that was extensively discussed and drew a lot of discussion was the issue of facilitation of traditional and cultural leaders. The committee takes note of Government’s contribution towards strengthening traditional and cultural institutions. The committee is, however, concerned about the criteria used in the allocation of resources and support to these institutions. For example, some of the traditional institutions are having their palaces constructed by the state while others are not.

The committee, therefore, is of the view that the policy for developing palaces and structures for kings should be discussed and developed. And funding for the projects for traditional and cultural leaders should be discussed and developed. The committee is concerned that selective support to cultural leaders could lead to polarisation of society. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should issue a standard policy for providing services to traditional and cultural leaders. The committee believes that an equitable distribution of support for cultural and traditional leaders is bound to create unity in diversity of the country.

Mr Speaker, let me turn your attention to Uganda National Roads Authority. The committee is concerned that there are many on-going projects under UNRA that are lacking adequate funding. The shortfall for ongoing projects is amounting to about Shs 230 billion and while that for new projects is about Shs 255 billion. 

The delay in implementation of ongoing projects will have financial implications in terms of penalties for breach of contracts and also interest accruing from delayed payments for completed works. 

The committee recommends that Government should re-prioritise its programmes and source funding which is required for the ongoing projects amounting to about Shs 233 billion and to avoid possible penalties and interest accruing from litigation.

On performance of the donor funds, the committee noted that despite poor performance release at about 47 percent, the donor component of the budget is projected to increase to about Shs 132 billion in the current financial year. The committee was informed that this was due to a number of administrative reviews during the procurement process; for example, Mbarara-Kitagati, Tororo-Mbale-Soroti, Mukono-Kayunga-Njeru, Mukono-Jinja Roads. However, there is no assurance that this will not happen again this financial year. 

The committee recommends that the ministry should only budget for road construction projects whose procurement procedures and processes have been concluded, to free resources to cater for critical Government projects instead of holding on to funds that are never spent at the end of the financial year. 

A major topic that was also discussed extensively by the committee is the delay in the procurement process. The committee is concerned that with the delayed in the procurement of contractors for road works even when funds are available for such roads. Examples are as alluded to earlier. 

The UNRA informed the committee that this is as a result of lengthy procurement processes and that the current amendment of the PPDA Act will not even help that much. The committee takes note of the fact that while it is a Government policy that accounting officers should not commit Government when funds have not been confirmed, the committee, however, recommends that UNRA considers commencing its procurement activities for a subsequent financial year in the last quarter of a given financial and only await to award the contracts, once funding has been approved by Parliament. 

The high cost of road construction was also a concern. The committee also observed that the huge cost of road construction in Uganda continues to be very high compared to other countries in the region. The table below gives an education of the rising cost of unit costs of roads in the country from financial year 2009/2010 to 2011/2012. You can see that there has been a steady increase in the cost of road construction per kilometer. 

The committee recommends that the Government should initiate an independent study on the issue of unit costs of road construction in order to make it economically viable and sustainable. Additionally, UNRA should enforce contract provisions in the construction projects so as to minimise contracts escalation costs. 

Mr Speaker, the cost of land acquisition was also a concern. The committee is concerned about the high cost of land acquisition as a component of the road construction cost. For example, upgrading the Kabale-Kisoro-Kyanika road which is about 98 kilometres had a budget allocation of about Shs 1 billion for acquiring just 25 hectares, while upgrading of the Kampala–Gayaza–Zirobwe road which is 44 kilometres, had a budgetary allocation of about Shs 6 billion. 

The committee recommends that UNRA completes the demarcation of all the road reserves in the country to reduce the cost of compensation due to encroachment on these national roads. Encroachment on such roads should then be treated as a trespass and eviction or demolitions should be carried out at the cost of the developer without compensation. 

The Government should streamline the procedures for land acquisition and land compensation in consultation with the Ministry of Lands and Housing. 

Abuse of administrative review rights by contractors: the committee observed that there are frequent requests for administrative reviews by contractors who bid for construction projects from UNRA. This delays the implementation of the planned projects by the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA. The main cause of the requests for administrative reviews, according to the committee, is lack of confidentiality and a weak PPDA Act which lends the whole process to corruption. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the evaluation and award of contracts be handled professionally and with the confidentiality that it deserves. 

Also, there is need to fine-tune some of the sections of the PPDA Act with a view to strengthening it and making it more effective. 

Let me turn now to the Uganda Road Fund. There were quite a number of issues –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You did not warn him. I told you to warn him. Give him two more minutes. 

MR ALERO: Let me move on to the budget. Mr Speaker, subject to those observations and recommendations, I beg to move that this august House approves the budget estimates for works and transport as follows:

Ministry of Works and Transport - Vote 016; the total budget allocation for the Financial Year 2011/2012 is Shs 123,361,000,000 only and this comprises the recurrent budget of Shs 19,274,000,000 and the development budget of Shs 101,067,000,000; with taxes amounting to Shs 3,020,000,000;

Vote 113 - UNRA: the total budget allocation proposed is Shs 836,412,000,000 and this comprises recurrent budget of Shs 27,176,000,000, development budget of Shs 799,236,000,000 and taxes amounting to Shs 10,000,000,000.

With regard to Vote 118 – URF, the total budget allocation for the Financial Year 2010/2011 is Shs 280,950,000,000 comprising of a recurrent budget of Shs 280,950,000,000. There were no development and proposed taxes under this ministry. I beg to move. 

Mr Speaker, allow me just five minutes to go through the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Going by the procedures we had adopted earlier, I am advised that in this sector, the Opposition has three ministers. Is that correct? Would the lands minister be responsible for this sector too? So, I am going to increase your time from seven minutes to 12 minutes. So that means each of you takes four minutes. 

4.41
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Richard Sebuliba-Mutumba): Mr Speaker, I will try my level best and cut out whatever I was supposed to present. The Ministry of Works and Transport is responsible for setting policy, regulating, setting standards and providing technical guidance. It has a number of Votes - Vote 016, Vote 113, Vote 118 and Vote 500. 

There seems to have been conflicting mandates between these agents with most of the engineers from the Ministry of Works and Transport moving to the agencies, which are paying well. This has resulted into poor supervision of the works executed on the roads. We, therefore, ask the minister and the agencies created to improve its operation to stick to their mandates as stipulated in the acts. 

Still on page 3, there is what we call the transport policy. Uganda lacks a transport policy to regulate the transport industry. This has led to Uganda’s public transport sector being hijacked by political sentiments and selfish interests thus running it poorly.
 
It is this poorly run and exploited transport system that has left most urban cities to spend a significant portion of their incomes on transport to and from their work places and to some families, the burden is over 50 percent of their monthly incomes. 

We have also got a poorly run transport system. We recommend that a national transport policy be urgently put in place to address the problems in the transport industry. 

The road sector network comprises about 10,800 kilometres of national, trunk roads: 27,500 kilometres of district roads; 48,000 kilometres of urban roads and approximately 35,000 kilometres of perimeter access roads. About 3,000 kilometres of the national roads are paved with two lane highways from Kenya as a primary route for 80 percent of Uganda. Many of Uganda’s main roads have significant maintenance issues such as potholes, age break cracks and seal bleeding due to insufficient funds allocated to maintenance. The majority of the community roads have duct trucks that are poorly formed and have inadequate drainage. Most of the work is of poor quality and the road network remains dilapidated. 

On paragraph 12 of page 6, we have high costs of roads. The cost of road construction in Uganda has varied widely and has been a subject of inquiry, like my colleague the chairperson alluded to. The problem of roads in Uganda is a combination of under-spending and very inefficient spending. In recent years, the unit cost for both upgrading and maintenance of paved roads has been higher in Uganda than in any other neighbouring country and nearly twice as high as Zambia, which shares Uganda’s landlocked status. It has gone up from US $180,000 to US $1 million. As a result, the roads constructed are narrow with no provisions for walkways and cyclists. 

Many roads have no signs, road markings and no provisions for parking yet the vehicles park on them. 

Traffic Management and Road Safety

Management of traffic in Uganda is one major problem that has a negative effect on delivery of goods and services and ultimately, productivity especially in Kampala. Traffic congestion in the city contributes to losses of investment based on the value of additional time and wasted fuel. It is estimated that fuel of about Shs 500 million is lost in traffic jam in Kampala. 

The occurrence of road accidents in Uganda is one of the highest in the region. About ten people die and 43 people are injured in road accidents daily due to human error. Poor vehicle conditions contribute ten percent, road conditions contribute ten percent and environmental factors contribute five percent to our hazards. In fact, Uganda has one of the highest road accidents rates in the region and according to the UN reports the prevailing state of our roads creates a serious challenge. You can read on page 8. 

The Railway/Road Sector

The Uganda railway sub-sector is one of the most talked about in the policy maker’s agenda. We have got to look at the under-utilisation of the railway transport system that is cheaper for passenger and goods transportation as well reducing vehicle damage on the roads. The President has time and again said that expansion and rehabilitation of the existing railway line was to be done by the UPDF. There are some details regarding that. 

But my main concern, which Members should be interested in, is the concession of the RVR, which was carried out by this Parliament. In 2007, Government gave a concessional loan to RVR for management of Uganda Railways. An amount of US $10 million was advanced to RVR and conducted by Government of Uganda at the start of the concession.

The Kenya-Uganda concession of RVR has been characterised by various breaches of the concession obligations including payment of concession fees, maintenance of conceded assets, price volume and prevention of further encroachment on the railway reserves. In Tanzania the concession agreement was cancelled due to breaches in the contract but in Uganda, recently, we were surprised that instead of implementing the recommendation of Parliament in August 2010 Government instead restructured the concession to address RVR’s poor performance allegedly caused by inadequate funding and management.

We demand an explanation from Government as to why the RVR concession was restructured without the involvement of Parliament that approved the loan yet RVR had not performed to its obligations. We would like to know the likely investment outcome in the five years in the Uganda concessions and why passenger services were included and yet they were not part of the original concession.

The Government should further inform Parliament as to how they determine the shares of each country. We demand the minister to table, before Parliament, the initial concession and the restructured concession terms and the detailed account of the requirement for the restructured agreement and the shareholders, both past and present. 

We further demand that the status report on the status of the defunct Uganda Railways Corporation at the time of the concession and the implications of failure to report loans on the future operations of Uganda be availed. 

On the air transport, we are praying for our airline to be brought back. We are suffering. Travelling to Uganda has become very frustrating and for a country, which is at the forefront of wanting to attract tourists, to us this is unacceptable. 

Inland Water Transport

I am sorry hon. Members when I see time is running. We have got a problem with inland water transport. Many people have died on our water bodies. The Government should come up with a policy regarding transport on water and especially on safety and even developing transport on the Southern Route especially through the port of Mwanza in Tanzania for export/import trade to make transport cheap for our traders in Uganda. This is the only way we can make our imports affordable and exports profitable. 

To conclude, the importance of transport infrastructure cannot be over emphasised. It is clearly outlined in the national development plan. However, we are concerned that instead of increasing the budgetary expenditure to the sector, it has been reduced. This raises serious questions as to whether the NRM Government is committed to implementing the National Development Plan that works as a blueprint for moving the country forward. I challenge honourable members to put Government to task on its seriousness in meeting - 

I have gone through it that way because of time. I was given four minutes and I have tried my level best but those are the salient features. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: And then I beg to lay on the Table, for the Hansard, the response of the Opposition regarding the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Works and Transport for Financial Year 2011/12. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then next shadow minister has four minutes.

4.50
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nzoghu): I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to highlight these key issues that pertain to housing and urban development. 

First of all, Uganda is a landlocked country, which has high a high density population and experiences scarcity of land. We also note that shelter is a basic human need, next only to food and clothing. Whereas the mandate of the ministry is to ensure orderly development of urban and rural areas, there is still unplanned and inadequate housing for social economic development which, I feel the ministry has not achieved. 

The major focus of any housing policy must be the sustainable development of urban human settlement and the alternative government believes that the urban and housing policy must call for all stakeholders’ interventions within the framework of the urbanisation policy of Uganda in order to constitute the urban structures at national and local levels so that an improvement can be made on the controlled development and the spatial expansion of urban areas, particularly urban centers, using an effective planning tools.

Uganda is experiencing rapid urbanisation estimated at an annual growth rate of 8.3 percent. This is attributed to factors ranging from political to economic to social. Many urban centers have mushroomed as a result of creation of new districts that goes with town councils in areas that were never envisaged by urban planning authorities while others emerged as a result of activities mushrooming alongside the busy roads where there are bus stopovers. Others are a result of social development that demands some regional governments to have municipalities as envisaged by Article 179(4) of the 1995 Constitution. 

Unfortunately, Uganda subscribes to Millennium Development Goal No. 7 that emphasises the need to make human settlement healthier, safe and more reliable, sustainable and equitable. But clean water, sanitation, transport, electricity and other subsidies still remain a challenge in our urban centers.

I want to address myself to the following principles which I think Government would look at if we are to have sustainable urban and housing development in this country. One, the government must recognise that housing is a basic right for its citizens. Two, there is need to recognise the need to ensure that people have access to portable water and adequate sanitation. And there is also need to realise that urbanisation is regarded as a driving force for economic development and that the ministerial policy statement must seek to accelerate the development of small and medium towns which can serve as generators for economic momentum.

We wish to make the following major recommendations in respect of the various sectors:

National Urban Transport Policy

The national urban transport policy is supposed to provide safe, reliable, effective and efficient fully integrated transport operations and infrastructure which will best meet the needs of the business community and their customers. Unfortunately, in most urban areas of Uganda, it is exploitative to the operators and the road users and the cost of transport, especially for the poor, has become a menace for affordability. That is travelling in urban areas is like walking to hell. The taxi management, boda boda cyclists and walking to the city has become more risky with increased accidents including thefts. 

There is need to have a national transport policy that will make our towns more “liveable” and enable them to become the engines of economic growth. 

Mr Speaker, you recall that we have petrol stations all over. We recommend that we remove all heavy trucks from the city centers, especially the petrol tanks -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.55
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The land sector is very vital for this country and as the Opposition we consider it as a foundation for development.

We would like Government to clarify on our land assets, which are scattered in different parts of the world; the people managing it and what revenue Government earns from it annually.

We are aware that in the past, land as property that belongs to the people of this country for several years was disposed off in a manner that is suspicious. Secondly, the Opposition is very concerned about lack of demarcation, surveying and titling of land in this country. 

We take with great exception how Government has allowed encroachment of wetlands that are supposed to be reservoirs for wildlife, animals and reservoirs for water to serve agriculture for today and for the future generation.

We would like to get a report from Government as to how you intend to protect our wetlands from further encroachment for future generations.

Registration of Title Act and the interference of Uganda Revenue Authority

Mr Speaker and colleagues, this House must be concerned about the interference of Uganda Revenue Authority in transferring of titles. Under the Registration of Title Act, no body or URA, except with the power of the court, can stop transfer of land. 

The interference of URA by stopping transfer of land titles to rightful owners during transactions is going to make Government lose substantial amounts of money. We would like to advise Government that URA should stop this activity but allow transactions to continue and instead use the information to pursue the Income Tax.

Titling and Surveying of Land in the Country 

We give appreciation to the colonial government that did titling of land especially in Central Buganda and part of Western Uganda. We would like to know of a plan from this current Government that has stayed in power for over 25 years when we shall have the whole country titled so that our people in Tororo and Bundibugyo can have collateral that they can move with to the bank. This is the only way we can end peasantry farming in this country and the only way we can promote development. Land is the only security.

Finally, we are concerned as to how non citizens are allowed to acquire and own land in perpetuity. Most foreigners form companies, buy land and register it and they acquire freehold instead of just procuring lease.

The Registration of Title Act is being abused and we would like to get a report from Government of how many foreigners are operating on lease and how many of them have complied with the terms and lease of this country.

In conclusion, the Opposition and this House should be concerned with the way the Executive, especially His Excellency the President, has been giving out land to quack investors. A case in point is former Shimoni Demonstration School and land elsewhere in the country.

We are concerned about the attempt by State House to take over Entebbe Hospital that serves all the residents of Entebbe without providing any place where the residents of Entebbe will go and seek treatment.

Lastly, the last Parliament approved a loan for transforming land offices throughout the country and we were told that Ugandans would no longer hold paper titles but we were going to hold computerised electronic titles. We would like to know from Government how far this programme has gone and why the implementation of this programme is so slow. Who are the people that Government is going to hold accountable for the Uganda Government where we are now paying what is called commitment fee to the World Bank resulting from poor performance? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, my colleagues from the Opposition. I now open the general debate, which will take 30 minutes. We will stop at 5.30 p.m. Time for general contributions is three minutes strictly.

5.00
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first thank the government for having tried to put up a budget, which tends to address the pertinent issue raised in the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President. I want to use one catch word, transformation of the economy.

I am mainly concerned about the summary of the budget with regard to page 40 and development especially. I would like to observe that the Shs 101,799 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you a Member of the committee? 

MR BIRAARO: Yes, I am. I am saying something.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please sit, you know the rules.

5.01
MR MARTIN DRITO (NRM, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the chairperson of the Infrastructure Committee for a well presented paper. I need to raise an issue, which has very big economic significance to this country and the sub-region where I come from.

Almost ten years ago, feasibility studies were undertaken for a bridge on the Nile in a place called Kia Kia. Asaba Construction did their feasibility studies and thereafter also the Arab Contractors.

This bridge is of great significance to the people I represent. One, this is the biggest fish producing area in West Nile. However to access Arua town, you have to travel about 120 kilometres without that bridge. Secondly, the distance between the sub county headquarters and Ewanga is about ten kilometres if you have the bridge but without it, you have to travel another 120 kilometres in between the sub-county headquarters to Ewanga.

I feel that this bridge is also a very good access road to Southern Sudan and it would be of good importance to our economy where about 15 percent of our exports go.

There is another issue, which involves life. In the absence of this bridge for the people of Madi-Okollo to cross from Ewanga to the headquarters at Ribo, a lot of lives have been lost there through drowning. I would like to know the state of this bridge from the relevant line ministry because all the bridges that were surveyed and budgeted for have virtually been constructed. 

However, this particular bridge seems to have a problem because funds allocated for it have never been used for this particular bridge; the feasibility studies have been thrown in the dustbin year in, year out; my people are crying why they have been neglected when all the relevant activities have been taken except the operationalisation of the building of this bridge. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.04
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The other day I presented a report here about the calamity that had hit my district of Mitooma and I mentioned that some of the bridges were washed away. I would like to know what is going to be done to have these bridges reconstructed because people who are fishing are not allowed to carry their fish from the lake banks to the interior which has markets. The restriction with fisheries is that they now have to get a vehicle to transport fish to the market and yet we have grown up seeing that the only form of transport is either by bicycle or boda boda. 

We want to know whether the directive is through your office as the transport ministry or from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries – that fish cannot move to the nearby markets or into the interior for people to buy using any available means that the natives can afford. I beg to move.

5.15
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the chair and members of the committee for the report. I have two issues; the first is that when the budget was read, the people of Kanungu wanted to demonstrate because the extension of the tarmac road from Rukungiri to Kanungu to Nyakishenyi in Rubabo which had been announced in the previous budget was now omitted. For us the Members of Parliament from Kanungu – every time you are addressing people whether at a wedding or what, they stop you and ask you to comment on the tarmac road to Kanungu. I would like to ask the Minister to give us an assurance on that issue.

The road to Kanungu right now has been cut off by landslides and I do not know whether I can reach home unless I fly by helicopter. So, we would want the Minister to give us assurance that he is going to fast track –(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: I thank you honourable. I wanted to add on –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you giving him information?

MS KARUNGI: Yes. I am adding to what he has said. The bridge which is even connecting Kanungu to Rukungiri has started weakening. So if work on that road is done very fast, it will be safer for us.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you very much. The point is that for us Members of Parliament from Kanungu cannot access Kanungu now unless Parliament gives us a helicopter. (Laughter)

Secondly, I do not know how the ministry identifies the contractors because right now the road from Kampala to Masaka is under re-construction but we have an issue with the quality of the work being done by the contractor. Almost every day, there is an accident and just last night, three people from Kanungu perished and a number of them were seriously injured and are in Mulago where some of them are being amputated. 

The cause of the accident is that the workmanship is poor, the road is not well surfaced – for those of you who have driven along that road know it. The contractor also leaves most of his trucks in the middle of the road and so if you travel on that road at night, the risk of getting an accident is very high. 

I would want to ask the Ministry of Works whether they really supervise these contractors because we as lay people, who are not engineers, you can tell that there is a problem with the quality of work by the contractor and for us who travel on that route are scared that more death will occur. We recently lost a Presidential Advisor who was based in Mbarara - there is a fatal accident everyday on that road. So, I would want the Minister to comment on that. I thank you very much.

5.19
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Through you, Mr Speaker, I would like to inquire whether the quality of the roads is inspected because after constructing the roads, there are potholes and the other unfortunate part is that the potholes are named after people – they can find a big person and they give the pothole the person’s name. So, it is better that we work on that and check on the quality of the roads. I thank you.

5.20
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): I thank you. I just want to raise three points. The first is about lands; four parishes in the country were surveyed by the Ministry of Lands as a pilot study to be given land titles and the President in his campaigns assured the people of Rukarango that these land titles would be given to the owners by April this year but only 300 land titles have been delivered. I would like to hear from the Minister or the committee chairperson as to when the remaining 2,000 land titles for the Rukarango people will be delivered.

I would like to thank the Government on its commitment to repair and tarmac the Ishaka-Kagamba Road. We were promised that work would start in December this year and this was published by UNRA. People were very happy about the news. I now want to hear the minister’s assurance that work on this road is on schedule because this road has been mentioned a number of times without work commencing.

Besides that, I want to report to the ministers that this road that carries very heavy traffic from the entire Western region – from Hima to Rwanda, Burundi and Congo is already in a very bad state of disrepair. I want to know what plans they have in having it repaired as a short term measure.

Lastly is about the road construction units. We were assured that while giving out the road construction units, the Ministry and the Government would take into account the size and the population of districts. Ntungamo is one of the most highly populated districts with about 100 million people –(Interjections)- yes [HON. MEMBERS: “100 million people?”] one million people – sorry. I want to learn from the ministers when these road construction units are going to be distributed and whether you are going to honour your commitments of distributing the road units taking into account the population and sizes of districts. I thank you.  

5.23
MS OLIVA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): I thank you. I would like to appreciate the committee’s role in presenting to us their forecast. However, you find that when they are making a comment on the policy statement, I think the ministry before making that report must look at the projections of the President. 

When the President was moving around during campaigns, he promised that he would give road equipment to districts. But I do not know why in the policy statement, the reflection or forecast of that road equipment was not really put across. I do not know why the committee has not also made it as a recommendation. 

You find that when we are looking at roads, we consider all sections of Uganda but there are certain areas like Bugweri County - I am sorry but the MP is not around although I am for Iganga District that covers Bugweri County. The district tends to neglect that region and they wait for the Member of Parliament to make a contribution regarding the roads and if you forget, that area, he is going to use that as a yardstick for non performance of this Government.

Lastly, I would like to make a comment regarding the projections of how the roads are distributed. Much as we base on the budget for the Government, I will give an example of the Kampala-Tororo road which was funded by European Union. Can we also ask the minister to tell us how many roads will be funded by projects so that when we are monitoring - if those roads are under projects then we ask Government to distribute the other money to other sections? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.25
MRS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this golden opportunity. I will add my voice to the rest of the people, thanking the committee which has done this wonderful job.

We are due to petition you, because maternal mortality rate is very high in Maracha because of lack of roads. Maracha is very young district. You cannot talk of the feeder roads; it does not have a tarmacked road. When other people are talking that portions of their roads are not tarmacked, Maracha has no tarmacked road and yet Maracha lies in the main corridor of the road leading to Southern Sudan.

The roads to various parts of Maracha are so pathetic that mothers get tired before they can reach the only health facility which is far off in the middle of the district. Therefore, through you, I am appealing to the Ministry of Works that they should put Maracha high on the list of those to benefit from good roads. 

We have one road which is very long that is called Otafiire road. (Laughter) We have come very far. You all know those of you who were in Seventh and Eighth Parliament. We struggled to get that district and it happened that hon. Otafiire was Minister for Local Government and that is how the road got that name. The local people attempted to work on this road because it connects us to the next district which is Arua through Terego and this road is very bad and people cannot access the middle very easily. Even going to the trading centers is very difficult. People are also suffering from poverty and they are dying of hunger. I am asking you to look at our plight. Thank you very much.

5.28
MRS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. When I look at the plan for the ministry, No.1 is to finalise and submit the road safety policy and strategy and axle load control policy and strategy.  I have got a simple request to make that maybe before the plans are finalised, why doesn’t ministry try to enforce the road safety guidelines we already have in place? 

At times I get worried; sometime back, something like two or three years ago, there was an issue of ensuring that every bus has a speed limit. That lasted for three months and died a natural death. The next strategy was the use of safety belts in all commuter taxis and buses. I think that one lasted for less than two months and it died. It is like we are making business for other people. After procuring the safety belt, then we forget all about that. My request would be that ministry makes sure that this is enforced.

Secondly, I want to put emphasis on what hon. Tashobya said. Mubende District is fit to be split into three districts. We agreed in principal that for the time-being, we stay the splitting of the district but how are we going to benefit from the road construction units which are coming? Because if we get a unit and the district is split into three districts, it means within a year, the unit will have to break down because of the pressure of work. 

In addition, I think it is either a principle or a policy where roads adjoining districts are taken over by the Central Government. They are worked on by UNRA but today we have impassable roads which are adjoining Mubende District with Kyankwanzi District and then Mubende to Kibaale. This actually fails peasants or farmers to market their produce. So, we are requesting that we are treated like other districts and these roads are taken over by UNRA.

Lastly, there is what we call weigh bridges. We have one in Mubende but it defeats the purposes of being there. This is a weigh bridge which is put in place but it is never put to good use because all overloaded vehicles go through the weight bridge. Of course, they are given some small token and at the end of the day, they are allowed to go and this has exerted a lot of pressure on our roads and the roads are not lasting the period of time they are supposed to last. We are requesting -(Member timed out­_)

5.32
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Chairman of the Committee and my fellow Shadow Minister. I come from Bugiri District, Bukooli Central constituency where we have a big problem of land; we have big pressure on our land. Twenty seven percent of the people in Bukooli Central do not own land. They have land where their houses are which maybe half an acre or quarter an acre which is not economical at all. 

 Many people are selling this piece of land and moving to the trading centers. The fast growing trading centers or towns are in that constituency like Busowa, Buwuni, Mayuge, Kitodha - they are fast growing but they have no power. So, those people are not economically involved in what is going on in our country.

The others were fishing; they can no longer fish because there is no fish. So, we have a crisis which needs the government to address. I would like to ask the Ministry of Lands how the people of Bukooli Central can access the Land Fund so that they can go and buy land where it is.

We have been hearing of the Land Fund but it end in some parts of Uganda; it never goes to Busoga area or Bugiri. I would like the minister to tell me how my people can access the Land Fund to go and buy land so that they can be gainfully engaged in agriculture. 

If they cannot, I am asking the minister in charge of power, please provide electricity in those fast growing towns so that these people who sell their land go to those trading centers and do something gainfully instead of engaging in selling liquor and sleeping with each other and producing more children and they are not useful to the economy of the country. Mr Speaker, thank you very much.

5.34
MS JOY ARINAITWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two issues that I wish to raise to the minister; one of them is about the roads in Buhweju. Sometime back I spoke about the issue of roads in Buhweju and I specified a particular road which connects Buhweju to another district and that is Katera Road. That road was constructed almost a year ago but nothing has been done about it. I believe a road that connects one district to another benefits all the people of Uganda because there are so many benefits that come along with it. 

A few months ago, I went for inspections in Buhweju on this matter of roads. When I got there, I found that some of the contractors who were contracted did not even know the places where they had to start from. So I want to ask the minister concerned; do the contractors they get first inspect the roads they are going to work upon? I believe there is a problem and sometimes they under estimate the cost yet much is needed.  

Another issue is about the road units of the new districts. I want to emphasise that Buhweju is a hard-to-reach area and sometimes the equipment they bring is not worth working in that district. The district is hilly and rocky and it requires very unique equipment. I call upon the concerned ministry to look into this issue for the benefit of the people of Buhweju and the people of Uganda at large.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will make one more exception; I will call a representative of the UPDF, Brig. Angina. Please make your statement and then I will close.

5.37
BRIG. CHARLES ANGINA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the committee that has handled infrastructure. However, I wish to make the following comments and make some recommendations. When we look at the situation we face here in the city; they say time is money and we are losing a lot of money because of the traffic jam. Even those who are privileged to have sirens leading them, it is almost becoming useless because there is no space for vehicles to give way to ambulances and those who are privileged to have the sirens. Therefore, I recommend that we make ring roads as another way of reducing the traffic jam. I believe ring roads will be a quick solution in our infrastructure. 

The other remedy is the opportunity that God gave this nation in terms of water bodies to provide water transport. For example one could move from Entebbe to Kampala or Jinja to Kampala using a ferry. But because we are not addressing the infrastructure – (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much comrade. On the issue of water transport, attempts have been made, but Government makes deliberate mistakes of making people money and risk people’s lives. A case in point is the ferry, which the minister retorted about here; Obongi – Sinyanya ferry. The ferry was bought, and delivered last year, but the process of constructing the landing site – Government gave it to a company that does not have the capacity to build a landing site. Government is going to lose money and then risk people’s lives; an accident on water is worse than that on land. That is the information was wanted to give you in respect to Obongi.

BRIG. ANGINA: Thank you. However, I want also to emphasise that there is urgent need to drench most of these landing sites because they can be another solution to our transport system. If we do not do that, we shall lose very expensive engines. For instance, there is an investor who brought a ferry on Lake Victoria and two of our ministers were held up because they thought that the water was still deep enough, only to find out that it had been claimed due to lack of drenching. So I appeal to Government to invest in cleaning up these landing sites in time so that when we get investors, they do not lose their engines, including those that Government is planning to purchase. 

Finally, my appeal is that we should invest more in recycling plants so that most of the waste that is being dumped in the lakes – if people know that they can make some money from the stuff they dump in the lake, then they can take them for recycling and save us from having our lakes silted. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we had three shadow ministers, taking twelve minutes; so I will give you eight minutes. 

5.41
THE MINISTER OF TRANSPORT AND WORKS (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you, Mr Speaker and dear colleagues. First of all, let me thank the Chairman of the Physical Infrastructure Committee for a well-prepared report. I also thank the shadow ministers for their reports. 

My Shadow Minister said that Uganda doesn’t have a transport policy. But the fact is that Uganda has a transport policy and I am surprised that somebody at that rank did not know that. We have one; it was approved and it is functional. 

He also alluded to the fact that the maintenance of the roads is very poor; yes they are not maintained to the required or expected standards because of the funding. For example, the 10,000 km Government took over last year; we only received Shs 50 billion, which translates into Shs 5 million per kilometer. That is not enough to do proper maintenance on a murram road. So, we do remedial situations to make the roads passable; we do spot murraming or grass-cutting just to make it passable, but we cannot do proper work due to the meager funds we have. 

On the high cost of construction; we carried out a study funded by the World Bank and we are still analysing the issues. But we have to understand exactly what we are talking about. A kilometer in Kenya and a kilometer in Uganda are they the same? Are the conditions the same; the in-sheet materials may be different; the weeds may be different – it is not leaner; we have to go deeper in analysing this situation.

There has been a lot said about traffic congestion in Kampala. We know it is there and Government is seriously considering this. In the National Transport Policy, there is a sector which is specifically focusing on Greater Kampala and I am glad to report that our friends the Japanese have joined us to put up measures to decongest the city.

We are also planning with World Bank to put the Rapid Bus System – this also will assist in ferrying people. We are also increasing on the number of roads; we have the Northern Bypass. On the Kampala Entebbe Road, we are going to have a loop-up to Munyonyo and eventually we shall link it up to Namboole.

Road safety has been spoken about; this has been a concern of the ministry and I want to assure you that Government is in the process of forming the National Road Safety Authority. This will focus on road safety because now it is spread all over. It is in Works which handles the engineering issues; it is in enforcement, internal affairs,, health and education. The thinking of Government is to put an authority which will be there to overlook this monster called road safety so that they can mobilise all the ministries involved. 

There has been talk about the railway system. Presently, the railway system is not functioning; but Government is seriously handling this. You must have seen in the reports that we have done several studies and some are still going on. If you are going to do any serious work, there must be a study. You cannot do guesswork. That is why we are concentrating on the studies. Very soon, Government is going to engage people, donors and financiers to see that the Kampala-Kasese Railway line is handled after the study. With RVR, they are going to do remedial work on the Tororo-Pakwach line but at the same time, we are thinking about building a standard gauge from Malaba up to Kampala, Tororo to Pakwach, Gulu, Nimule and other areas. These are plans Government has but we must work within the funds we have.

Related to this is the alternative route, the southern route from Tanzania. You must have read in the papers that as soon as I took office, I went and signed a memorandum of understanding with the Government of Tanzania to construct a railway line from Tanga to Arusha, Musoma up to Lake Victoria. This will go up to Bukasa. We are seriously in discussions with GAUFF for the development of the Bukasa Inland Port. This alternative route is in the middle of Government thinking. We are serious about it. By December, we would have repaired MV Kaawa. It will be ready to work. 

Today, I was discussing with the officers working on this. We also want to start handling MV Pamba so that we have two vessels moving around to increase the alternatives through the southern route. Apart from that, they can also go through to Mutukula and the rest. 

Was the passenger also in the concessionaire? No, it wasn’t. But of recent, we had a meeting in Nairobi. We have already asked our technical staff to work on putting an addendum on our concessionaire to make sure that passenger services are also involved.

The RVR had a problem; both managerial and financial but these have been addressed. Last month, we were in Nairobi where RVR was signing a loan agreement with financiers. After mobilising management, the financiers got confidence and signed a loan agreement of US $164 million. From the money they are going to collect, the total is going to be US $280 million. We hope from zero to this an improvement. 

Hon. Drito talked about the bridge in Kia-Kia. This is one of the bridges going to be handled under the ABEDA funding. I must apologise there were some problems with ABEDA funding but this is being addressed and this is one of the bridges. Those from West Nile, many, up to 10 bridges which were under this project, are going to be covered when we tarmac the Oraba-Arua-Vurra road for which we have already signed a contract. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you comrade. On the issue, Mr Speaker, I also thank you. On the issue of Kia-Kia Bridge; this bridge has been on and on and on almost every financial year for the past three years. This time, the worst has happened. It has not even surfaced in the report on the policy statement. In the past, it surfaced but was not implemented. What is the use of putting an issue in the programme, getting money and not implementing it? In my view –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point is made –

MR FUNGAROO: In my view, we should build a –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the point is made.

MR BYANDALA: The point has been made. I wish hon. Fungaroo were listening! I said there was a problem with the ABEDA funding. It is being addressed and 10 of the 21 bridges –(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, honourable minister for giving way. I also thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like clarification from the minister regarding these bridges. I remember the bridges were 21 in 2005. When it came to 2008, they were reduced to 14. Now it is 2011; how much money do you have now for those bridges and how many bridges will you make? Thank you.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, hon. Baba Diri. Yes, they were 21 bridges. As I said, as we construct Vurra-Arua-Oraba Road, 10 of those are going to be included in that. The remaining are going to be handled when the funding of BADEA is finally put right. 

Hon. Kamateeka said bridges have been washed away. No, no bridge has been washed away. I think you must be talking about culverts. These are culverts and most of these –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, your time is running out. I will not give you any more time.

MR BYANDALA: These are culverts and most of them are in districts and access roads. I am going to talk to these people to ensure that they are worked on.

Hon. Lubogo, road maintenance. He talked about boda bodas –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, we have a programme for road maintenance. In the ministerial policy statement –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you hon. Minister and thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the hon. Minister in order to mislead this House by saying no bridges were washed away? When I went and inspected these bridges yesterday, indeed, they had been washed away. I am talking about the Kenjubwe Bridge that links Mitooma to Kasensero sub-county. There is also one which has not been completely washed away but part of it has been washed away; the Kiruruma Bridge. Is the minister in order to stand here and say, “No bridges were washed away,” when some were? (Interjections) Is he in order? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order. It is very improper for any hon. Member, let alone a minister, to give information that is not correct. If you are not sure of the information you are going to give, cross-check. The honourable minister is not in order. He is ruled out of order. (Applause)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker I am sorry because I was checking with my colleague and this is just recent and -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has said yesterday.

MR BYANDALA: Yes, yesterday. Because it was not yet on my desk - I have been in the West. Last week, I was in Kasese and Bundibugyo. Maybe, that is why I did not capture that one. 

Hon. Lubogo was asking whether we have a road maintenance programme. Yes, when you read the ministerial policy statement, the programme is there and in maintenance, using the Uganda Road Fund, funds are released with a road programme. 

My friend the Woman MP from Lango sub-county –(Interjections)- was talking about – Lango District –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lira?

MR BYANDALA: Lango sub-region –(Interjections)- they were talking about the land of the aerodrome which has been encroached upon. I am going to investigate this and find out more. 

Hon. Migadde talked about safety. I have already commented about safety. Honourable Baryomunsi talked about the road from Rukungiri to Rukoba. I want to assure you that this is still in our programme. Our manifesto is a five-year programme and your road is among those that will be handled.

The bridge at Kanungu; we are still constructing it. The bridge is not yet finished. 

The Masaka road accidents: I am very sorry; my condolences go to the families of those who died in accidents on this road. The contractors are trying their level best to warn drivers but our people don’t follow advice. They don’t read directions given. But all the same, I am going to talk to the contractor to improve on road safety. The quality of work –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please wind up. 

MR BYANDALA: Road maintenance equipment to the districts. These will be distributed by the Ministry of Local Government and not my ministry. So, those questions should be directed to the Ministry of Local Government. 

Roads in Buhweju; I know about that. I talked with the honourable about the contractor. These are contracts we took on before prices skyrocketed. We are in discussions to see what we can do about this. 

Traffic jam; hon. Angina, I talked about what we are going to do to improve traffic flow in the city.  Mr Speaker, because of time, I will stop there.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, you have three minutes.

5.58
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Kanungu, you deliberately just kept quiet about it. You said that the bridge had been constructed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he said they were working on it. 
		
5.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I am going to answer for the sector of Housing and Urban Development. And my colleague, hon. Achieng Sarah, will answer for Lands.

I am going to be brief. On urban development, the issue of the national urban policy was raised. I want to inform this House that we are in the process of working on the urban policy under the support of Cities Alliance under the project of transformation of settlement of the urban poor.

The second issue that was raised was to do with the physical planning law. Last year, we passed the Physical Planning Act. So, as a directorate, we have already made the regulations. They were signed by the minister and they are now under printing. We shall have them gazetted. 

The guidelines have been finalised and soon we shall disseminate them. 

Under housing, two issues were raised. As the housing sector, we are working under the guidance of PPDA, using the public-private-partnership to see that we use all the available initiatives to make the housing sector better. As you are already aware, we have many people who have come up, even in the area of housing, under real estate dealers. The housing policy is under review and is expected to be ready by the end of this calendar year.

Issues of sustainability and limited supply of land have been addressed by the condominium law, especially where it talks about high-rise buildings. Thank you so much.

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A number of issues were raised. The first one was regarding the assets owned by Government that are scattered all over the world. I would like to inform this House that it is the mandate of the Uganda Land Commission to manage these assets. However, structurally, the assets abroad are actually under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and maybe they should be the ones to be asked about the proceeds from those assets. 

Those within, the Uganda Land Commission is doing its bit and I wish to report that last financial year, approximately Shs 3.9 billion was collected from premiums and ground rent and this money was deposited in the consolidated fund.

For demarcation, surveying and titling of land in this country, you may be aware that the ministry actually embarked on a pilot programme of systematic demarcation of land in rural areas and so far this has been done in a good number of districts: Ntungamo, Masaka, Iganga, Mbarara and Mbale. Yesterday, if most of you watched television, we issued titles to beneficiaries in Mbale. We hope to rollout to other parts of the country but we first need to do an assessment in the pilot areas.  

I wish to inform hon. Tashobya, who raised the issue of Rukarango that demarcation was done and 300 titles were issued. However, our biggest constraint was that in the last two quarters of the last financial year, no funding was issued to this ministry. There was zero release. So, there were constraints. However, I want to assure you that before the end of the current financial year, we will definitely deliver the titles to all the beneficiaries in Rukarango. 

An issue was raised about URA interference in land transactions. I must say we were equally concerned. We were informed by URA that they were actually not interfering but what they wanted to do was to carry out their mandate, which is, to ensure that they collect all the relevant taxes from all those who are supposed to pay taxes. 

So, you are only supposed to declare your source income when you purchase land. However, we are arranging a meeting with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and URA so that we can streamline the process and be able to advice all Ugandans about the procedure.

The issue of wetlands; I must say that protection of wetlands in this country should be everybody’s interest. As a ministry, we do not issue a title to land that is in a wetland. I want to request anybody with information to bring it so that we can take appropriate action. For as long as a title has been issued in a wetland without approval from NEMA, we pledge to undertake our role and that is to ensure that that property, like the committee recommended, is demolished. 

On acquisition of land by non-citizens, I want to assure this House that non-citizens cannot actually be given freehold. It is only leasehold and I am not aware of any non-citizen that owns land in perpetuity. 

Another issue that was raised was on computerisation. I want to assure Members that the ministry is doing its best to ensure that we have our registries all computerised and I am glad to inform this House that computerisation of the Mailo land registry is complete and by the click of a button, we can easily tell who owns what property and where. We hope to complete this exercise by 2013. 

On the Land Fund, hon. Wafula–Oguttu, the major constraint regarding this Land Fund has actually been lack of adequate funding and that is why currently, the ministry was only handling those areas that were affected by historical injustices like Kibaale and we hope that this Parliament will appropriate adequate funds to that activity so that all the people in this country can be beneficiaries. I think those were the issues and I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, you have three minutes. 

6.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Mr Speaker, allow me table the budget for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. For the Financial Year 2011/2012, the proposed budget is Shs 19,174,226,000, which comprises of Shs 10,877,229,000 for the recurrent budget. For the development budget, the total is Shs 8,267,895,000 and taxes amount to Shs 29,102,000.

For the Uganda Land Commission, the total budget proposed for the financial year 2011/2012 is Shs 13,261,377,000. This comprises of Shs 543,877,000 for the recurrent budget and Shs 12,717,500,000 for development and there were no taxes. I beg to move. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee and the Members of this House for having made the viable comments and contributions on our report. It is my duty, in accordance with rule 177(2) of our Rules of Procedure that I move that this House adopts the report. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. As you may realise, the issues in this report are so far-reaching that in this limited time, we have not had the opportunity. There are issues that are so critical. For instance when the committee realises that bilateral air transport agreements had been signed and we know we are a landlocked country, apparently no mention has been made on how Uganda, as a land locked country can acquire an airline of its own. 

You also realise the committee wondered why it is only the KLM and the British Airways that are using the aerobridges and this was never answered to say that when ENHAS puts their ladders on the planes, each passenger is taxed and this goes to a personal or individual pocket meaning that we, as Ugandans, lose out on this yet we have the aerobridges that were used during CHOGM. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, we have to address the unit cost of the roads in this country. There is no way we can run away from this; the road unit is really skewed. In East and Central Africa, Uganda has the highest unit cost and it is a matter for which I propose and pray that you allow us ample opportunity at some other point in time, before we can wind up so that we can really look at these issues more critically and even those that are incidental to the same. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why we have adopted the report. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the Chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. And by the way, Mr Chairman, begin by laying a copy of the report on the Table since you will not read the whole thing and then proceed with the rest. You have ten minutes. 

6.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs deals with policy statements and budgets from the two-in-one Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and also deals with ten votes of other constitutional institutions. We shall try as much as possible to summarise. But I beg your indulgence that you give us a little more than ten minutes considering the amount of work and the institutions that we deal with. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is ten minutes. 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, I will only report on the observations and recommendations of the committee. Most JLOS institutions are housed in rented premises. On average, about US $4 million is spent on rent every year, which represents 40 percent of their development budgets and a loss of vital resources which could be applied to improving service delivery. 

The committee observed that the ministry’s rent is payable in dollars and for a period of two years in advance and the committee recommended that the minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should get a consultant, following the PPDA laws and regulations, to prepare a bankable project indicating the funding proposals and submit it to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to enable them source for the funds. In a joint meeting – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, I have been advised that there will be no response from the Opposition in this particular session. So, I will give you an additional five minutes. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much. Much obliged, Mr Speaker. In a joint meeting between the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the minister of justice, it was agreed that upon finalising the bankable project, the Ministry of Finance committed itself to financing 50 percent of the JLOS House while the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional had annually set aside Shs 50billion for the construction. The committee adopted this position and further recommended that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should renew its tenancy period for only one year and make arrangements to move to cheaper premises. 

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should renegotiate with landlords on the rent payable in Uganda shillings basing on the prevailing market rates.

The government should come up with a policy to address the matter of landlords who are charging for their premises in US Dollars.

 The policy statement of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and that of the Attorney-General’s Chamber was presented as one document. The committee observes that these are now two separate ministries and the two institutions seem to continue to be merged yet there was a split to create two separate ministries. 

The committee recommends that two separate policy statements be prepared next financial year since now there are two separate ministries. 

We noted that a number of offices in the ministry are vacant and we recommended that the Public Service Commission should expeditiously fill the vacant positions within this financial year since this matter has been outstanding for a very long time.

On the Centre for Arbitration and Dispute Resolution, the committee recommended that Government should fund the activities of CADER within this financial year since this CADER Bill was brought to Parliament with a certificate of financial implications and its services would reduce the case backlog in the courts of law. The committee noted that the previous similar recommendation on this matter had not been implemented by Government.

Government is spending a lot of money in respect to litigation and court awards. For example 11,942,283,901 was secured to procure an external counsel to lead the government legal team in the UK in defending Government in the arbitration case of Heritage Oil and Gas Limited v Government of Uganda. This money was to meet only arbitrational costs, travel and operational costs. The committee was not able to establish if the relevant procurement laws were followed in securing the lawyer. 

Furthermore, 37,720,000,000 was paid to Dura Cement Ltd as a result of a consent judgment and Shs 1,737,045,100 was paid to Save Samaki as a result of a court ruling. The committee was not able to make recommendations in respect to the procurement of the lawyers in the Heritage Oil and Gas case because by the time of writing this report, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs had not yet sent relevant information/documents supporting the procurement. Documentation relating to the Dura Cement Limited and Save Samaki had also not been received by the committee. 

The committee’s concern is in respect of the legal costs and the quantum of the costs and so recommends that it be allowed time to receive this information, analyse it and report back to the House in a month’s time. In the meantime, no more funds should be released in relation to the arbitration case of Heritage Oil and Gas Limited until the committee has concluded analysing this matter. 

The ministry, as of 01 July 2011, had outstanding compensation arrears of Shs 196,645,000,000. Only Shs 4.347 billion has been provided to the current court awards of the Financial Year 2011/2012 and 1.33 billion for current compensations. There is no provision for domestic arrears for court awards, human rights cases and compensation arrears in the budget.

The committee requested the Ministry of Justice to submit a list of compensation arrear claimants and their claims together with documents relating to computation of those arrears. By the time of reporting, all the required information had not been submitted. The committee, therefore, requests for a month to report back to the House. 

But in the meantime we recommend that:
(i)	Government should clear those arrears within four financial years starting this financial year by providing funds on quarterly bases.
(ii)	When paying compensation and court awards, the Ministry of Justice should follow the principle of first in first out. 
(iii)	Government should pay the co-operative unions whose assets were taken during the liberation war. This matter has been outstanding for a long time. 
(iv)	Companies whose compensation details were sought by the committee should not be paid until the committee has scrutinised their claims.  

Two Bills on oil and gas exploration are being drafted. The committee was concerned that the process of oil exploration started without any comprehensive legal framework in place. 

The committee recommends that Government should expedite the process of drafting the relevant legislation on exploitation of minerals and gas. 

The committee recommends that the budget of Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, be approved as follows: wage is Shs 3,188,773; non-wage is Shs 10,513,800,000; development is Shs 26,243,676,000 and court awards are Shs 4,347,324,000.

Electoral Commission

In summary, the committee recommends that these elections should be held before 12 May 2012 and this is a position that we arrived at in a meeting jointly held between the committee, the Ministry of Justice, the Electoral Commission and the Ministry of Finance.

The committee’s earlier recommendation that Government should provide funds for the commission to start construction of its own offices and stores went unheeded and, Mr Speaker, we are recommending that the Electoral Commission should be provided with money to have its own office and storage facilities starting next financial year. 

We are also recommending that the salaries of staff and commissioners of the Electoral Commission should be harmonised with those of other constitutional commissions in the country. 

On holding of elections and creation of administrative centers and districts, the committee is recommending that the government temporarily suspends creation of more districts and units until the elections mentioned above have been held.

The committee also recommends that Shs 856,000,000 required to pay the domestic arrears for the Electoral Commission should be provided. 

Final recommendation on this matter; the committee recommends that the Electoral Commission together with the Ministry of Finance, Development and Economic Planning and the Attorney-General should work out a workable solution in providing funds for holding the youth elections. And the committee recommends that the budget for Vote - 102 for the Electoral Commission be approved as follows:  wage, Shs 6,475,559,000; non-wage is Shs 20,749,000,000; elections is Shs 19,517,000,000; and development is Shs 445,880,000,000. The total is Shs 47,187,439,000.

Uganda Law Reform Commission

Mr Speaker, the committee was concerned about the slow pace in passing the deals that are before Parliament. The committee recommended that rule 125 of our Rules of Procedure should be strictly applied to have quick passing of the Bills.

In addition the committee recommended a Bill tracking system to be put in place by Parliament, Cabinet and the Uganda Law Reform Commission.

On 3, we are recommending that Government provides funds to the Uganda Law Reform Commission so that studies for the impact of the Land Act, which was passed in 2009, are found out; whether there is need for amendment of that law.

In five, we are recommending that we should save the money we spend in rent by supporting the JLOS House, which would in addition to other institutions, house also the Uganda Law Reform Commission.

In six, we are recommending that Government provides for Shs 288,146,151 so that the Uganda Law Reform Commission settles its statutory obligations of paying the NSSF contributions.

Finally, we recommend that the budget Vote - 105 be passed as follows: wage is Shs 648,750,000; non-wage is Shs 2,237,177,000; development is Shs 174,292,000 and the total is Shs 3,020,219,000 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is up. Give him two minutes to wind up. You will lay the report on the Table for the Hansard to capture but for our purposes, you can wind up the business now.

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the circumstances, it would appear that I cannot go very far in summarising. What I can possibly do is to lay the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement for the Financial Year 2011/2012 on the Table. But before I do that, Mr Speaker, allow me to read the summaries of the votes which I have not had time to present before this Parliament.

Uganda Human Rights Commission: wage is Shs 2,144,599,000; non-wage is Shs 2,969,189,000; development is Shs 3,519,357,000; and the total Shs 8,633,145,000.

Law Development Centre:  non-wage, Shs 4,323,694,000; non-tax revenue collection is Shs 3,145,000,000; and the total is Shs 4,323,694,000.

Uganda Registration Services Bureau: wage is Shs 473,944,000; non-wage is Shs 1,617,280,000; and the total is Shs 2,091,224,000.

Directorate of Public Prosecutions: wage is Shs 4,129,216,000; non-wage is Shs 7,590,391,000; development is Shs 997,706,000; and the total is Shs 12,717,313,000.

Judicial Service Commission: wage is Shs 651,968,000; non-wage is Shs 1,214,690,000; development is Shs 139,819,000; and the total is Shs 2,006,477,000.

Parliamentary Commission: wage is Shs 17,329,110,000; non-wage, Shs 186,687,167,000; development Shs 27,928,914,000; total Shs 231,945,191,000.

The Inspectorate of Government: wage is Shs 9,898,923,000; non-wage is Shs 12,161,235,000; development is Shs 4,578,629,000; and the total is Shs 26,638,787,000.

The Judiciary: wage is Shs 15,316,105,000; non-wage is Shs 40,259,064,000; development is Shs 14,558,370,000; and the total is Shs 70,133,539,000. 

So, Mr Speaker, that brings me to the end of my submission and I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will go to debate now. I will give 20 minutes, two minutes each.

6.34
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much. I would like to thank the committee and the ministry. I would like the minister to clarify and table a report to Parliament on the number of Judges we have as well as the number of chief magistrates and other magistrates in the country so that we know whether there is growth with population.

I would also like to ask the minister to inform the country when you are going to decentralise the Law Development Centre. In this country, training of medicine takes place in so many places but Law Development. In this country, training in Human Medicine takes place in various places but Law Development Centre has retained its monopoly for a very long time. Ugandans are now going to Kenya and Tanzania to do a bar course; so we are losing a lot of money.

Finally, it is against the Foreign Exchange Act for anybody who is not licensed to operate in foreign currency to trade in foreign currency. But there are very many landlords and hotel owners who are charging rent in dollars and pounds; this is criminal and unacceptable. I want to find out from Government when they will stop this criminality and fine these landlords. Otherwise, very soon I will move motion to the effect that your office be disciplined for non-compliance with the law. Thank you.

6.35
MR WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is about the Electoral Commission; I noticed that the committee only presented the budget for the Electoral Commission without saying anything about them – there is no literature or text about them. Did the committee interact with them? 

The other thing is that the Electoral Commission has suffered a lot of bad press; we have had elections but the observers, the courts of law and the various candidates who participated have all said the Electoral Commission is incompetent and they cannot organise elections according to the laws of Uganda. This has been said everywhere but the committee wants us to approve this money. 

Is the committee not thinking of proposing the review of the commission since the credibility of our elections has been questioned because of its incompetence? I would like the line Minister or the committee to tell me what I should tell the people of my constituency. There is something to do with the election of LCI and LCII in this budget; when are we having these elections we are budgeting for? Thank you.

6.37
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County, South): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the ministry that I happened to have worked in; can we get answers as to why out of 126 cases, only 33 are won. Why is Government losing such many cases; is it about the policy makers there? I worked there and most people think that when you are a state attorney there you connive with people outside. But when I was in court I never connived with anybody. The government has continued to lose cases in that ministry and the blame is on the state attorneys. Maybe it is time we started reflecting on what needs to be done; I would be glad to know the reasons.

On the recommendation by the committee to have policy statements next financial year, we know that there are two different ministries there; the Attorney General and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The deputy Attorney General is now the Minister of state for Justice and Constitutional Affairs and in the recommendation here, it is clear that these are two different ministries. Are we giving with one hand and taking with the other? (Member timed out_)

6.40
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for this good report but I have two issues to comment on. One of them is about rent for the Ministry of Justice. During the Sixth Parliament, there was a select committee set up to investigate ownership of that building occupied by the Ministry of Justice and the Attorney-General. Unfortunately, the committee seems to have not concluded their investigations and therefore there was no report. 

The chairperson of the committee eventually got elected as the Deputy Speaker but that aside, I imagine the committee should have gone ahead with a new chairperson who would have presented the report. But pointers were showing that actually that building belongs to the government.

The second issue concerns Parliament; one of the main functions of Parliament is appropriation and oversight. Our budget office, which is cardinal in analysing, appropriation and helping Parliament, is heavily understaffed. Economists are leaving us because Parliament is not paying well. So our function of oversight is going to be compromised if we do not have officers to help committees. Members might have observed that economists were jumping from one committee to another because you have one economist for about four to six committees -(Member timed out_)

6.42
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Vote 103: Inspectorate of Government, Shs 26.6 billion has been requested for and is due to be appropriated. I thought the IGG should stand out as an impartial ombudsman but to my surprise, it only took court to say that apart from Prof. Bukenya, let also the directors of the company that imported CHOGM cars appear in court. The indictment instead came from court and all along we were complaining why the IGG does not lift the veil and look at the directors behind the country that defrauded Ugandans. 

But time and time again, the IGG was on the defensive; defending Motorcare and its directors. It even went ahead to acquit a high profile politician involved in the CHOGM scandal. I hope as we appropriate this money, the IGG will help us - one of the Members here was remanded, though he belongs to the Opposition. Out of the 61 MPs who had not accounted for the Constituency Development Fund, why - some of us are getting perturbed when the IGG pinpoints one Member. I think there should be fairness.

Lastly, we are requesting for Shs 11.9 billion to help the government legal team in the UK defend -(Member timed out_)

6.44
MR BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest in thanking the members of the committee for this report and their good recommendations. 

My concern is about the number of judges and magistrates. There is need to increase on the number of judges because when you come to our sub-counties, you find one Grade One or Grade Two magistrate handling about four or five sub-counties and in the end, you find a lot of congestion in our prisons. I think this recommendation will come in to serve this purpose. 

Secondly, the creation of the Statutory Board on Arbitration is also very important because we have come to realise that not all issues have to be handled by lawyers all the time. People need arbitration especially when it comes to matters concerning land in our respective local areas. We want to support this recommendation and I hope it will be upheld.

There is also a problem I always hear about the Law Development Centre. The students are taught and at the end of the year, you find 500 have sat but only 50 have passed. Even colleagues here in Parliament have also fallen prey to that. Is that real teaching? What happens over there? Why should you admit 500 plus students and you end up having only 50 or 100 passing? We need to review and re-examine that. I understand that we have to keep the standards in the law profession but as a theologian and a teacher, I get concerned about the failure rate. (­Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finally, the hon. Member from Luuka [MR KYEWALABYE: “You had picked me.”] Sure? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Then I have changed my mind!

6.47
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): I thank you so much. I will talk about compensation as highlighted on pages 6 and 7. The committee recommends that all compensation be thoroughly made. But I have a suggestion that some of this compensation is made without thorough investigation. I suggest that thorough investigations are done for the compensation especially to Dura cement and HABA and all the compensations that were made in the previous period. I suggest that they are thoroughly investigated before payment is made.

The other is about the commissions of inquiry by the Ministry of Justice. I suggest that when a commission of inquiry comes up, let us get a report because some of these commissions of inquiry are set up but the reports never come out. Let us get reports from the commissions of inquiry that are normally set up by the Ministry of Justice.

We have the DPP but I am wondering why the DPP does not investigate cases before going to court. We are losing so many cases because of insufficient investigations by the DPP’s office. I suggest that they spend more time and resources if necessary to investigate cases before they are thrown out.

On workshops and training; there is a lot of money given for workshops and training but do we make a follow up to ensure that the objectives of the workshops are achieved? I suggest that for some of these workshops that waste a lot of money, we need to look at the objectives of the workshop and training and then follow up instead of people just going for workshops and yet we can prioritise and allocate that money to some other important acts.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you have five minutes.

6.49
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen) (Rtd) (Kahinda Otafiire): I thank you. I will begin with the question of the judges. Right now we have got the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal fully constituted. We have 56 judges but unfortunately, we have 39 Chief Magistrates which number we would like to raise to an appropriate level so that at least a Chief Magistrate is responsible for a minimum of three districts. 

We would have been very happy if every district had a Chief Magistrate but our resource envelope does not allow for the time being. I hope that with time, we shall be able to cover every district with a Chief Magistrate. As for the lower cadre magistrates, I did not pay attention but I will bring the information later on. 

We are proposing to increase capacity for the LC III courts. We are holding a debate among ourselves to see whether we can introduce the cadre of Judge Advocate for the LCIII courts who will guide them and by so doing; we improve on their capacity and scope of operations so that they handle many of the cases that actually end up in the traditional judicial system. With that, all these other cases that can be handled by the civilian courts are done in order to decongest our prisons and help the justice system. 

On LDC; funds willing, we are thinking about having up country centers in the four regions. LDC will be in charge of teaching, the syllabus and examination. But then we would like to have a centre in Northern Uganda, Eastern Uganda, Southern Uganda and Western Uganda so that LDC is able to cope with the number of the lawyers we are producing and also have an increase in the teaching staff so that we do not have congested classes like we have at the moment. 

Currently a class at LDC, especially for the Bar Course, is about 600 people and honestly I do not know whether that is a class or a rally and no wonder they fail because even marking and so forth – but we are doing our level best to make sure that we deal with this situation.

On the landlords who charge rent in dollars – now that is not my responsibility but I think for the ministry of finance. Hon. Members of Parliament, you ask the minister of finance why these fellows break the law when it is obvious.

About the competence of the courts of law – you know there is an African saying that everybody that dies has been bewitched. Our people do not know how to lose. Hon. Members, when you go to court and you are two, one of you has to loose –(Interjections)- you cannot go to court – in every litigation where there are two parties, one of the parties has to lose but unfortunately when the parties loose, they say the judicial officers have been bribed. People do not accept loss. 

As far as the Ministry of Justice is concerned especially the Attorney-General’s department – the biggest problem we have with the Government losing cases is because the relevant ministries do not give sufficient information to the advocates who go to court. You can bear with me that we are sending advocates to court on behalf of the Government but the ministries that are responsible do not give sufficient evidence. The officers do not go to court to testify and so what do you expect the judge to do? (Member timed out_)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much, hon. Minister. Mr Chairman, three minutes.

6.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE (Mr Stephen Tashobya): I thank you. I would like to associate myself with the comments made by the Minister for Justice. On the Electoral Commission, hon. Wafula wanted to know whether a timeframe of holding these elections has been agreed on.

I want to report that the committee was of the strong view and we shared Parliament’s concern about holding these elections because it is a constitutional and legal command and we agreed that they must be held by the 12 May 2012. We shall require the Electoral Commission to furnish us with a road map towards that purpose and we have had the commitments from the Ministry of Finance to fund these administrative units’ elections. 

On the matter of the competence of the Commission, I think I am not able to comment but what we are providing for is the Electoral Commission. Whoever is put in place or whoever is in place, I am not able to comment on that.

Hon. Obua raised a matter about the Minister of State for Justice holding the same portfolio as the Deputy Attorney-General. We agree with you. If you read our report, we shared the same views and this is a view we think we should take up with the appointing authority to sort out.

Hon. Kasirivu raised a matter of the office block housing the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Mr Speaker, I would suggest that if indeed that was the position, then you can re-activate a similar or a new committee to investigate this matter and come up with its recommendations to this Parliament.

Hon. Ssekikubo talked about the IGG; that at times it may not be impartial in doing its work. Those are the views of hon. Ssekikubo but what we can say as a committee is that in spite of what he has mentioned, the IGG in the last year carried out a record number of investigations and concluded them. They also had a record number of prosecutions which were successful. So, as we look at hon. Ssekikubo’s concern, this other aspect should also be looked at.

Number of judges and magistrates; if you read through our report, we are also gravely concerned but the root cause of failure to have magistrates and judges is the absence of not having a Judicial Service Commission. If you do not have a Judicial Service Commission, you cannot recruit these judicial officers and you cannot also discipline them. So, we are calling upon the appointing authority to honour his constitutional obligations of appointing these commissioners so that they can do their work and perform their mandate as provided for in the Constitution -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just make your prayer now.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank honourable members for the contributions that have been made on our report and the statement of the minister and I would like to thank my honourable colleagues, the members of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. I realised that our committee has a very big and wide mandate but we worked tirelessly to have this report in place in time and with those comments, I beg to move that the report submitted to Parliament be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay it on the Table. Did you lay it on the Table?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, I am much obliged. It is now my pleasure to lay the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2011/2012 on Table and move that this Parliament adopts them. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations to all those who have been able to make it today. (Applause) Thank you very much for persevering up to this time. Just two announcements:

One, I would like to record my disappointment with the Ministry of Finance. There are four ministers in the Ministry of Finance and it is very surprising that none of them is in this House. 

Hon. Chief Whip, please, pass the message of my displeasure at this conduct and it should be corrected because it is going to jeopardise future business should none of them be in the House. I thank the hon. Ephraim Kamuntu for accepting to hold the brief of the Ministry of Finance even if he left there a few months back. (Applause)

Hon. Members, we have six committee reports remaining. The Committee on Social Services, the Committee on Natural Resources, the Committee on Presidential Affairs, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and of course by design, we put this one to be last otherwise, they are ready. Finance, Planning and Economic Development said they were ready but they had been told to present last. 

Chairpersons of the remaining committees, please make sure these reports are ready for the next business of Parliament so that we can finish all these reports in one day. Why I am saying so is because we have a deadline imposed by the Budget Act on us that these reports must be finished by the 31st of August of every year and today is 29th, that leaves us with only two days, one which will be a public holiday from information I have got.

We have been monitoring closely to see when the public holiday will be. The last consultation we had which was about 15 minutes ago, they said the announcement will come at 8.00 p.m. It is 7.00 p.m.; we cannot wait till 8.00 p.m. to get that announcement. Therefore, I am going to make the following orders on my adjournment of this sitting.

This House stands adjourned to tomorrow at 10 O’clock but should it be announced that tomorrow is Idd El-Fitr; and then the House will be adjourned until Wednesday 10 O’clock. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.02 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 31 August 2011 at 10.00 a.m.) 

