Thursday, 25 August 2011

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the communication is going to be very brief. I have two matters to communicate. The first is that today in the mid-morning, we received a petition from children; a very emotive petition that was presented against child sacrifice. They have even gone ahead and proposed some framework for legislation, which they think could be adopted and worked upon. It is a serious matter and I am encouraging Members to take more interest in it and see how to move this matter forward because it is becoming a big problem in this country.

Secondly, the committees chairpersons; we had expected that these matters of the budget were going to be finished within the timeframe provided by the Budget Act.  We passed the Budget Act as Parliament; we should be the ones to follow what it says. By the 31st of this month, we should have finished this budget process and let the Government begin operating on what it should be doing. But as of now, the committee chairpersons are not ready with the reports and it is affecting the work of this House very badly. 

The Speaker raised this matter earlier, and just for emphasis, I need to raise it with you again. Chairpersons of committees, please submit your reports urgently so that we can have a proper schedule and have this matter done within the timeframe provided by the Budget Act. Otherwise, we will start violating laws which we passed ourselves, which would not be very good. We had agreed that we will be doing two reports every day, but it turns out today that there is only one report ready and that is not very good. So, we should do something about that.

My third and final communication is that there has been some discussion on Rule 40(2) on ministerial statements. There have been two positions here, one that is contained in the printed book, and I am also advised from the Clerk’s department that on the 27 February 2007 that same Rule 40(2) was amended, in effect, making all ministerial statements in the House debatable. 

I can read for purposes of those who do not have the text of the amendment, which was done on the 27 February 2007. Rule 40(2) reads as follows: “All statements made by ministers shall be debated. Debate on a ministerial statement shall be restricted to the issues raised in the minister’s statement and shall not exceed one hour.” That is what the rules say. So, we will be using these rules to guide us in the proceedings that will follow because I have seen on the Order Paper there is such an item. Thank you.

2.39
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you. I rise to express a matter of national concern. This is to inform the honourable House and the whole country at large that Mitooma District was hit by heavy rains that came with strong winds and hailstorms that destroyed crops, schools and people’s houses. Four sub-counties were affected and these are: Mitooma Town Council, Kashenshero Town Council, Kabira sub-county, Bitereko and Kashenshero sub-county. 

In these areas, banana plantations are down; millet gardens have been washed away and all crops have been destroyed. Four bridges were washed away. These are: Rubaya in Mitooma Town Council, Kenjubwe that joins Mitooma with Kashenshero; Kiruruma, which crosses a UNRA road – the culverts were destroyed - and Rushaaya bridge which joins Mitooma district with Rukungiri through Kanyabwanga. This is a Central Government bridge.

Mr Speaker, five schools had their roofs blown off. Bwibaale Primary School had entire classrooms and the staffroom destroyed. Mushunga Primary School, Kagaba Primary School, Nyakizinga and Nkinga Senior Secondary Schools had their roofs blown off. 

Four houses in Kibingo parish were completely destroyed and two Friesian cows belonging to Mr Saidi Kakuru in Kibingo were hit by a tree that had fallen because of the heavy rain. 

We pray, Mr Speaker, that Government provides cement and iron sheets for the damaged schools: Bwibaale, Nkinga, Nyakizinga, Kagaba and Mushunga. That Government provides planting materials like Irish potatoes, sweet potato vines, cassava, maize grain, beans, millet and coffee seedlings so that people can plant right now. 

We pray that the district budget, now that we are at a time of budgeting, be increased so that the district caters for the bridges that have been washed away. So, the budget on roads and works should be increased. 

We also pray that food relief should be provided to the 1,387 families that have been affected and this could be in form of maize flour, beans and rice. I thank you.

2.43
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the colleague for raising matters of national concern. I know the issues the honourable Member has raised are really not limited to her district. The whole country is actually having calamities on climate change. I think there is need for Government to come up with a broader and comprehensive statement on how we intend to handle these problems because it is really covering the whole country. I do not know whether each Member will now be given time to talk about the problems in each constituency, which is actually going to be the case. So, I would like to know from the Leader of Government Business what steps the government is taking in trying to mitigate this situation. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.44
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to express our sympathy to my sister hon. Kamateeka for that damage and disaster. Natural calamities are always there. I am sure we all watch CNN and other channels - there is the Monsoon season and the distruction happens. There is also the season for the hurricanes in the States and they even disorganise great and powerful states like the United States, like we have watched over the past years. Definitely, the environment has changed a lot and we are now also experiencing some of those natural calamities. 

Mr Speaker, we have the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness to which most of these disasters, when they happen, should immediately be addressed so that in the end, Government can handle them. So, in a way, Government has prepared itself because there is a Ministry responsible to address those issues and where the capacity is not enough, more efforts and resources will be provided by Government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chief Whip. I do not know how far we have taken the provision of Article 157 to try and deal with this kind of situation that we do not plan for. Article 157 is on contingency funds and Parliament is by law supposed to make some provisions in relation to that. Are we taking that up or is it still something pending?

MR NASASIRA: No, Article 157 is still work in progress. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If that could be hurried it might help.

MR NASASIRA: Yeah, definitely I will.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because if you have a standby fund to deal with these matters then the responses will be faster. I think - Yes, hon. Ssewungu? Or was anybody going to speak on the same matter that hon. Kamateeka raised? 

2.46
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish also to express my sympathy to my sister hon. Jovah Kamateeka. I also wish to add my voice to the hon. Dr. Epetait who has said that it is a matter of national concern. 

In Rwampara of late, we have had a number of bridges washed away. We have had gardens downed, plantations and schools downed and many more others. I am surprised that my Chief Whip is saying that the Ministry of Disaster is there. The Ministry of Disaster has said before that it is not prepared and everybody remembers when we formed a forum on disaster. So, it is actually prudent of this Parliament that we must now expedite the issue you raised, Mr Speaker, of the contingency fund. 

As a member of the natural resources committee, I note with concern that there is a very big problem in Uganda. Our focus has shifted I do not know to where. We used to have predictions, especially in the Meteorology Department. In 1977, we had 1,066 stations that would predict weather. Today, we only have 240 and you wonder why we had more in 1977, and we have less now. And the reason why our farmers cannot predict the weather - the rainfall is too much, some roads are cut off; go to Karamoja, Mbale and everywhere - and the Meteorology Department has not been attended to.

Mr Speaker, I am begging very kindly that this House pays due attention to the Meteorology Department. Most of these rains have come at a time when people do not expect them and they have done wonders for our crops but worst of all, most of our people have resorted to witchdoctors to determine when the next rain will come and the next sunshine. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope you have captured that in your report that will be presented in Parliament. If you have, then we could save time and actually give it a good treat when we come to discuss that statement if it is contained there.  Would that be proper?

MR MUJUNI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: OK. 

2.49
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to share the passion of hon. Kamateeka and also to share with Dr Epetait about this issue cutting across all the districts and, therefore, becoming an issue of national concern. 

The Government Chief Whip has just reminded us that there is a Ministry of Disaster, but maybe Members of this House need to have information about how disaster is managed in that ministry. When we get such serious cases and we the honourable Members of Parliament have nowhere to run to, because every time you go to the Ministry of Disaster it is disaster itself. Mr Speaker, we fail to have anything to say when our constituents are looking at us and we are just crossing over to them to become voiceless yet we pledged to be their voice. Can we, therefore, be educated on the procedure of how whatever resource is there, small or big, can be accessed in such cases? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May the Government Chief Whip say something on this matter.

2.51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): First of all, it is not a ministry for disaster; it is the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness. (Laughter) When you call it a ministry for disaster, you wish it really bad. 

Mr Speaker, as you know, we are in the process of presenting our policy statement and, therefore, I would want to promise this House that when the time comes for discussing the policy statement of the Prime Minister’s Office where the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness falls, we will come with a comprehensive statement giving the process and the mechanism of the system that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees follows so that Members can be fully informed about the process they should follow when such a disaster happens in their areas, so that their respective cases are addressed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Cerinah Nebanda, still on the same matter? No, I think we should close this matter now after the guidance from the Chief Whip. Yes.

2.52
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have risen to also contribute and thank my honourable colleague for bringing up that issue. I want to give - in fact, Mr Speaker, I want the honourable Minister of Disaster to come and tell us the challenges he is facing - (Interjections)- Disaster Preparedness. Why I am not adding the word “preparedness” is because they are not prepared. That is why I am saying disaster. 

What is happening is that at the beginning of this year there were heavy rains in my area, Butaleja District. The rains started from Butaleja District and then Namutumba. We all raised alarms but only the people of Namutumba were helped and my people were not helped. This month we had heavy rain in Butaleja District before Karamoja, but the people of Karamoja were helped before the ones of Butaleja. When I called the minister he told me that the ministry has only three trucks. The whole country has only three trucks! Sincerely, how can three trucks be able to serve the whole of this country? 

So, there is a big problem in this ministry that has to be solved. Let the minister come and present the issues in Parliament so that we also see how to help them. My people even went to the extent of striking on Monday because for almost a month, the road has been closed and this is the main road from Mbale to Butaleja, just like the main road from Kampala to Entebbe. It was blocked and people went on strike because they did not have food and that is when they were helped. So, I am requesting the Chief Whip and the Leader of Government Business that if more money is needed in this ministry, let the Parliament know, but the minister of disaster – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it has been clearly put that there is a ministerial statement coming on this matter. There is a committee going to report on this particular matter and the details could be raised and discussed at that particular time. 

2.54
MR GONZAGA SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also have a matter of national concern. We have MIG jet fighters flying all around Kalungu District and it began on Monday. These jet fighters make very loud noise and we are disturbed because this noise is very dangerous and it could affect our ears. My people last heard of this noise in 1979 during the Tanzanian war, when they captured the former Masaka District. Hens have stopped laying eggs because when they are going to lay and they hear this noise, they fail. 

But what I am worried about is that on New Year’s Day, when one wants to blast fireworks, they have to apply for permission from the Police and then make the public aware. Our Police in Kalungu District are not aware of this problem and in case these MIGs – they are four – crash within the constituency and cause accidents, who will be responsible? 

Secondly, what is so difficult for the Ministry of Defence to pass an announcement that there will be jetfighters flying throughout the week in Kalungu? People are no longer going to their farms to dig. In Kalungu West, we have a place called the Daughters of Mary where the elderly nuns stay and these people may be killed because of the noise. 

My question to the Ministry of Defence is, when will this business end so that I can inform my people. What is the cause of this to the area? Is it only Kalungu West that has the best terrain for trying out the ways and strength of these old jet fighters? 

Finally, I want to get an answer on why the Ministry of Defence failed to at least inform the Police, the area Members of Parliament or the LCV chairperson so that we could make these people aware of this business of jets flying around and the pollution they make. We need to tell them not to be scared so that they can wait for them and spend about five days looking at the jetfighters, if that is what Government wants them to do. Otherwise, the noise in the constituency is too much and we need an answer from the Ministry of Defence, mainly on who the insurer is in case they crash or, on who is going to pay back for these people’s lives in case they die? I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it would have helped us a lot if you had met the Minister of Defence early in the morning and then came here because I do not see the Minister of Defence here –(Laughter)– oh, the Chief Whip is here. 

2.57
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some time back, I raised this issue that if we are abiding by our rules and if one thinks it is a matter of national importance, it would be better, first of all, to follow the process - I think it is Rule 25 - and ask your question or if you have to come and present this matter on the Floor, at least inform the Speaker so that the government side is informed in time for you to get an appropriate answer. But I am sure these jets do not only fly over Kalungu although it is only Kalungu West that has complained about the noise. Knowing the speed of military jets, they must take about a second to cross Kalungu. 

But all the same, I want, on behalf of Government, to apologise about the noise and any scare that may have been brought to the people of Kalungu. Please assure your people that there is no threat to their lives and no jet is about to crash in Kalungu. Maybe if you find it necessary, there may be a general announcement when they are doing their aerial training or practises because we have to train in Uganda. We cannot train outside Uganda with our jets; our air force has to train in our country. So, we will find an appropriate way. But I want you to go and assure the people of Kalungu that there is no threat to their lives and the jets are not about to crash in Kalungu. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, hon. Chief Whip. If it were that they just fly through the constituency, I wouldn’t mind, but they spend more than an hour there and I have recordings on my phone; people inform me and ask me to listen to the noise. So, that is why I raised this point because if they spend an hour flying through the district, then that is too long. And for the other process that you mentioned, I think that is what I followed. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, yesterday there was a petition handed in to the Speaker by civil servants of the Islamic faith, requesting that their salaries be paid before Idd day celebrations. We thought that this was a matter of urgency and we should make a statement on this. 

Mr Speaker and Members, it is Government policy to pay salaries of public officers by the 28th of every month. I wish to inform the House that my ministry has considered the request and had thought that there was need to pay salaries before Idd day and in accordance with the mandate of the ministry, we are ensuring that salaries for the month of August 2011 will be deposited to individual bank accounts by the 28th of this month. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I. THE REVISED REVENUE EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012

II. THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS ON THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

3.02
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Mr Speaker and Members, I bring you apologies of my chairperson, hon. Florence Kintu. She is unable to be with us today; she is still outside the country. We have produced a report as a committee. It is a heavy report, but with your guidance, Mr Speaker, I will go straight to the emerging policy issues from the various policy statements of this sector. 

There are two copies of documents; there is a detailed report and an executive summary. Through you, Mr Speaker, I request that these documents be circulated. 

This report covers the Ministry of Local Government, the Local Governments, Finance, Ministry of Public Service and the Public Service Commission. The budget performance of the sector last year; the activities implemented and their targeted activities this year, are in the detailed ministerial policy statement. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to highlight the key emerging policy issues and the recommendations of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. 

1.  Creation of new districts

The committee observed that the number of new local governments has been increasing significantly in the recent times. The number of the new districts rose from 79 in June 2009 to 111 in July 2010. Town Councils increased from 105 to 165, municipalities from 13 to 22. And we observed that much as the new districts are requested for so as to take services closer to the population and other reasons genuinely given by the population, it is important that Government seriously considers the resulting administrative cost burden of creating the new local government units. 

We observed that the new local government units have not been matched by commensurate resources to make them fully operational and achieve the desired objectives of governance and development.

It is the recommendation of the committee, therefore, that creation of new districts be halted, pending the report of the study which is being carried out by the Ministry of Local Government on the viability of new local governments. The study should be completed, in any case not later than March 31, 2012. 
Government should provide a clearly phased programme with acceptable proposals for the financing, equipping and staffing of all new districts to be created. 

We also urge the Ministry of Local Government to ensure equitable sharing of assets and liabilities between the mother districts and the new ones at the time of splitting.

2. Urban planning

The creation of a Ministry in charge of Urban Development has not resulted in meaningful improvement in physical planning of the urban areas. We note as a committee that many of our towns are an eyesore of unplanned and unregulated developments, poor physical infrastructure, poor sanitation, traffic congestion and slums, to mention but a few.

We recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development in consultation with the Ministry of Local Government, produce a policy on urban planning and ensure enforcement of the plans. 

3. Staffing Gaps in Local Governments and Hard-to-Reach Areas 

Mr Speaker, it is the observation of the committee that local governments have serious manpower challenges, especially the new districts, which we found to have only on average 7 percent of the approved staff structures. Remote areas which are hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay find it extremely difficult to attract and retain qualified staff and this constrains their capacity to deliver effective services. Typically, hard-to-reach and stay areas are characterised by adverse and harsh natural conditions, poor roads, lack of electricity and lack of accommodation for staff, etcetera.

The committee recommends that Government should take the necessary measures to fill up to 65 percent of the staffing structure of all local governments so that they are able to provide better services.  

We also recommend that the ‘hard-to-reach’ package should apply to all civil servants in those districts categorised as ‘hard-to-reach’ across the board, and it should be increased from 30 to 50 percent.
 
4. Election of the LC I and LC II Councils

Whereas the national elections were held regularly, the elections of the lower councils have not been held for a very long time. This is contrary to Article 181(4) of the Constitution. This has resulted into problems of governance and increased lawlessness.  

We note too that leaders elected on party tickets in these lower councils may find it difficult to exercise impartiality as courts of law.

We are, therefore, recommending that Government should expedite the process of holding the elections of lower councils. Government should also reconsider the judicial powers of local councils in view of the necessity of separation of powers in governance.

5. Councillors’ Allowances

Councillors’ remuneration and facilitation is subjected to 20 percent of the locally generated revenue. We find wide variations in the remuneration of councillors between districts as a result of differences in resource endowments. Generally, local governments have serious revenue challenges. Councillors are, therefore, surviving on very meagre allowances, yet many of them by law resigned their jobs to serve as leaders and offer this service to our communities. 

We, therefore, recommend that Government should review the payment of local councillors, with a view of paying them salaries, with effect from next financial year.

6. Bicycles for LC I and LC II Chairpersons

Mr Speaker, the agreement to supply 70,000 bicycles for the LC I and LC II chairpersons was signed on the 26 November 2010 with a delivery period of three months; that is, bicycles of Shs 70,000 were supposed to reach the district headquarters by the end of February 2011. We found that the supplier was paid 40 percent of the contract sum, amounting to US $1,719,454.58 upon receipt of copies of documents purportedly submitted by the supplier as shipping documents for 30,000 bicycles. However, since that time, the supplier who is of Indian origin, has now defaulted and the local contacts in Kampala cannot be traced. Although the contract was terminated by the Ministry of Local Government, the money was not recovered.

The committee finds substantial discrepancies in this contract and recommends that an express forensic audit be carried out on the entire transaction and the officers concerned be held responsible for the loss incurred. (Applause)

7.	Local Government Finance Commission (LGFC)

Mr Speaker, the Local Government Finance Commission is central to the realisation of Governments objective of building strong local authorities capable of financing their programmes. However, the commission is faced with capacity gaps stemming from resource inadequacy. 

Whereas under the national development programme the Local Government Finance Commission requires at least Shs 3.7 billion annually for implementation of its strategic activities, the MTEF only allocates Shs 1.7 billion, which is moreover subjected to budget cuts. 

The committee recommends that the Local Government Finance Commission should be protected from budget cuts. 

We also recommend that an additional Shs 0.9 billion be provided towards implementation of the commissions NDP prioritised actions for the financial year 2011/12. 

8. Local Governments Financing Study

Local governments depend up to 95 percent on Government transfers for their financing. We find that there is a lot of political interference in the collection of local taxes, which has crippled the ability of local governments to collect their own revenue. The LGFC has proposed a holistic study on local revenue aimed at addressing this challenge by suggesting practicable and sustainable means of financing local governments.

The committee recommends that the commission should expedite the proposed study and provide for mechanisms to compensate local governments for revenue lost as a result of undue interference by political leaders.

9. Total Transfers to Local Governments

The total transfers to local governments this year are estimated to increase to Shs 1.655 trillion as compared to last year’s budget of Shs 1.484 trillion. This represents an increase of 11.6 percent. Nonetheless, we note that the total estimated revenue collection of Government is expected to grow by 13.4 percent from about Shs 5.1 trillion to Shs 6.29 trillion.

The proportion of total local government transfers to the total National Budget has dropped by about six percent this year from 23 percent last year to only 17 percent this year. This is a very serious issue. I worked with the Local Government Association some five years ago, and the proportion of the local government’s Budget of the National Budget had risen up to 34 percent. This has progressively reduced and this year we are talking of only 17 percent.

The committee recommends that Government should match its commitment to its goal of improving service delivery with adequate resources channelled to local governments to enable them make their contribution towards achieving this goal. It is the local governments that deliver the services to the population. Therefore, they should be financed and the recommendation of the committee is that the local government budget should not be less than 35 percent of the National Budget in any given financial year.

The unconditional grant of all local governments has decreased from Shs 156.944 billion to Shs 151.155 billion. The unconditional grant is protected by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (Seventh Schedule) and that is the very final page in our Constitution. We find it un-constitutional to reduce the unconditional grant in the current circumstances of inflation. The unconditional grant is supposed to be subjected to price changes. If there is an increase in the prices of commodities and if there is an increase in the responsibilities of local governments, then the unconditional grant is supposed to increase. So, we are surprised that in the current conditions, the unconditional grant is going down.

We are, therefore, recommending that this grant be protected from budget cuts as enshrined in the Constitution. We further recommend that additional Shs 15.5 billion be provided for the non-wage unconditional grant, so as to enable LGs meet the minimum costs of their operational requirements.

10. 	Graduated Tax Compensation

Graduated-tax Compensation has reduced this year by 7.5 percent from Shs 44.456 billion last year to Shs 41.161 billion this year. Graduated Tax compensation is this year, in or under the non-wage component of the unconditional grant and we think this is done to give the impression that local governments have funds adequate for operational purpose, when they actually do not. 

We are, therefore, recommending that Graduated Tax compensation be separated from the non-wage component of the unconditional grant. Let it stand alone and let Members know how much has been provided for local governments as Graduated Tax compensation.

The law should be amended to provide for extension of the compensation for another period of three years as efforts are made by Government to look for another source of revenue.

The Ministry of Local Government and the Local Government Finance Commission should review the entire framework of Local Government financing so as to provide effective sources of revenue for the local governments. We recommend that this be done by the end of this financial year. 

11.	Equalisation Grant

This has continued to stagnate at only Shs 3.4 billion since its inception and yet the key parameters for this grant such as population and the number of districts have increased. Despite the fact that the intention of the grant is noble, which is to equalise for the relatively poor areas, the amount is too small to make any impact.  

We are, therefore, recommending, as a committee, that our earlier recommendation of the last Parliament be upheld that the Equalisation Grant be increased from Shs 3.4 billion to a minimum of Shs 6 billion as recommended by the Local Government Finance Commission. 

12. 	Wage Bill of Local Governments

This year the wage component of the unconditional grant has been separated from the non-wage component. To us, this gives a full picture of the unconditional grant. Indeed, it shows that out of the Shs 112.2 billion for the grant, Shs 86 billion is for wages, leaving only Shs 25.6 billion for decentralised services. 

The provision of the wage component itself is far less than the amount required for staff in post, virtually in all districts as of June 2011. Local governments will no doubt need supplementary budgets for salaries unless something is done. We are, therefore, recommending that it is bad practice to budget and you expect a supplementary budget right from the start. 

Local governments should be provided with the required wage bill in its totality to cover staff in post, in order to avoid supplementary budgets in form of wage shortfalls this year. 

13.	Prioritisation of Budget Allocations towards Service Delivery

Government priority objective this year is to improve service delivery as the means to eradicate poverty. However, the committee wants to note that there is lack of adherence to this objective, which is noble, by line ministries, departments, and agencies of Government. There continues to be substantial budget outlays for seminars and workshops, stationery, travel abroad and inland, consultancies and so forth.

Mr Speaker, we have given you an example found in that table. Let the Members just look at say the column on seminars and workshops. The instruction is that this year, the provision for workshops and seminars should decrease. In the Prime Minister’s Office, last year it was Shs 8.6 billion and this year a slight decrease to Shs 7.8 billion. 

In the Ministry of Public Service, last year it was Shs 720 million; this year they are budgeting for Shs 2.12 billion. In the Ministry of Local Government, last year the budget for seminars and workshops was Shs 6.56 billion. This year they are increasing it to Shs 8.83 billion. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the very honourable minister who gave this instruction in the budget speech, last year, the budget was Shs 6.3 billion. This year the budget is Shs 11.02 billion. 

In the Ministry of Water and Environment, last year it was Shs 4.75 billion. This year they are increasing it to Shs 7.12 billion. You look across the board to the other items where we had this instruction and we do not see any element 	of consistency with the policy statement.

The committee, therefore, recommends that all sectors be subjected to the implementation of the presidential directive as was given in the Budget Speech, and all savings realised be sent to local governments because this is where service delivery can be realised.

14. 	Return of unspent funds to Central Government Treasury

According to the Public Finance and Accountability Act (2003) Section 19, local governments are obliged to return all unspent conditional grants as at 30th June to Treasury. This legal provision affects the absorption of funds by local governments.

Mr Speaker, I was looking at some of the figures we got from talking to CAOs, and the total I had got was coming to Shs 70 billion, which local governments are supposed to return to Treasury. But if we took into account the fact that some fourth quarter releases reach local government accounts in June, and if we are aware that these are funds appropriated by Parliament for services and yet LGs are constrained by the commitment control system and late release of funds by the ministry, then this committee is right to recommend that the Ministry of Finance be compelled to ensure timely release of funds. Where it can be verified that funds were released late, LGs should be allowed to retain the money and use it as per their work plans. (Applause)

15.	One percent VAT for Local Governments

Mr Speaker, your committee has investigated on the issue of one percent VAT for local governments. The Mahler Report which recommended a one percent increase in VAT advised that the funds be put in a designated Local Government Fund where it would be distributed to local governments, in view of the abolition of graduated tax. 

The committee found that the recommendation was adopted by Government and subsequently VAT was increased from 17 percent to 18 percent. However, the idea of the Local Government Development Fund was never implemented by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We, therefore, recommend that Government should remit the one percent VAT to the local governments to ease the current revenue crisis they are facing.

On payment of agency fees by URA to local governments, we found that local governments are collecting taxes on behalf of Uganda Revenue Authority and other agencies of Government without charging fees. 

The committee learnt that it is the considered view of the local governments that the Local Governments Act Section 80(3) is adhered to because it provides that units that collect fees on behalf of Government should be paid agency fees. We, therefore, recommend that with effect from this financial year, URA provides agency fees for local governments since they collect taxes on its behalf.

Mr Speaker, on payment of royalties to local governments, the current arrangement for sharing royalties from oil, gas, electricity, national parks, minerals and protected areas are inadequate and have left the local governments disadvantaged. They cannot claim the royalties due to lack of guidelines for revenue sharing. The sector ministries do not remit what is due to the local governments. 

The Committee recommends that the Local Government Development Fund should produce and disseminate the guidelines for revenue sharing of the different categories of royalties. 

Under the Ministry of Public Service, there is the issue of the Civil Service College. The committee found out that the Civil Service College has serious implementation challenges. The project does not have ownership over the land it purports to have in Jinja. Feasibility studies, assessments, field visits and all other activities carried out by the Ministry on the basis of the Civil Service College at Jinja, were based on a college that did not exist and land that the Ministry did not own. 

The land in question located on Kisinja Road along the Nile Crescent in Jinja Municipality, was allocated to private developers. The Uganda Land Commission has an uphill task to relocate allocatees of the plots; cancel the titles of the allocatees and enable the Ministry of Public Service to acquire a title to the land. 

In the meantime, the Ministry too, still has to enter into formal arrangements with the National Fisheries Research Institute at Jinja to rent and use their premises. As a result of delays by the implementers, the project has stalled and is behind schedule.

The committee is of the view that the proposed Civil Service College is important and it should be built and operationalised. We, therefore, recommend that Government provides land for the Civil Service College so that construction commences this financial year. Uganda Land Commission should stand by its promise to fast-track registration of land at Jinja or other suitable facility for the purpose of the Civil Service College. 

The committee recommends that the land should be secured, in any case not later than November 1, 2011.  In the meantime, the Ministry of Public Service should halt the caravan training until manpower structures for the college have been put in place and the facility to be rented at National Fisheries Research Institute Jinja has been secured, furnished and adequately prepared.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, please allow me use some of your time. I am worried that the people in the gallery might leave before their presence is announced. Hon. Members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have members of Mbale Sub-county Speakers’ Association. They are represented by hon. Yahaya Gudoi, MP for Bungokho County North, and have come to observe the proceedings of Parliament. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, the project of the National Records and Archives Centre has not taken off despite the loan of $7.3 million having been approved in 2008. The committee recommends that Ministry of Public Service commences the construction of the National Records and Archives Centre this financial year without fail.

Regarding the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS), we commend the Ministry of Public Service for initiating it. The project is on course and is likely to result in improvements by modernising the personnel and payroll system, including managing pensions. However, too much money has been utilised on consultancies and the roll-out is taking too long. 

The committee recommends that the IPPS roll-out plan be finalised so that all line ministries, departments and agencies of Governments and local governments benefit from the system. The Ministry should use this facility to end the issue of pension arrears, ease access to the payroll and avail timely personnel data in the entire Public Service.

Concerning salary disparities within the Public Service, we found out that there are big disparities in pay within the Public Service. This de-motivates staff and negatively affects service delivery. Salaries of staff in some Government projects and programmes are by far too high compared to those of traditional civil servants, who do an equally good job and sometimes even better than some project staff. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service harmonises pay structure across the Civil Service. The Ministry should also consider the possibility of establishing a remunerations board for the entire Public Service.

As for pension arrears, Shs 68 billion has been provided to pay pension arrears, including Shs 12 billion meant for local governments’ pensions. The committee, however, is concerned with the unending lists of new submissions for pension arrears. We, therefore, urge the ministry to take the necessary steps to end the problem of pension arrears once and for all. In addition, Ministry of Public Service should take over payment of pension arrears for local government staff.

Mr Speaker, regarding salary increments for public servants, the committee notes that despite inflation there have been no salary increments for the public servants this financial year. The committee recommends that Government should provide salary increment for the public servants across the board this financial year to take into account the inflation levels in the country. Selective treatment of personnel is likely to breed discontent within the service. 

Finally, the Public Service Commission continues to be underfunded yet their mandate is expanding, especially with the increasing number of districts. Moreover the commission is subjected to budget cuts even with its meagre finances. 

The committee recommends that the Commission should be protected from the budget cuts since its mandate has grown with increased number of districts. 

We also recommend that an additional financing of Shs 0.9 billion be provided this financial year to the Public Service Commission to enable them meet their statutory obligations.

In conclusion, the Committee on Public Service and Local Government wishes to recommend to this Parliament the approval of Shs 2,019,545,637,000 for the following votes:

•	Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government   Shs 200,504,592,000. 
•	Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission Shs 3,793,818,000.  
•	Vote 501 up to Vote 850 - all Local Government Grants Shs 1, 655,308,636,000.          	
•	Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service	Shs 356,091,000,000 and finally,
•	Vote 146 - Public Service Commission	Shs 3,847,791,000.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to thank the House for their kind attention and before you, Mr Speaker, I would like to sincerely thank the Members of the committee for their generous support and commitment. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. For purposes of the Hansard, I would like you to lay the full report on the Table so that it can be captured as property of Parliament. If you could do that bit and then we take the next step.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to lay on Table the report Of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the policy statements and budgetary provisions for the fiscal year 2011/2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you for directing that the Hansard captures the report as it is. However, we need your guidance. Yesterday, we adopted a report of ICT, but something that needs to be noted is that, we are not adopting the figures. According to the procedure, unless I am advised that there is change, the Budget Committee is supposed to capture these figures because some committees are recommending re-allocations which must be discussed with Ministry of Finance in the Budget Committee and then it goes to the Appropriation Bill. So, I just want that for purposes of the record that when we adopt the report, it should not be taken that we have adopted the figures. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We take it that the recommendations that they are making now is what they have forwarded to the Budget Committee so it will come back that way. Thank you.

3.39
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Roland Mugume): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to begin by congratulating all of you. This is the Opposition statement in response to the ministerial policy statement for Ministry of Public Service for the financial year 2011/2012. Because of time and because this document has been distributed among the honourable members, I will highlight key issues in this report -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I rise to seek for your guidance. The Chairman of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government has just presented a report by the committee and at the back of this report, the Members of the committee signed for it. No.16 is hon. Mugume Roland who is a Member of this committee and who, therefore, owns this report as well.  Would it be procedurally  correct for him now, to present an alternative report. We would like to get this clear, whether for every policy statement, there is going to be an alternative shadow policy statement. 

What is the point of this committee because the committee brings the whole House together? They look at the ministerial policy statement, where we get responses from the Opposition - the Leader of the Opposition makes a response to the State of the Nation Address by the President, the Shadow Minister of Finance made a statement in response to the budget speech, but when we come to policy statements, we assume that these are owned by the committees of Parliament of which both the Opposition and Government participate, and this is the report. I would really need your guidance on this one. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My initial understanding was that he was making a response to the ministerial policy statement rather than the committee report and -

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had not finished but you proceed.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, there are two established things in this House and I wonder why hon. Nasasira would want to portray that this is a very new development. It has been like this since we went to a multiparty parliament; that we make our views known.

Secondly, as the Opposition, we have been repeatedly put to task to provide alternative policies to Government. We count this as a very precious opportunity that we put on record the alternative views that we hold with the hope that if they are good, as I imagine they are actually better than Government’s, we would consider them in the process and somewhat begin to implement them for the good of our country. 

So, it serves the dual purpose: One, bring out the visibility of the alternative government and the policies that we hold so dearly, but also, two; where else would we get the space if it is not at this time, and the tradition has been so. So, I thank you, Mr Speaker; your guidance to hon. Nasasira is adequate; I appreciate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, I think that has been the practice; but if you look at it in terms of sequencing, the Minister of Finance makes the budget speech and that is the only person that speaks from the government side. When the matters come here, ministers do not speak to the House on their policy statements, do they? They just send the documents to Parliament and then they end up in committees without speaking about the policy statements; when it goes to the committee, the committee reports back, which it has just done. 

I think it would be proper that an opportunity be given to a minister to respond to issues that have come up as a result of the discussions and presentations from the committee and the discussions that result. The minister should be given the opportunity to respond to such issues, in which case, the shadow minister would then be able to respond to those issues properly. 
The sequence would have been better that way. But since I have been advised that that has been the practice – the first person who has spoken on the policy statement is the chairperson to the committee and the House is going to make some comments on it. Then the next person who should have spoken on this after the discussion would be the shadow minister, and then the Government person would come to crown it up. That would have been neater in my opinion. But I do not know what the practice has been; you know I was out of this place for a while.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, in the previous Parliament, we had proposed – in our Commonwealth countries, to which we are a member - for us to lay our alternative on the Table, and both of them should have been referred to the committee. And that requires the Rule to provide like that. 

In the previous Parliament, the Speaker directed the Rules Committee to come up with an amendment to the rule so that we have a neater sequence. But because of the elections, we did not achieve that. So, next financial year, we need to have the ministers laying their policy statements here; both Government and Opposition and all of them be referred to the committee so that the report of the committee comes up with two sections: Where they agreed with the Opposition and where they disagreed. Like now, they have a section where they agree with Government and where they disagree. But for now, Mr Speaker, I think we need your guidance so that we have space. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I do not totally disagree with hon. Ekanya, I hope there are going to be areas where we agree, given the two statements I have seen so far; the response to the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech. You seem to be talking only about where you do not agree. Anyway, I think that would be a better procedure; but since we are in the process of amending our rules, I think we can look into that. 

But for this session, Mr Speaker, I would beg that hon. Mugume makes a contribution to the ministerial policy statement and any issues that are raised will be picked by the Hansard instead of presenting an alternative policy statement or an alternative report which will contradict the very report he signed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what is written here is a response to the ministerial policy statement, and not an alternative report of the committee. I think it would be in the interest of the House to bring these issues together to allow the – I saw that is how it was handled yesterday – we allow the shadow minister to lead in the making of the statements in relation to the overall policy statement. Of course you are limited by the rules on how much you can disagree with the committee, since you did not file a minority report. So, you restrict yourself to the issues in the general policy statement and your quick responses as you have prepared.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am aware of the fact that my friend hon. John Nasasira has challenged the presentation of this statement on the basis that hon. Mugume actually signed – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not correct; we stopped that argument. That was finished. If that is the only point you want to raise, then – 

MR AMURIAT: Well, what I would like to say is that what he is about to present is a response coming from the entire Opposition, and we offer alternative policies in this statement, something that is not done in the committee. So, hon. Mugume would not have participated in making any – 

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to know whether it is in order for the honourable member to continue discussing on a topic which has already been ruled on by the Speaker. Is the honourable member in order; and he is an old Member of this Parliament. Is he in order to behave in such a way?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are still trying to find a way forward on this matter, so he was going to make a contribution. But a bit of it was not in order. But let me first restate what I said, it might help. What we are trying to do now is to find at what stage the shadow minister makes the alternative proposal to the policy statement made by the Government. And from the guidance given by hon. Ekanya and the Government Chief Whip, there should have been a proper sequencing of this matter; the minister did not present the policy statement verbally. 

The proper procedure would have been to send the shadow minister’s alternative policy statement together with the Government policy statement to the committee, in which case the committee would have come back after discussing both positions. 

But now we are faced with a situation where this proposal has not found its way anywhere. We are trying to see how to accommodate it in the process. For this financial year, we want to accommodate the shadow minister, whose docket is actually under discussion to make a statement. 

Now, I am suggesting that he makes his response to the statement within the spirit of the discussion, but after he finishes, then we will open up the debate; but we will have made some rejoinders to the issues. 

3.54
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Roland Mugume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said, I am going to highlight some key issues. I want to congratulate all of you for having gone through the elections successfully and to congratulate the Speaker for having been elected to one of the most top offices in this country. I salute my Leader of the Opposition and register my appreciation to my party for having entrusted me with this responsibility to provide an alternative response to the Public Service Sector. 

The view of the Opposition on the Public Service sector vis-a-vis the national economy and resource allocation: The Public Service is one of the political sectors in the development of this country. But it is the same body that is poorly remunerated and poorly facilitated. Public Service employees are seriously demotivated compared to their counterparts in the private sector. This is why they struggle to bring us a semblance of the badly-needed services by our people.

There is security tenure for public servants. Tenure of time is not fully-guaranteed as many of them acquire these jobs through political influence. Those with independent minds are sidelined, marginalised and politically persecuted. 

Considering the government policy on the Public Service year-in, year-out; there is little done to improve the Public Service sector even though these civil servants continue to play a major role in the development and management of our country. 

On key observations; the policy statement is not clear about the minimum wage for our employees. Ugandans are being exploited at the mercy of private and foreign employers whose focus is on profit maximisation and not developing the human resource for our national development. This is counter-productive service delivery given that poor civil servants are susceptible to corruption.

On page 4 of this document; the remuneration levels in the Public Service are far below the inflation levels which public employees have had to live with. The ever increasing costs of living with minimum pay, have greatly affected the performance in Public Service since staff are always worried about how they will survive with their families. 

Whereas the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2011/2012 stated the mandate of the Ministry of Public Service to keep His Excellency the President, advised and updated on human resource developments in the Public Service and to enable him make informed decisions, the insignificant ministries’ interventions in the remuneration issues of the health workers, teachers, especially those in hard-to-reach areas and specific institutions of higher learning like Makerere University staff, reflect failure by the Ministry of Public Service to appreciate the general challenge of public servants in this particular mandate. This has resulted into unclear and haphazard presidential proclamations of improved remuneration policy for employees in selected public institutions that do not address the problem faced by all public servants.

On page 6, the Ministry of Public Service does not show in its policy statement how it intends to improve the status quo to address the problem and bail out many district service commissions that are underperforming due to staffing challenges. This has resulted into a very slow pace while filling vacant positions in the local governments, hence poor service delivery. What is happening in local governments is alarming because the human resource stands at 7 percent, especially in the newly-created districts. 

From time to time, I have heard the President lamenting that there are few NRM cadres capable of taking up the challenges in Public Service. Politicisation of the Public Service has greatly affected the service delivery. In many sectors and ministries, people get jobs through political influence other than their capabilities to deliver better services in Uganda. 

RDCs and security organs as it was reported to Parliament in reference to the recruitment of the National Forestry Authority boss are influencing the recruitment of civil servants on the basis of card-holders of NRM. No wonder there is poor service delivery as corruption becomes the basis of recruitment. It is no longer on the basis of skills and capacity; rather, it is rewarding those who campaigned for the President.

What is amazing is that those traditional civil servants who are of independent minds and at times disagree with political leaders have always been politically persecuted and victimised to the extent of losing of their jobs. (Interjections) 

I will give an example - Mr Speaker, protect me. The labour force market indicators in Uganda are based on population statistics which show that the active working age group is between 14 to 40 years. That comprises about 23 million Ugandans. However, more than 30 percent of the Ugandan labour force are unemployed and those we feel are employed are in disguised employment, and are, therefore, under-utilised, since they are in jobs they did not train for.

Every year, the government commits itself to eradicate ghost employees from the payroll. However, the Ministry of Public Service has not done much to realise this dream, to the extent that there are ghost schools and ghost health centres where Government funds are being abused. The ghost employees maybe invisible, but the people who create them are highly visible, can be identified and dealt with if Government was serious. The permanent secretaries who facilitate such fraud should be made accountable for making Ugandans believe that there are no jobs yet jobs are available but are occuppied by the ghosts. Those acts amount to treason and treachery. The Ministry of Public Service must rise up to prove that they are up to the task.

On page 8(i), pension reform has been long overdue particularly for the long suffering retired public employees. Apart from accumulated pension arrears, other problems associated with pension payment in Uganda include: Inadequate institutional capacity for effective service delivery; delayed payments of benefits; low value of the actual package; inability to meet basic needs from the benefits; and high transport costs for collecting payments. We could not agree more with this assessment considering the dire circumstances surrounding the Public Service pension situation in Uganda. 

Recommendations from the Opposition

Given that the national economy grew by 8.9 percent on the one hand, on the other hand, the inflation rate has hit two digits. There should be some modest relief for public employees by way of a strategic intervention to give the civil servants upkeep stabilisation pay to meet the skyrocketing cost of living, as a stopgap measure while the country waits for an improvement in the remuneration. 

Government should double the wage package of its long suffering public employees if there is any appreciation for their being the engines of our development and service delivery, before we put to risk all Government efforts to realise development.

The Opposition proposes the following reforms:

A minimum wage of at least 70,000 per month for all informal casual employees both in the Public Service and private enterprises, and a minimum wage of Shs 300,000 for professional, skilled employees be adopted as Uganda intends to meet her targets of the Millennium Development Goals by 2015. Uganda is supposed to reduce the poorest quantile share in national income to make sure that every Ugandan earns at least $1 per day, thus, $30 per month. Due to inflation and the high cost of living, Government should raise the threshold to Shs 350,000. 

The ministry should commission an inquiry into the Public Service payroll to remove all ghost workers, and accounting officers who have facilitated the fraud intentionally should face punitive action immediately.

The ministry must develop strategic interventions to reduce the brain drain Uganda is facing, by improving the working conditions and remuneration of public servants. 

The ministerial policy statement does not reflect at all how it intends to address the brain drain challenge. Instead, the minister’s priorities, shown on pages 20-23 of the ministerial policy statement, have nothing to do with motivation of public servants at all. 

As the Opposition, we call upon Government to raise the pay of medical doctors to a minimum of Shs 2 million monthly, plus other incentives like housing and hardship allowance. 

Government also needs to revise the employment ceiling in all Government departments to enable ministries, departments and local governments improve on their staffing levels to recruit more workers for better service delivery.

Most of our pensioners in local governments, as a result of decentralisation, have always suffered with the creation of new districts. Whenever new districts are created, it only inherits assets. Even when pensioners find themselves in the new district, their pay becomes a big problem. The ministry must come up with a clear policy to streamline the fate of our pensioners whenever a new district is created. 

We in the Opposition note with concern why public servants of the same qualification and similar jobs vary in salary structure yet they live in the same country and same economy. For example, why should a driver in the Ministry of Finance, URA, KCCA and many other institutions earn far better than a commissioner in the Ministry of Education or Local Government. The disparity in payment breeds corruption and discrimination in Public Service. 

Ugandans demand rationalisation of payments across all Government departments. We recommend that a commission of inquiry be instituted to establish the cause of this disparity and a uniform pay structure be established.

The Opposition also notes that there is no longer natural growth and development in Public Service today. A person who joined a department as a Clerk 20 years ago, even after upgrading his or her education, still remains at the same level. However, a young graduate who has just joined a ministry or department becomes a supervisor of those he or she found in the ministry even when they possess the same qualifications.

It is demoralising to see a long serving civil servant who has been efficient and committed to his work being supervised by a young inexperienced graduate, just because he or she is well connected. (Applause)

We recommend that employees should grow with the sectors they serve and promotions be given on the basis of proper appraisals, efficiency and be results oriented.

Mr Speaker, may I also implore Parliament to take keen interest in the informal sector and private organisations, especially the employees of religious denominations. Religious leaders have played a big role in our development as change agents, but when they retire, life becomes miserable without a retirement package. Though they are not public servants, as a nation, we need to consider them as patriots who have served this country selflessly. (Applause)

Concluding remarks

As the Opposition, we shall continue providing leadership where Government has failed or ignored to consider as a priority until we come to power to enforce those ignored patriotic ideas. (Laughter) It is crucial that Government considers Public Service employees as a priority and addresses the issues that lead to brain drain, protection of our people from exploitation and instituting the minimum wage for Ugandans. Otherwise, the same promises every year in and out means the Public Service will sink further in the doldrums of poor service delivery. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I call for your support. I beg to move. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes hon. Yaguma, you have three minutes.

4.09
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you. My issue is on service delivery. The Local Government Act, 1997 transferred a number of services and functions to local governments and one of them is primary education. 

With the introduction of UPE, the Central Government committed itself to transfer conditional grants, especially school facilities grant. This school facilities grant was to enable schools and local governments provide classrooms and pit latrines, but for the last four years, some of the districts, Mbarara inclusive, have not received this grant. The population of school children has increased; toilets have filled up; some toilets have collapsed. Even this financial year, there is nothing going to that district. 

Secondly, when these functions were transferred to local governments, it was expected that the equivalent revenue would follow, but from the budget, what I can see is that we are continuing to witness a reduction in figures. Local governments are instead being told that the new taxes like local service tax and local hotel service tax have been devised to help local governments.

These taxes are very difficult to implement. Take an example of a local government like Moroto, deep in the village where there is no hotel; and you are telling this local government to collect the hotel tax. So, I request this honourable House to consider providing lucrative sources like Stamp Duty and Pay-As–You-Earn. For instance, a local government payroll provides the deduction of Pay-As-You-Earn. We get Pay-As-You-Earn from that local government payroll every time we pay salaries, but this Pay-As-You-Earn is remitted to Central Government and yet it is collected by the very local government. 

Why can’t this money be retained by the local government to provide services? I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. 

4.12
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for the good presentation. I will restrict myself to three issues. 

Firstly, the issue of workshops. It has been found out that civil servants in these ministries make money out of these workshops and this has been going on for long. We make budgets day in and day out, but there has been no change. 

The committee recommended that they follow presidential directives. I want to inform you that these days people don’t follow or implement presidential directives. He talks and they keep quiet. So, I would urge the committee, since we have not passed the budget yet, to go back and cut these votes which have workshops. We have 111 districts which were created and these people will be bringing, at a certain time, RDCs who are 111, the Chief Administrative Officers and the LC Vs for one workshop. They will collect all of them here and that is money gone. Since we have now technologically improved, I suggest some of these workshops be taken to the IT ministry and some money be given for the provision of solar to these districts which do not have power so that they take Internet to these districts, so that, instead of workshops, people interact using the new technology -(Interjections)- that is one. 

Secondly, the committee has recommended - first of all, they looked at LC I and LC II bicycles. But I would have thought that they make their ministry budget for funds to conduct elections for LC I before they give them bicycles. We have never had elections for LC IIs since 2006. I do not know whether the ministry is aware of that. (Member timed out_)

4.16
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to applaud our shadow minister for articulating the issues of the civil servants. (Applause) I would like to also add my voice to the issues of disparities between pay for people who do the same job. 

The word “authority” has become synonymous with higher civil service and it is just another name for higher or superior civil service. If an engineer is in an authority, he is a higher engineer than the one who serves in the ministry because that is what their remuneration and pay indicate. No wonder that evil now penetrated Kampala City Council the minute it attained the word authority. The same people who do the same work expect an elevation of their status because now they serve an “authority”. The same former ordinary civil servants are now in the superior authority category. No wonder a driver now needs a minimum pay of Shs 7 million. 

When we do not curtail these developments - the local councillors are no longer local councillors. LC IIIs are servants of the authority and that is why their pay should now be higher because we know that they have also demanded for a minimum pay as people who are serving an “authority”. So, somebody who is an LC III in Kampala in Mutungo Parish will earn higher than anyone serving in a lesser district or local government. So, do we see that coming so that other municipalities will also try to agitate to become authorities so that their people and their leader also get better pay? Mr Speaker, as Ugandans, we should wake up to this evil called “authority”. Thank you very much.

4.19
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I read somewhere in the report on the Public Service and I am happy to note that the Public Service is now promptly paying pensioners. This has been a big problem. Even before I came to Parliament, all the time I was helping pensioners by taking them to Public Service to get their pension. Sometimes you go there and you want to weep. Old people who served this country so well and who are now frail come from upcountry and bench at the Public Service ministry for days without being served. I hope what is being reported about 78 percent payment of arrears is true and I thank the minister for that.

But I would like to know whether it is possible for the Ministry of Public Service to put benchmarks or standards for a period within which somebody can get on to the payroll so that they can receive their money. People retire and take a long time to get on to the pension payroll; some take years. What is the period the ministry gives somebody after he retires, to get on to the pension roll?

Secondly, I have heard Government talking about Shs 22,000 to pay to pensioners - I think the elderly. There is some pilot project they have started. We know that a lot of our old people, especially those older than 65 years, who have served this country so well, live a miserable life, whether they are peasants, artisans, bicycle repairers or teachers; whether they have worked in Government or not. They live a miserable life. 

I am glad to know that the government would like to pay some little money to them. I think - though this money is not enough, I would like to propose that Government increases this money and considers every senior citizen of Uganda who is over 65 years old and who has stayed in this country and has served; they should be given a minimum of Shs 50,000 as pension per month. It may not be this financial year, but I would like to ask Government to consider it next financial year and pay a minimum of Shs 50,000 to every Ugandan senior citizen who is above 65 years old, irrespective of whether they worked in Government or not. I personally think that the Shs 22,000 that the Government proposes to pay will be consumed in transport costs - on boda bodas - to go pick the money from the Mobile Money Centres. So, I think it is a good gesture, but might it be a useless one -(Member timed out_)

4.23
MR PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I represent the people of Mukono South Constituency after moving from north. (Laughter)

I want to add my voice to the rest of the Members’ to thank the members of the committee for the work well done and I hope they will stick to their recommendations. They have talked about creation of districts, municipalities, town councils, sub counties and even LC Is. As I speak, I have already heard that about 21 more districts are yet to be approved. Let me hope that they will stick to their recommendations so that we put a total halt to that as we review the performance of the past districts. 

During his campaigns, the President went on promising very many districts and one of them is Nakifuma in Mukono and they are waiting. So, we are waiting to see whether this recommendation is going to work. 

When it comes to LC I elections, I think we need to review the policy that we passed some years ago about a chairman appointing his own executive because it has been abused. You find that a chairman has appointed his wife and children on that committee and they cannot really do good work for that village. We need to review that so that we can appoint an LC I chairman and also elect other members on the executive. 

They have also talked about the hardship allowance in the hard-to-reach areas. I am glad that this has been done because we have that problem in Koome Islands. I was there over the weekend interacting with some teachers, medical officers and the rest, but there are no toilets. I stayed there for three days and I had to keep it cool until when I came back.(Laughter) They have no housing; transport is a problem, but you can imagine, a teacher who graduated in the same training college with the one teaching in Budo or elsewhere is being paid poorly. Those people in those areas need to be catered for; they need that hardship allowance and many other allowances to enable them work in those areas. 

Lastly, when I hear of money being brought back because it has not been spent, I wonder. It makes our people ask, “How do you fail to spend this money when our people are suffering?” I think the districts and the Ministry of Finance which delays to send this money to the districts are doing us a disservice. Once again, I want to thank the committee and I support the budget. Thank you. 

4.26
MR FAISAL KIKULUKUNYU (NRM, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to comment on the issue of creation of new districts. Many districts have been created true, but little has been done to help them set up district headquarters. What is sent to districts as development grants are not enough to accumulate into meaningful amounts that can help these people come up with district blocks. So, I want to suggest that Government comes up with a special programme to help these new districts, at least have blocks where they can do their administrative works. 

Mr Speaker, I also want to comment on the issue of councillor allowances. This is a serious issue. Many sub-county councils and districts are not sitting because they do not have money to give these people in form of sitting allowances. The law is clear that these people are supposed to be paid out of what has been locally generated, but where is that local revenue? It is, therefore,  possible that these people will never sit and as such the services in the sub-counties and the districts will never be done to the scale that people want us to have them done. 

In the past, it was a good practice in our local councils; people may not like it, but when we had graduated tax, work was being done. You may recall that with the graduated tax ticket, there was money meant to go to the education fund; there was money for health and some money would go to helping local governments do their businesses. All that is not possible because Government has failed to live to its promise of sending back money to these councils. So, I propose that we reconsider in future to reintroduce graduated tax in local governments so that they can at least work.

Mr Speaker, it is also a pity to learn that money is being swindled. Money meant to purchase bicycles to help our local councils was taken by people whose addresses we cannot even trace in Kampala. How was this contract awarded? Who awarded it? Can’t we trace these people –(Member timed out_)  

4.30
MR WILSON ISIKO ASUPASA (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): I thank you so much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I will submit a very short statement on local councils. The LCs have judicial powers and every day they preside over cases and pass judgement. The LCs need some training around this area and while there is a standing directive that they cut money on seminars and workshops, I am loudly wondering how LCs can be brought on board so that they give judgement or justice to the people who go to them. 

Mr Speaker, the number of LCs has increased and whether there have been formal elections or not, there are LCs in place and they are performing judicial services without any training or guidance. You can really see the type of judicial services that Ugandans are getting from such LCs. 

It is my humble submission that in regard to this, and with the Ministry of Local Government, and bearing in mind that LCs must be trained, especially after the elections, we allow them have monies for seminars and workshops. 

Mr Speaker, I have read from the report that a supplier was contracted and given money to supply bicycles to 7,000 LCs and that this supplier has disappeared into thin air. I am wondering about the type of procurement process that this supplier went through. How did this man come to be approved to the ministry? The government is losing a lot of money through suppliers who come into contact with Government in very funny ways. I submit that this issue requires investigation so that we can get to know who or how this supplier came about. 

I will end with the issue of salaries. It is true that there are grade discrepancies in salaries amongst public servants. I am privy to information that a driver in the Auditor General’s office gets well above Shs 900,000 and the same driver in local government gets around Shs 160,000. Both of them drive double cabins; they both drive officers and they both have driving permits. Why should one have so big a salary and the other so little a salary?  This –(Member timed out_)

4.34
MS GRACE ASAMO (NRM, Representative of Persons With Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some people are laughing because you mentioned disability, but I don’t have a problem with it because I live with it.  I just have a few issues to raise on the issue of the number of districts that have increased. I know that as politicians, people get happy because their constituencies become small. But for us People with disabilities, the Workers and the Youth, the constituencies grow bigger and so we need to take it from there. 

I also think that Government should look at other areas. For example, I come from Kasilo, but if a teacher has to get salary, they have to travel up to Soroti. Services like banking and hospitals are still lacking in most districts that we are creating.  So, there is need to check whether infrastructure has been put in place in the district before we can get seriously political. 

The other issue is that of the district service commissions. Districts have been formed, but there is a challenge because we are compelled to seek the services of other districts to come and do recruitment in our districts. So, you realise that whereas we create districts, the systems are not put in place and this still creates a problem of having no qualified staff in the new districts that are formed. 

I would like to inquire because we have the NAADS Programme which I know is in the area of agriculture, but in terms of staffing, you will realise that most of the agricultural officers have moved to the NAADS Programme because there is some bit of better allowances. But the agricultural services have almost been rendered useless because everybody looks for a NAADS worker to help them thereby leaving out the agricultural extension workers. So, I think there is need to harmonise this anomaly which I look at as a double cost. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.36
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work done. My concerns are on urban planning. As the committee noted that there are unplanned structures and yet here in Parliament, we passed the Physical and Infrastructure Planning Act. I would like to know from the minister how far he has gone in as far as operationalising that Act is concerned because it seems people are still building wherever they want. This Act is actually just shelved somewhere and it is not being implemented.   

On the LC I elections, we were rushed here in the Eighth Parliament to amend the Local Council Act in view that local council elections were going to be held. But up to now, we do not have new LC chairpersons. In my district, Butambala, most of the chairpersons abandoned the work, others died and even the executives are not any longer interested in doing the work because they are few and have been overworked, yet they are not even remunerated. So, Mr Speaker, we would like to know the timeframe as to when these councils will be put in place from the minister. (Applause)

On the issue of bicycles, it is so sad, Mr Speaker, for this report to come to Parliament and the minister is aware that this money was swindled; this is another Shimoni project.  How long are we going to lose money? In the shipment order, they were supposed to give you a document - a shipping document indicating 70,000 bicycles that were supposed to be shipped, but they gave you documents for 30,000 and you went ahead to endorse a 40 percent upfront payment, what were you paying for? Whom were you paying? We would like to know what exactly happened with this transaction. And we know that you very well know the person you contracted. So, please can you avail us the name of that person because you know them?  We can look for them even if they are on the moon because we want accountability in this country. (Applause) 

The same applies to the Civil Service College.  This money was approved and the ministry came here and guaranteed that they had land, but they are now telling us that they don’t have the land. The project is remaining with only two and a half years to expire; are you going to get land in these two years to do the baseline study and everything to complete this service college?  I think that even this very project needs a forensic audit and whoever is concerned should take responsibility because we know that the taxpayers’ money has been wasted. 

The last issue is to do with the commission which was being recommended by the Shadow Minister. We are about to get a disease called “Commissions of Inquiry” in this country.  These commissions of inquiry are set up very expensively with all the good pay and terms of reference that you can think of. The reports are produced, but neither debated nor effected. We don’t want these commissions of inquiry any more. We have relevant officers and institutions which can do this work. Let us utilise them instead of forming parallel structures that we pay heavily, but give no results.

4.40
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on the concern of the formation of new districts. When you read the report, they are saying they are recommending a halt on the creation of new districts until 2012.  Now, to me, hon. Members, we shouldn’t run away from the reality. We have created the districts and they have sacrificed service delivery.  

When I was moving towards Jinja the other week and I passed by Kawolo Hospital, I found an incubator using charcoal –(Interjections)- real charcoal in an incubator for young children. They put in charcoal and make sure that it doesn’t get so hot. Now, those are things that are happening because all the money we are getting is being spent on running local governments and councils, etcetera. If we just ban the creation of new districts, there is no reason why Uganda, small as it is, should have more administrative units than China, USA and Russia which are bigger. (Applause) Let us stand up to the reality and save money which we can put into these other districts that are there. 

When you look at the staffing levels at the district, it is just alarming. You go to Finance and they tell you they don’t have money to finance when -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, protect me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order. 

MR CADET:  When you go to the district, you find the staffing levels too low in health and education, why? Because we are creating more and more districts. What we need is to give services to these people and once we do that they will not demand for new districts. This issue -(Interruption)

MR KYAMADIDI: Rt hon. Speaker, you are aware that a number of districts were created before some of us came here.  You are also aware that the then honourable member is a beneficiary of districts and a new constituency that were created. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, a district under Article 179 is created by Parliament with support of two thirds majority, but on geographical conditions, economic viability and wishes of the people. Is the honourable member   in order to come here and rubbish the creation of districts when he has just got one?  I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is making his contribution basing on what has been reported here by the committee. 

MR CADET: Thank you very much. I would like to maybe inform hon. Kyamadidi that I am not a beneficiary of a new district because Bunyaruguru was there even during Colonial times. I am not a beneficiary; I am not. (Applause) (Interruption)

MR TINKASIMIIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was here in the Eighth Parliament and I am aware of all the developments that took place during the entire term. I am also aware that his district called Bunyaruguru was created at the fall of the Eighth Parliament. The district - what people know - they just twisted the name. It is called Rubirizi District. On top of creating that district, we sub-divided his constituency into two and I know a constituency is an administrative unit. I want to find out whether the honourable member, who is a beneficiary of administrative units, is in order to dissuade this honourable House that we should not create more districts?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have to rule. I think on the basis of the information that the honourablemember has been given through the point of order, I advise the honourable member not to pursue that line anymore. (Laughter) You can continue with your submission if you still have other points.

MS SEMPALA: Mr Speaker, I am wondering if it is procedurally right to debate personal interest in the House because I realise that most of the Members raising order have an interest in districts. Is it in order for Members to pursue personal interests when a Member is presenting on a matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rules prohibit us from anticipating things that might come. The honourable member has not said anything about the claim that he wants a district. Please conclude.

MR CADET: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I conclude I would request that you give me more time because I was interrupted several times.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR CADET: As I conclude, I want to inform hon. Tinkasimiire that I am an MP for Bunyaruguru not Woman MP for Rubirizi, and I state that I am not a beneficiary of the new districts.

Lastly, on the disparities of civil servants, there are those that are in the traditional Civil Service and they are permanent and pensionable. We also have those that are on government projects who are given contracts for two or three years. Sincerely, paying somebody who is permanent and pensionable the same as this one with a contract of two years would be unfair. We should revise this. Also, what I do not agree with is a driver earning more than a qualified doctor or teacher. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.48
MS JOY ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to add my voice to those of my colleagues. Before I go further, I would like to thank the chairperson and his team for coming up with this report and I have this submission to make.

On page three, I would like to thank the committee for considering the payment of councillors at lower level. I thank you for this proposal and I pray that it comes to reality and does not only stop on black and white.

I would also like to propose that while you consider the payment of local councillors at lower levels, you should also put - regarding  the summarised version of the report, I would like to request that you also consider the payment of municipality speakers because you are paying the district speakers who are 120 plus their deputies. Why not also include the municipality speakers who are only 20?

You realise that even the little allowances that are given to the lower councillors of Shs 100,000 are taxed to the tune of close to 30 percent. I request that the ministry and the Parliament look at this law and revise it.

Thirdly, it has also been that the channel of payment of municipal council councillors’ emoluments were channelled through the district accounts. I request that, if possible, we begin paying it direct to the municipality accounts because it has really been difficult for the municipality councillors to access the payment through the district.

Lastly, about a month ago when we were responding to His Excellency’s State of the Nation Address, I raised a crucial issue concerning the career development path in the local government. I gave an example where in the local government, there is a policy, which says in order for one to be the head of department, you must have served at the principal level for three years. When you look down at those departments in the local governments, you realise that we have very few departments. We only have the department of personnel with the principal officers and the department of audit; if I am right. So, what are you doing about the policy? Are we leaving it like that? Why can’t we revise it and give opportunity to all the departments in local governments to have the principal position so that they are promoted? That is a way of motivating them. (Member timed out_)

4.52
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by thanking the chairman of the committee and his team for a good job done. I have gone through the recommendations and I do not doubt because the chairman of the committee has been in local government and he knows the challenges which are there.

May I start commenting on the creation of new districts? You know to us politicians it is not easy to assume that position. I want to request honourable members to accept that we are creating many districts. They are good if we insist and make it a point that it brings services nearer to the people. But if it does not bring services nearer to the people, then we should think twice.

Hon. Members, I know some of you have not been in local government; you came straight to Parliament and have not seen the challenges down there. I have just left local government and I know how it feels to be a district chairperson and you are told that, that part of your territory should be removed. It does not feel nice at all. If today we were to say that this country should be divided, the President would summon you because he would not want to lose part of his territory.

The other thing is that I would have loved us to have many districts and also increase the funding for the new districts; each new district should come with its funding. However, what is happening on the ground is that you may have a district with Shs 20 billion as its budget and when two or three districts are created out of it, the same Shs 20 billion is divided among them. So, if we are going to maintain the same funding and yet we have created many districts, it will not serve the purpose of bringing services nearer to the people. So, it is one thing this august House must look into because it is not happening. 

My recommendation is that whereas we have new districts created, there should be new funding for them in order for us to get services nearer to the people. I was actually surprised when the committee indicated that this financial year’s funding has reduced from 23 percent to 17 percent. This means that if we are going to create more districts, we shall have more administrative costs. This is because we shall have a new district chairperson, Chief Administrative Officer and all the technical people, the councillors, RDCs and the rest. All of these will have to be paid from that same budget, which has now been reduced.

Mr Speaker, in this country, the local governments are delivering 70 percent of the services and yet –(Member timed out_)

4.57
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Generally, districts are good depending on the motivation for which they are demanded. I come from Buhweju which formerly was terribly cut off, but today you can clearly see the benefits of a new district. Although we are still needy, at least we have changed. So, the creation of new districts is a good thing.

I am concerned about the issue of councillors’ allowances. The last circular I saw stated that councillors should be paid Shs 100,000 per month as a form of retainer. In my area, it costs Shs 40,000 to hire a motorcycle within a sub-county to travel to one destination and back. How much will that facilitate a councillor to monitor schools, clinics and roads? Definitely, it will not suffice. So, the recommendation by the committee that the councillors’ allowances and facilitation be increased next year – why wait until next year? The councillors are supposed to be our frontline monitors. If we wait for next year, we shall have lost much. My view is that since we are still in the budget process, the councillors’ concerns should be addressed now.

Mr Speaker, regarding the issue of LCs, we have a lot of anarchy at the grassroots. There are people who are called “flag bearers”; they won the primaries and are waiting for the elections. Then there are those who are currently holding office; they have the authority. There is now a lot of confusion and so, the LC elections should be conducted immediately.

The other issue is about the recommendation of transfers to local governments. Whereas the committee recommends a figure of 35 percent, I think we should raise it higher so that the central government remains with the role of monitoring, auditing and inspecting what is done by the local governments. There is no need for much money at the centre while the bulk of work is being done by the local governments.

Lastly, on harmonisation of salaries, we might get a lot of civil disobedience from the workers. Someone holding a diploma in a certain field of study should earn the same salary with another person of the same qualification. It pains to have someone with a diploma and is looking after our children getting peanuts while another person of the same qualification gets millions. So, we should now harmonise the salaries so that we acquire the moral authority to lead these people, give them directions and advise them. Otherwise, they will pay a deaf ear to what we are saying. Thank you.

5.01
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have really saved me a lot because in the gallery there are speakers from my district and so they will listen to me. Ladies and gentlemen, I have listened to you. On page 8 of the committee’s report, there is the issue of the creation of new districts. You have mentioned that the creation of new districts is a bad practice. But I would like to remind you that there are several factors that necessitate the creation of new districts. One of them is as a result of the huge mother districts. The other one is the conflicts between various groups, especially when the group from which the district chairperson comes from marginalises the minority. Sometimes, districts are created because our voters want them. So, when you stand in this House and you talk without considering those factors, you are doing a disservice to those people and you will be voted out next time.

Mr Speaker, since the Minister of Local Government is here, I would like to say that the way forward is that – there are districts which were pledged by the President during campaigns. So, if you are to put a halt to the creation of new districts, let us first consider those on which the President pronounced himself during campaigns, including mine, Namatali District. This will enhance people’s confidence in the President. You can then halt the exercise after giving me mine. (Laughter)

About the loan which Parliament approved for the Public Service - Civil Service College. I am wondering because when I read the paper which you circulated, you say that the money has nothing to do. If we got the loan before getting the land first, then that money is being twisted - you go to Jinja, there is no land. 

My question to the Minister of Public Service is, if you knew very well that we had no land, why did you pursue the loan? I know the money was given. Where is the money? Is the money safe? When you say the Land Registry will try to cancel the title then probably give the title to the Public Service - if it comes after five years, where will that money be -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please join me in welcoming in the public gallery this afternoon, pupils and teachers of Homecare Preparatory School in Kabale represented by hon. Henry Musasizi, Member of Parliament for Rubanda County East. They have come to witness the proceedings. (Applause)

5.05
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have stood up on the issue of elections of LCs. You know this government is a National Resistance Movement Government and we came to power and maintained it on the ground of the LC system; from the bush war up to now that is our big foundation and that is why we have overwhelming support.

According to the State of the Nation Address by his Excellency the President, he emphasised constitutionalism and rule of law. Therefore, we shall be deceiving ourselves if we shelved and did not pay attention to elections of LC Is. I, therefore, propose that we look for the money from anywhere even if it means getting a loan. 

If we managed to appropriate a loan which has laid there for more than three years and it is doing nothing, what about getting a loan and we elect these foundation bodies which will help us in keeping law and order and even in fulfilling the Constitution of our nation. 

Therefore, this Parliament should impress it upon the government and Ministry of Local Government for that matter, to look for that money and put it in the budget so that we can carry out elections of LCs. We cannot move on by breaking the Constitution, the world will take us on the wrong side.

On the issue of this Civil Service College, we all know that many people pass through UMI. I do not know why the Eighth Parliament decided to put up an alternative college which was not proper, and even up to today, they have no land and they have no preparations. Let us get that loan and go for the elections of LCs. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.08
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will continue thanking you as Members have done, but I will not go into details because I think that was enough. 

My issue goes direct to the creation of districts. First of all, 
as we halt the creation of districts, we have to bear in mind that this was one of the campaign tools that the President used in the whole country on those people who were interested in creating districts. Most of them are just waiting for a ruling or just splitting of the districts and operations will start. I do not know whether by taking this decision, the Minister of Local Government has consulted the President on whether to continue or not.

The second point is the issue of bicycles; you know there are very many issues most of us used in campaigns because the manifesto we were using was the manifesto which was launched by our President. So, in the manifesto -(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Mr speaker. Is it in order for the honourable member to mislead this House and even the young children that are in this House tonight by implying that the prerogative of creation of districts should be politically motivated and should be initiated by the President when the constitution stipulates here under Article 179 as to how districts are supposed to be created? Is it in order for us to make personal interests supersede the reality and the right provided for in the Constitution? Is it in order for the Member of Parliament to mislead this House and the country at large?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member was just stating a fact of what happened. What she stated is the fact as she knows it.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for protecting me and my point. I will not waste time. The next thing was on bicycles. There are very many issues which I was talking about that existed in the manifesto, which manifesto some of us Members of Parliament who came on the NRM ticket used up to the time we finished elections. Up to now, some of the issues which were raised in the manifestos are bound to be key issues which are going to be addressed by Government, a government which is the ruling party now. We have to appreciate that much as we have our own concerns, there is an issue of the government we are serving. We have to serve in the interest of the party. 

As Members of this Parliament, we have to appreciate that much as we are in this Parliament, there are issues which we have to take generally and there are issues which we have to take on individual basis. Where there is a ruling party even in our committees - there are issues in the Committee on Government Assurance we agreed on that, if an issue is raised in a constituency and it is a matter of public concern, it should be given priority. If an issue of districts which are created is an issue in my constituency, why don’t I prioritise it and give it support.

Those who are putting this one on halt are causing problems to some of the people who used this issue and thought that in Parliament, this would be issue number one we were going to agitate for.

I want to assure you that where there is no creation of districts in my area, then the next
term will be very bad for me. 

Another point, on the issue of local governments; there was a time Uganda Revenue Authority got some money from the districts –(Interjections)– unless it is not going to cost me time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For a point of information, you have the right to accept it or not.

MS NTABAZI: I am not accepting it. (Laughter) There is money which the districts were supposed to remit to URA and because the study done by URA was exaggerated, the money was too much for the districts. It came to a point where the districts could not remit this money to URA. When URA did a second study, it put interest on the money which was supposed to be remitted. The amount became bigger yet the districts could not pay it. 

In my district, for example, URA started assaulting the conditional grants which were coming from Central Government to pay the debt of the loans to a tune of Shs 900 million.  Up to now, this money is a problem to my district. Some of the salaries and other monies have not been paid by the district even to the sub-counties because this money was taken by URA –(Member timed out_) (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Speaker is speaking. Going by the trend of the contributions, on the bicycles, on the creation of districts, I have sat here and I have not picked any new ideas; unless you are going to raise a matter that does not relate to bicycles and the new districts – is that the agreement –[Hon. Members: “Yes”]– because, if you go back to those issues, I have the prerogative of stopping you.

5.16
MR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of the local governments financing as related to the 1 percent VAT, when Graduated Tax was abolished, VAT was increased from 17 percent to 18 percent to cater partly for this local governments financing. From the report, it is very clear that since this money was instituted, it has never been remitted to local governments. This is how these governments have been crippled. That is the reason some Members think the creation of districts is a burden, yet with this financing, I am sure even the new districts would feel a bit of comfort. 

I am very happy with the report that a study should be instituted –(Interjections)- maybe it is ongoing. But the study should not look merely on how to create districts, but also look at how the districts should be managed in terms of finances, including the old districts which may think they are okay when they are not. Therefore, the study should look at the new districts and those that will be created to see how all the districts will be above “sea level”. 

On the sharing of loyalties, the report was very clear that guidelines must be made on how these loyalties should be shared. With the project in Ministry of Energy on discovery of minerals and the possibility of exploiting them, revenue coming from these minerals like oil and gas is going to be a reality. Therefore, we should not have mere guidelines, but hard facts on how they are going to be managed so that they do not become a source of conflict in this country. Bunyoro is ready with its oil and we want to know what we shall get.

Lastly, on LC elections, every Member is concerned that these elections are not being held. The issue of resources which is being given for not holding these elections – could we borrow a leaf from the previous elections? Recently, we had party primaries of NRM which were conducted at the village level. Possibly the Electoral Commission would consult on how they did it. These elections were relatively peaceful and there are not as many petitions as we have for the other levels –(Member timed out_)

5.20
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start with information. After this Parliament agreed to join the East African Union, matters of consumption tax, and in particular VAT - the tax rate of VAT - were determined in Arusha. All countries of the East African Community pay 18 percent on VAT. Therefore, the report that says that 1 percent was recommended is not true; that was agreed upon in the East African Community. The ministers of finance sit in Arusha and determine the tax rates within the East African Union.

The second point I would like to comment on is on page 30. I would like to know from the chairperson or the minister; what sort of taxes are those that the local governments pay? Is it VAT, or withholding tax or import duty? Let it be clarified and the figure be known.

When you look at the table indicating performance in 2010, it is a lumpsum figure. The amount paid the previous financial year is the same paid this year. So, we would like to get it clear on the sort of taxes being paid consistently by the local governments.

The third point I have is to ask the minister – since Parliament passed the law on regional governments, why don’t you operationalise that law so that we can have a centre for service delivery instead of creating more districts and conditions within that law? The Seventh Parliament passed that law, yet it has never been implemented. What happened to that law? Please, operationalise that law so that we can benefit from it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.23
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on unconditional grants, where the committee says the unconditional grants of all the districts have been decreased. You may realise that currently, many of the districts created depend on unconditional grants. There are new districts without local revenue as is required and others have only one county.  Therefore, I would like to agree with the committee that the unconditional grants that have been reduced should be increased.

Currently, the government is not thinking of increasing sub-counties and counties. We were talking of increasing districts not knowing that in order to bring effective services; it is better to create counties and sub-counties. For example, in my district, we have only one county and the county is a district. In other districts, they have only four councillors because the district has only two sub-counties. (Laughter) Therefore, instead of insisting on creating more districts, let us develop the current districts by creating more sub-counties -(Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. In the same district he is talking about, this information is useful. We have an LC V chairman and the RDC. The RDC has a vehicle of Shs 90 million he uses for travelling; but the internally-generated funds in the district cannot help the LC V chairperson buy a car which is almost similar to that of the RDC. The result is the LC V chairman continuing to walk while the RDC enjoys that type of life. (Interjections) That is the information.

MR OLANYA: Thank you. I propose that instead of creating new districts, let us start by creating new counties and sub-counties.
 
I would like to inform this august House that the LC I of my area abandoned his work and said he is tired of being the LC I. (Laughter) He has locked his term in the box and the community is not getting services because Government has never held elections for LC I. They are very tired, frustrated and demoralised. (Member timed out_)   

5.27
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the minister for a job well done. I have a few questions. 

When will the minister bring the Bill on federal governments? I ask this because this Bill will answer many of the questions being raised. When you talk about loyalties and about creation of new districts; this Bill, in my view, will be able to answer these questions.

I have taken note of the observation by the committee, on money returned to the Government Treasury at the end of the financial year. I think this disease is becoming chronic in nature. Year-in, year-out, we find the Minister of Finance releasing money towards the end of the financial year, yet we know there is an encumbrance to the utilisation of this money beyond the deadline of 30 June. This is impacting negatively on the operations of local governments. The Minister of Finance needs to know that every year, there is going to be a financial year, and there is need to plan appropriately.

Many years have passed now; we keep talking about hard-to-reach areas advocating for preferential treatment for people who want to go to those areas. In this age, why should a modern country like Uganda, with a government that claims to be upright, be talking about hard-to-reach areas? When I was growing up, being posted to Karamoja was not a problem; not even after being posted to Kalangala Islands would you experience a problem, because it was possible to go to every part of this country without difficulty. We need to redefine our course and make all parts of this country accessible. Make it possible for the services that are found in Kampala to be found in Bundibugyo, and in West Nile. It is only then that we will believe the country is operating a system.

Lastly, allow me to comment on just one thing about the bicycles. This is glaring theft. It is glaring theft and rather than wait for the Attorney-General, we should constitute a select committee to look into this glaring theft. (Member timed out_)

5.30
DR SAMUEL LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have only one point to raise and it concerns the Civil Service College. This came up in the Eighth Parliament and the motion had been moved to handle this matter; but the motion was overtaken when Parliament expired. The same matter has come up from the Uganda Management Institute (UMI) in the Committee on Social Services which I chair. Initially, the services that the so-called Civil Service College is supposed to perform are the same objectives and functions of UMI. 

When the loan was being negotiated, a fight erupted between the Minister of Public Service and the Minister of Education. Because the Minister of Public Service had more weight, the Second Deputy Prime Minister wasoverrun and this matter ended up going to Public Service. 

I would like to notify the House that this matter has been clearly handled by the Committee on Social Services and we have a very different view from the Committee on Public Service. Also, this matter is in the Office of the Speaker, on a motion, pending to harmonise – because there is no way you can start buying land, when you have land at UMI. All these are Government institutions and you want to duplicate because – then you start running what is called caravan courses, and you do not even have – you are even hiring other lecturers, the same people who are at UMI. 

MR ATIKU: Thank you. The information I would like to give is that in Arua, we have a lot of land. I will be very glad if this Parliament agrees that this Civil Service College is taken to Arua where there is no encumbrance. (Laughter)  

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, but the point I am making is that this is a case of bad management or a scheme to defraud Government of money by people in high offices. It is a matter that is going to come up in the report of our committee. Also, we shall request Parliament to sanction a serious investigation to find out who was behind this scheme. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.33
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. 


My concern is on page four of the report. I just read through it and found out that there are 200kms of completed roads and 378kms which are yet to be completed. I appeal to this House - because I come from a hard-to-reach district – that these roads should be considered first because in a district like Kanungu, we have many foodstuffs but we cannot access the nearest markets. 

Secondly, they are also telling us that they managed to inspect and reach some districts and urban councils. I do not know what they found out because in my district, when you go to some sub-counties, the situation is bad; the structures are very old. I do not know whether they reached Kanungu, and whether there is a good plan for that district. 

Finally, on the Nakawa-Naguru property, I do not know what plan there is, but I would pray to this House and wish that it is not given to these foreign developers. When I carried out an investigation, I found that most of these big developments are done by people who are foreigners and they take a lot of money from Uganda. 

I wish this land was given to a Ugandan or maybe have Government offices erected there because Government is paying billions of money every year on renting office space. This land could be used for offices of Government departments.  

5.37
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all congratulate you upon your elevation to the office of Deputy Speaker. (Applause)

I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. This Parliament is well known for coming up with good laws. One of those laws is a requirement that any Bill before presentation to this Parliament must have a certificate of financial implications. In the Seventh Parliament, this committee passed a law on regional governments and the districts of Bunyoro, composed of Masindi, Hoima, Kibaale, Bulisa and now Kiryandongo, passed council resolutions to the effect that they would wish to operate under the regional government. 

It is now seven years down the road and this law has never been implemented and there is no mention of it even in the committee’s report. 

Do we only pass laws here for the sake of it or should we pass laws that we know will be operationalised; even after the Ministry of Finance presented a certificate of financial implications, indicating that we have money which will operationalise those laws? I would like to know from the Minister of Local Government, and it is good that he has been in that ministry for some time - when this regional government law will be implemented. If other regions are not ready, let those who are ready and have passed the council resolutions be allowed to operationalise so that we go ahead to put in place the regional government and all those other sectors so that some of these services, which are actually not being brought to the people, like roads, education and health are provided. 

Mr Speaker, I will be happy to get a response to that. If not, I will come up with an oral question to that effect so that the minister can respond.

In my district, there are many local government pensioners who up to today have not been paid their arrears. I am happy that the committee came up with such an observation and recommendation. 

Government needs to handle these issues because some of these pensioners are in the last minutes of their lives. They need to be paid their pension so that they put certain things right; to educate their children and even feed their families. People are sick and if you keep somebody’s money and that person served this nation diligently, then we shall not be helping them.

5.41
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I salute you all hon. Members. The roles of Government need to be reviewed. There are two tendencies which are dividing people – the tendency of going towards the centre and the tendency of going towards the local. 

The creation of regional governments is a tendency of shifting from the local focus towards the centre. Have we achieved the purpose of creating local governments? We have not. 

Therefore, what we should do to improve local governance is by going beyond the districts to the sub-counties and even to the villages. If you want to improve governance, use the bottom-up approach. How can you think about setting-up a government at the top when at the bottom you have killed the same government? The government of LCs is dead and this LC I person does all the work of the three arms of Government. They sit and adjudicate cases; they make their local policies and they are also the Executive. Therefore, Mr Speaker, let us organise the elections of LC I; let us finance them and equip them with means of transport. 

Coming to the level of the district, we should review the policy of decentralisation. There are some crucial staff who cannot be readily available in the local governments. Even if the district was to advertise, these people are not there. The centre should send them there. For example, if you look at the District Director of Health Services, the CAO and the District Planning Unit, these are people who must be highly qualified. They may not be readily available and, therefore, cannot be supported by the finances raised from there. The Central Government should deploy these people from the centre and withdraw and transfer them as and when deemed fit. 

There is a lot of inefficiency even in the local councils. A supervisor, irrespective of whether you are related, you are a supervisor; you monitor people who are employed in the Civil Service.

How does a councillor monitor Government programmes if he does not have means of transport? How can he move if he does not have a motorcycle or even a bicycle? 

In addition to sending people from the centre, once you know that there is a position provided for election of a councillor, you must budget for at least a motorcycle for every councillor. There must be minimum national standards from where every district can take off. If a district has more capacity to raise revenue then they can improve the conditions of work of their local government staff and councillors beginning from the minimum national standards. 

I sympathise with my district. It has civil servants and councillors who do not have means of transport and yet they have a huge area to cover with poor roads. They are supposed to supervise and monitor Government programmes. (Member timed out­_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have covered quite some ground on this matter and we should be drawing to a close now. I am going to ask -(Hon. Members rose_) would you like to first sit when the Speaker is speaking?

I propose that we roll this up because we are going to give the opportunity to three ministers and then we go back to the Chair of the Committee before we close and -(Members rose_)- because we still have these discussions going on tomorrow and on other sectors. Can we roll this to a close so that we are energetic enough tomorrow to proceed with the other matters? Can we agree that we reduce it to one minute now? Can you adjust the timing to one minute? 

HON. MEMBERS: Agreed. We are adjusting the timing to one minute. 

5.47 
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have only one concern and it is about the women councils. Women council elections have not been held for a long time. After the split of the districts, it was found that some new districts were left with no member on the women councils. Funds for women councils are being released on a quarterly basis and I wonder what the technical officers are going to do with that matter if the money is being held on the account. That is my concern. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.48
MS THEOPISTA NABULYA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the salary disparities. It is very unfortunate to have such within our ministries, the Local Government and Public Service because it is an abrogation of the national Constitution under article 40(1)(b). I do not want to read it verbatim because there is no time. It is already an abrogation and we are members of the ILO and we have it in our laws. I do not know what is happening. It is very unethical. People should be paid according to the work done. So, this disparity should be rectified immediately. 

Secondly, on the issue of non recruitment of workers, we are crying of high unemployment rates, but why don’t you allow people to get jobs? Vacancies are there. What is it?

Thirdly, we have this issue of the national records centre. I think it is a vein which we should keep because it keeps all the records that we want in this country and it is good for us to even inform the generations to come that we have such information. So, what is the problem? After approving that loan in 2008 up to now, the centre is not yet constructed. Can we know what happened? Thank you. 

5.49
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): My concern is on page 5 of the response. In Australia, there is a tool the hunters use called the boomerang. When you throw a boomerang to a bird to kill it, in case you do not get that bird, the boomerang comes back to the leg of the one who has thrown it.

Now, the Ministry of Finance assured us that they wanted to reduce costs and on page 5, they talked about seminars. In 2010, it was Shs 6.3 billion then they raised it to Shs 11.3 billion. Where is the boomerang heading? I would like to know.

Also, Mr Speaker, concerning poor remuneration of workers in Uganda, I am very interested to know the salary scale of these drivers in Ministry of Education and other departments. It is very painful to find a civil servant like a teacher earning Shs 260,000 and you have a driver who is getting a million and he “milks” the cars every evening to get the fuel. What does the teacher milk from the pieces of chalk? (Member timed out_)

5.50
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to remind the committee chairman and the minister in charge on the second point concerning urban planning. You are aware that the President went around announcing regional cities and Arua was one of them. When I read through the policy statement, there was no mention of operationalising regional cities and I am sure if this was done, people would move away from the issue of creation of districts because cities themselves are better opportunities for service delivery and at the same time are opportunities for employment. Thank you.

5.52
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am grateful because this is my maiden speech. I wish to comment about the salary increment. It should be handled urgently. 

I would like to restrict myself to Kabale District, which for over five years, has not had a district surgeon, not because it is a hard-to-reach area, but because all those who are transferred there say the payment does not allow them to go and settle in Kabale - a hospital that caters for Kisoro, Ntungamo, Rukungiri and Kamwenge. 

I also wish to find out from the minister whether this Shs 68 billion for pension is really enough because I wish this problem would be resolved once and for all. I do not mind, like hon. Wafula Oguttu said, if it requires that we increase this budget. The issue of pension has been thoroughly tackled. Thank you.

5.53
MR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Mr Speaker, a nation which does not treasure her history and learn from it is as good as dead and I believe the safest and the surest way of keeping the treasures of history is actually the establishment of national records and archives. I have learnt from the report of the committee with great astonishment that for over three years, there is finance available up to the tune of over $3.7 million and it has been lying there without being utilised for constructing a centre. May I know from the minister concerned why such an important project of national importance to the treasures of this nation has not taken off for over three years? 

5.54
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, who was also my Speaker at Makerere. I have information as the Chairman, Committee on National Economy and one substantive issue. The question of Parliament passing laws like hon. Bintu has put it on the regional tier is the same as the other of declaring the whole country a planning area, which the last Parliament passed. But when you look at the budget, you do not find money for town councils which are being created to make the whole country a planning area. And actually, it is the regional tier and urbanisation of a country which would deliver services to reduce the pressure on the new districts. So, I thought I should comment on that. 

Mr Speaker, allow me give information to this Parliament as a person who has been on the Committee on National Economy for six years. First of all, the correction I want to make is that the loan given was $23 million and not $7.3 million; the loan request was of $72 million. Parliament slashed that loan because we found it was not well structured or well-intended. The matter even went up to State House in Nakasero. It is now over four years since Parliament approved the Shs 23 million, but we are still being told the archives will be made and we are still looking for land –(Member timed out_)

5.57
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In this month of fasting for the Muslims, I am requesting that when debating, you at least consider some of us who are fasting so that we have time to go and break the fast. That is my request. 

But what I want to raise is the issue of border conflicts. I have seen all the local government ministers here. Our people are almost killing each other. When you go to the Ministry of Local Governments, they say border demarcation is under the Ministry of Lands; when you go to the Ministry of Lands, they say it is under the Ministry of Local Governments. Which ministry is responsible for solving those conflicts? 

In Yumbe, we have a problem with Moyo, Koboko and Arua; people are now with their arrows and bows on standby. I remember in 2005, there was a commission instituted under the Ministry of Local Governments; they have the report. Why can’t they implement the report now? (Member timed out_)

5.58
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to comment on two issues. The matter of LC Is and LC IIs. The term of office of these leaders at LC I and LC II are a constitutional matter. We are constitutionally obliged to hold these elections and we swore to uphold the Constitution. So, failure to conduct these elections as provided for in the Constitution and in the law, is breaching the Constitution and the minister responsible should be on notice on the constitutional provisions in regard to breaching that Constitution -(Member timed out_)

5.59
MR BARNABAS TINKASIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the Eighth Parliament, we proposed that more money could be generated through the reform of Government pleats; that this money, over Shs 200 billion, would be saved and go to running of local governments. Definitely, if that is done, we would not be having crippled local governments. I also want to inform honourable members that a district which is being demarcated like Kagadi is more viable. It has over 70 councillors; that is, a UPE class and a speaker cannot manage it. It is becoming a problem to run such a council; even service delivery – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we have 375 members.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, you must acknowledge that you are a lawyer and more competent in handling matters and you have microphones here, but in the council chambers, there are no microphones. The speaker is not as educated as you are and it is really chaos. Even as we talk, they are mobilising on the ground to reject a budget which is their constitutional obligation to pass. You are going to see it happen tomorrow –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finally, I will have hon. Ssempijja and then I will ask the minister to make a response before I call the chairperson. 

6.01
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since I have one minute, I would like to say that it is very unfortunate that the proposition of the total local government transfers to local governments is 17 percent, because if you are committed to decentralisation, by now we should be at around 30 percent of the total budget transfers to the local governments. Physical decentralisation demands that local governments raise their own revenue, but everybody knows that the revenues that are left for local governments are those which are hard to collect. I wish to submit that Government should forego some easy-to-collect taxes for local governments, like income tax –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me ask the honourable ministers to come, in the order in which they are ready to make responses and the chairperson will close. 

6.03
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (MR Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, first of all, for interacting with the ministry and for presenting the views of the ministry and indeed the policy statement as discussed in the committee. I would also like to thank you honourable members on both sides of the House, for your very good contributions to this report. 
 
In the interest of time, I will respond to the issues in the order that they were raised by the committee.  

The power to create districts lies with Parliament. The provisions of Article 179 are very clear.  But it is not out of place for His Excellency the President who is the Chief Executive, to make proposals because, even under Article 93, although Parliament has the power to create districts, the proposal to create them must come from the Executive and of course, from the President. 

I would like to confirm to this House and to the country that all the commitments that the President made on creation of new districts, will be fulfilled by Government as a commitment. (Applause) However, I respect the observation of the committee that subsequent creation of districts must be rationalised. That is the spirit in which I captured the comments of the committee. My opinion is that the proposals of the President and the recommendation of the committee are not in contradiction; we shall present the new districts but, as hon. Kasirivu observed, both the old and the new districts’ management and financing must be rationalised.  

On urban planning, we are already working with the Ministry of Lands to harmonise urban planning in this country. The consultations have just started and when the two ministries have finalised the study, we shall be in position to come to this House to present our report.

I totally agree with the observations of the committee on the staffing gaps in the local governments and more specifically, in hard-to-reach areas. And I would like to concur with the proposal made by the committee that   Government should fill the gaps up to 65 percent. Fortunately, the Minister of Public Service is in the House; we shall definitely work together to make sure this is done. (Ms Aol rose_)

When Members were contributing, I never interrupted. I have been listening for the last four hours. I would like to request that I respond and conclude this subject, if you allow me. (Ms Aol rose_) Since the honourable member is insisting, I will give way for half a second.

MS AOL: Thank you, hon. Minister for giving way. Before you leave this creation and urban planning, there were meant to be four new cities to be created, Mbarara, Jinja, Mbale and Gulu but the committee is very silent about that matter. Could you, please, tell us something about those four cities? Thank you. 
 
MR MWESIGE: I was coming to the issue of cities, hon. Member. As soon as you mention the four cities of Gulu, Mbarara, Jinja and Mbale, Members will be asking why not Arua? Why not Tororo? Why not Fort Portal? So, what lesson do we get from that? The lesson is that we can have a repeat of the problem we fell into when we started creating districts, if we just start creating cities without a careful study. So, the proposal of the ministry is; yes, there is no doubt that some towns like Gulu, Jinja, Mbale and Mbarara are really due for city status. When Kampala became a city in the 1970s - I do not recall very well - 74 and so on, its size must have even been smaller than the size of Gulu.  But our position as a ministry is that we are carrying out a comprehensive study on the criteria for creation of cities and when we are ready, we shall definitely come to you.  

On the election of LC I and LC II councils, the mandate to hold elections lies with the Electoral Commission and not the Ministry of Local Government.  But I would like to say that the reason elections of LC I have not taken place since 2006 are two; one is political and the other is financial. It was political in the sense that we were due to hold elections in 2006. The government was ready with funds but some citizens of Uganda represented by Mr Rubaramira Ruranga went to court and challenged the status of LCs. The matter dragged in court for three years and was only concluded last year. So, we could not hold elections when the case was still in court.

But after court had taken a decision, Government had to come back to Parliament to review the law on local governments to make it conform to what the Constitutional Court had decided. So, the law was reviewed; now, we have a new law that conforms with the multiparty political system. The only problem is lack of funds. But I am happy that Parliament is thinking aloud; where can we get these funds to make sure that LC elections are held?  

I think it is something that we must all own. Perhaps when we come to discussing the budget in the report presented by the Budget Committee, we shall look at funding for these elections. I agree with you that elections for LCIs must take place; they are very important. But the only problem Government has now are the funds to do that.  

I am told the Electoral Commission requires Shs 98 billion to hold LCI and LCII elections. If things become very difficult and we fail to get the money, I will be making a proposal to see if we can review the law and procedure to make these elections cheaper. That is the option I am exploring and when I come to this House with my proposal, please, give me the support because we cannot keep in circles just because we do not have money. 

Mr Speaker, on the question of councillors’ allowances, we have come a long way because when these councils were created many years ago, councillors were not earning anything at all.  At one time, even LC V chairpersons were not earning a salary; now they get something like Shs 2 million. At the time I joined Parliament, Members of Parliament here were getting Shs 60,000 a month, but they are now getting something substantial. At one time, councillors were not getting anything at all, but now Government makes sure that at least every month every councillor at the district level has a retainer fee of Shs 120,000; it is small but better than nothing. 

Secondly, when councillors sit, they also get some sitting allowance in addition to the monthly fixed allowance. When the economy improves, definitely Government will have to review the pay for these councillors.  

A Member raised the issue of municipal speakers and deputy speakers; at the municipal level, where I have been inspecting, lately, there is some reasonable degree of revenue collection. I know of municipalities where speakers earn about Shs 600,000 a month, which is not even earned by district executive members. So, municipalities have the benefit of generating local revenue because areas of revenue like taxi parks, markets and other facilities are in municipalities.  So, they are not as badly off as they are being presented.

I share the concerns of the committee on the irregularities that have been highlighted on the procurement of bicycles and I would like to say that the ministry has not been “sitting” because when this matter came to our attention, we instituted investigations by Police under the Criminal Investigations Department. 

But I would like to welcome the proposal made by the committee that a forensic audit of this procurement be carried out. I have no objection to that and I am willing to give any assistance to this audit to make sure that the truth in this procurement comes out. I fully support the recommendation of the committee and any other form of investigation that you may wish to do.

On the protection of local government financing, I totally share the views of the committee on the study by the Committee on Local Government Accounts, to expedite the study for mechanisms to compensate local governments for revenue lost. I totally support this, but also the Local Government Finance Commission has actually started on this study.

On the total transfers to local governments, I share the views of the committee that this drop from 23 percent to 17 percent, certainly, is not good for local governments. The trend must be reversed. We are fortunate that the power to re-align these figures lies with the Parliament, both through the Budget Committee and the Committee of Supply. So, this is an opportunity, in my view, for us to look at this more critically and I totally support it.

I do not support the re-introduction of Graduated Tax because Government had reasons to abolish it. We came to this Parliament and in our wisdom, agreed to abolish Graduated Tax. So, it is not the intention of Government to have it revived.

The alternative taxes which Government introduced at the local level, local hotel tax and local service tax, are not doing well because they are new taxes. The population is yet to appreciate the importance of these taxes and the methods of collection are yet to improve, but there is a gradual improvement because when we started, we were collecting about Shs 4 billion, but now the collection has improved from about Shs 8 to Shs 9 billion.

They are improving but slowly. I would like to recommend that Parliament continues to support us like they did a few years ago when in the Local Government Act itself you provided for tax compensation. I would like to continue to request the support of Parliament that Graduated Tax compensation to local governments should continue until they are able to catch up with the new taxes.

The recommendations on the Equalisation Grant are taken. The recommendations on cutting and reducing the budget on seminars and workshops - I think the kind of seminars that we do in the Ministry of Local Government are different as one Member observed - I think it was hon. Gudoi. The rate of turnover in Parliament here is 60 percent every five years. The rate of turnover in local governments is 75 percent. The bulk of the councillors you find in local councils are new. So, the money you find in our budget is not for the normal ordinary workshops of wasteful expenditure. These workshops are meant to induct the new councillors in the workings of the local government system. You can imagine a councillor who has just been elected, and he has never been to school, scrutinising budget documents, looking at tax policies -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Hon. Minister, for giving way. I support you on that argument of having the seminars and workshops, but we could reduce them by having qualifications for these councillors. If they have some level of qualification, the rate at which you induct them will not be like for those who have not gone to school. The level of inducting where someone has to appreciate concepts becomes a problem. When are you thinking of having minimum qualifications for these councillors?

I remember when we went with the Speaker and Deputy Speaker to Northern and Eastern Uganda, it was the recommendation of the local government authority to have a minimum qualification to enable us have appropriate people in the council. This is because in some councils, even the reading of – you read in the papers when they were swearing that some people could not even read the oath. So, if you have such people, training them to a certain level takes a lot of money.

MR MWESIGYE: I thank hon. Okupa for the proposal, but with due respect, I am reluctant to - I can comment, but I would not really buy it because the majority of our people who voted us into this Parliament are not educated, but these are our people. They are citizens and have rights that we have, notwithstanding the fact that they never went to school. So, our view as Government is that they must fully participate in the affairs which affect them. So, we shall do everything possible to educate them in the language they understand to appreciate Government procedures.

I agree with the recommendation of the committee on remitting 1 percent VAT to local governments. This position was adopted long ago, maybe the Minister of Finance who is here will comment on that. I think it is a good proposal that would help local governments to work. I also agree that royalties to local governments should be paid and paid on time because they are provided for in the law.

There are a few comments like District Service Commissions being borrowed from other districts. This is true, especially for new districts, which cannot have their own commissions immediately they are created. It is also true because some districts do not have qualified people to work on District Service Commissions. We have experienced this, so, sometimes when districts must recruit staff, the law allows them the flexibility to borrow the services of a neighbouring district service commission. 

But we are doing everything possible with the Ministry of Public Service to make sure that every district has got its own district service commission.

The function of physical planning is not a function of the Ministry of Local Government. I would like to pray that that question be posed to the Ministry of Lands. 

On the question of regional governments, I would like to inform honourable members that the Bill on regional governments has never been passed by this Parliament. There is an impression, which has been created that it was passed but the problem is that the Ministry of Local Government has not implemented the Bill.

The Constitution does not operationalise itself. It requires an enabling law to put it into practice. The Bill on regional governments is now in this Parliament. I do not sit on the Business Committee of Parliament. I presented it here for the first reading and it is up to the Parliament to schedule it for discussion.

Mr Speaker, women councils are not a mandate of the Ministry of Local Government. I would like to advise that when the policy statement for the Ministry of Gender is being discussed, this matter should be raised. 

I have already made a comment on regional cities.

Settling border conflicts is a function of the Ministry of Lands because they have the infrastructure in terms of surveyors, cartographers and other staff to go on the ground, determine and demarcate borders -(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. On this issue of borders, I was the very one who went to the Minister of Lands and he sent me to you. You gave me a letter to be taken to the district so that the district could get money and request the Ministry of Lands to send the surveyors. 

This is the information I wanted to give to you because you are moving from right to left without giving us the right direction. Thank you. (Laughter)

MS OLERU: Thank you. This issue of land and border conflicts is real and we must not dodge it. Otherwise, you will witness people in West Nile dying like nobody’s business. There is a rumour that you, hon. Mwesige, went to West Nile, specifically to Arua, two weeks ago with the RDC of Arua. You went up to Ewanga, asking people where they wanted to belong. Why did you leave out all the local leaders of West Nile? The issue is explosive and you must handle it. Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to make a quick submission without delaying Members. We are all politicians and we excited LCs. The Minister should tell us what we should do about the issue of bicycles. This issue has created a lot of anxiety among the LCs. If these people took the money, should we pass more money to give you? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what is going on now? Are you giving your final remarks?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I am sorry for – Hon. Baba Diri, I did the right thing as a colleague because when you come to my office, even if you have come to a wrong forum, I cannot just dismiss you. It is my job to attend to you and help you go to the right offices. I am now advising – 

MRS BABA DIRI: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable minister for giving way again. But is it in order for him to claim that he wrote the letter just because he knows me yet he wrote a letter on a headed paper from the Ministry of Local Government and signed as the Minister of Local Government? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Minister has said that he facilitated you to reach to the right ministry. And that is exactly what you have repeated in your point of order that he sent you to the district to raise money so that surveyors could come and carry out surveys. He had earlier said that the responsibility lies with the Ministry of Lands.

MR MWESIGE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. On going to Yumbe, I would like to be on record that I was not in Yumbe last week. The last time I was there, it was in 2009. And whenever I go to districts I first report to the headquarters. I make sure, where practicable, I inform the members of Parliament who hail from those districts because that is the procedure this Parliament has set. 

So, I was not in Yumbe recently, and if I have to go there again, I will inform the hon. Oleru. 

Finally, on bicycles, this Parliament has recommended an investigation. So, beyond that, I do not want to sentence people in the plenary.  (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking for your indulgence. It is true that the committee has recommended an audit by the Auditor-General. But this is a very simple matter that the committee can handle once we finish the budget. The people who were given the money are known and the Constitution gives Parliament power to summon anybody in any part of the world and so these fellows should be handled immediately instead of waiting for the Auditor-General for a full year. I suggest that we reject that recommendation by the committee and instead ask it to handle the matter in two months and produce a report.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here with a “burning heart” and I am shading tears from inside. (Laughter) Just last week, about 200 LC Is met me and they really undressed me, saying the President and I lied to them with regard to the supply of the bicycles. When I read this recommendation, I thought that maybe my colleagues were just window-dressing this issue and I did not like it at all. I am glad that some other people were also touched. This is not the way to handle this issue. This is something we should pronounce ourselves on today. 

Money was released which could have been sent to districts. If we continue handling such sensitive matters with kid gloves, we shall not go far. I know of a relative who lost a big job simply because she had mishandled a contract worth Shs 15 million and yet we are talking of $1.7 billion. Unless there is connivance, the Minister must come out very clearly and tell us what he is trying to do. As a member of the NRM and a person who stood together with the President and promised that LCs should get bicycles, I need a proper answer today. Otherwise, this budget should not be passed. (Applause)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I totally agree with the proposal by hon. Ekanya. Committees of this Parliament have all the powers under the Constitution to investigate, oversee and summon anybody. [Hon. Members: “Including you.”] Including me, of course, that is obvious. The Committee on Local Government had already put questions on this matter. If it is the wish of this House that the committee investigates the matter and reports back to you within a time period you choose, I have no objection.

6.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker –

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. On this matter of bicycles, hon. Byarugaba raised very important submissions and he was seeking a final decision by the House on the matter. The Minister of Local Government said he is agreeable to the proposals of hon. Byarugaba, but we have not concluded on the appropriate course of action this House will take in relation to the bicycle issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know how to move this House. I cannot move this House as Speaker. 

We are discussing the report of the committee; we will pronounce ourselves on the report as presented with modifications if possible. 

And then, at that time when we are now approving or disapproving whether in whole or part of the report, that is when that matter will come up properly and be decided upon. I am hoping that, that is going to happen today because I want it to happen today. That is why we want to finish with all the preliminary issues.

Hon. Mbaguta, please continue. 

MRS PRISCA MBAGUTA SEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report that they have presented, but also the deliberations we had with them. I would also like to thank the committee for the interest they took to visit the Ministry of Public Service for fact-finding. 

Regarding the Civil Service College, the report has indicated that we should look at the college with the view of the land. I would like to lay on the Table a letter from the Uganda Land Commission that confirms that the government land at Nile Crescent has been secured for the Civil Service College. I would like to lay on Table –(Interruption)

MS NAMARA: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the honourable minister is; the committee is talking about the availability of land. Is the letter which she is laying on Table an offer letter or just a communication from the commission to the ministry? Is it an offer? We need an offer letter on the availability of land.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a procedural matter. We have a standing proposal as the Committee on Social Services on this issue of the Civil Service College and there is also a pending motion, but we are seeing the money being used quickly before the other motions come. So, on a point of procedure, at what stage should we stop - because you see people are rushing to use money so that by the time we move a motion and try to align, money will be used?
 
Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance on how we move so that we stop any money being used for now until this matter is resolved within a timeframe.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As the Ninth Parliament, we cannot continue debating the Civil Service College; what was raised in the last three years of Parliament and money is being lost. In the motion I presented to Parliament last year, the intention was to stop the money which was lost on consultancy by Public Service when actually, the Ministry of Education under UMI had done the same. 

Government of Uganda has done a lot of duplication. I laid on Table a presentation by UMI showing that they had done the same things; they had plans that they had submitted and they had land. What they wanted was to run two channels; the private sector training and the Public Service training, but it is unfortunate the hegemony between Cabinet ministers; the Education Minister says, “We want it in UMI”, Public Service says, “It is our thing”. 

We advised them to take this back to Cabinet and come with a harmonised position. What do we see in this budget? Some million dollars have been spent for consultancy? Can we pronounce ourselves on this so that we have some order? If you put a service college in Jinja, are you going to first give leave to your civil servants who are in Kampala to go to Jinja? UMI is central, people can do evening courses and weekend courses. Even the Jinja thing is misplaced. Why are we protecting a bad thing? By the way, for the four years the loan has been committed, Government is paying a penalty. What are we looking for in this bad project?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there will be time for us to take a decision on this matter. Our rules, hon. Lyomoki, bar us from debating in anticipation. If you have a motion that is coming, we cannot debate anything based on that motion before it comes. That would violate the rule on anticipation. 

So, let us restrict ourselves to what is before us and handle it. I would request that the minister finishes so that we can go to the decision point of what we are going to decide about what the committee has recommended. If we need to make amendments, we will do that.

MRS PRISCA MBAGUTA SEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of the Civil Service College in terms of objective -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was the issue of, what form is that letter?

MRS PRISCA MBAGUTA SEZI: The letter is a letter of offer of the land. They will provide us with a land title and that was a letter of confirmation by the Uganda Land Commission.

There was an issue on remuneration which was raised by many Members. We appreciate the concern of Members on the payment of civil servants. I do appreciate the committee’s recommendation that we establish a remuneration board. As Government, we had presented it earlier to Parliament and it had not been accepted, but now we are happy; as Government, we are going to start the procedure for establishing a remuneration commission or board, as Members have said. 

On the issue of disparities of pay, the salary structure of Government was established following a job evaluation. That job evaluation does determine the level at which individual jobs are paid and that job evaluation has been guiding the salary structure. It highlights the medical officers’ salary which has been raised; the doctors, the health workers and the scientists are actually not paid at the same level as other cadres.

We shall continue to improve the remuneration of public officers. We make comparative studies during the determination, but we also have a constraint that this Parliament passes laws for agencies that gives them powers to determine their salaries. I hope that when the remuneration board is put in place, there may be a need to review or to look at those laws that set up those agencies as approved by Parliament.

There was an issue on the minimum wage. I am not competent to make a statement on the minimum wage because it is misdirected to the Ministry of Public Service. The minimum wage issue is a mandate of Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I hope that when their report is being discussed, that issue should be discussed.

I had wanted to also indicate the Public Service that we are dealing with as defined by the Constitution. The Public Service is only ministries, departments and local governments. That is how it is defined by the Constitution for those bodies that draw directly from the Consolidated Fund. 

So, when we are asked to give pension to religious leaders – and with all due respect to religious leaders - you must be aware that Uganda, under Article 7 of the Constitution did not adopt a state religion. So, if there is no state religion, I see no way we can embrace the payment of religious leaders as public officers. 

A public officer is any person holding and acting in an office in the Public Service and it also means that that civil servant is serving in a civil capacity in the Government of Uganda, for whom emoluments are drawn from the Consolidated Fund or money is directly voted by this Parliament. That, therefore, excludes religious leaders.

On the issue of promotions to raise motivation and that public officers are not being handled properly, I would like to say that the Constitution in Article 173 protects public officers. “A public officer shall not be – 

a)	victimised or discriminated against for having performed his or her duty faithfully in accordance with the Constitution; or
b)	Dismissed or removed from office or reduced in rank or punished without a just cause.”

So, this provision does protect public officers and they have a duty when they feel aggrieved to appeal in following the process of the law.

Mr Speaker, I would like to make a comment on the hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay places because that issue kept coming up. The hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay policy was intended to move teachers and health workers from areas which are easy to stay so that they are able to serve in those areas where there is need. 

I will confirm to the House when we make the assessment whether teachers are coming out of the municipalities or whether they are coming from the Malaba-Katuna access road and going to the hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay areas. We shall make a report in due course.

I would like to conclude by talking about pension. First, we would like to confirm to you that management of pension has been improved. When the Ninth Parliament started, I hoped that I would not be ambushed with papers claiming for pension. But since we started, I have not received a single note, unlike in the past. So, that indicates that there is great improvement in the management of pension.

In terms of arrears, they are still a challenge because the Shs 68 billion that has been given will not cover all the arrears. It is dependent on getting sufficient money. We are now having a forensic audit to determine the level of indebtedness. Once those resources are given, we shall work to ensure that our senior citizens receive their pension.

With the introduction of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS) we think and hope that access to the mainstream payroll and to the pensions payroll will improve, because currently, we need 90 days to process pension. Of course, access to the payroll is one month from the date of appointment. 

So, as this IPPS is rolled out into ministries, Government departments and local governments, access to the pension payroll will be easier because all the data will be on the system and all the calculations of the pension will be done and we will move from the current payroll to the pension payroll.

And I want to confirm to you hon. Members that we want to rollout this system of contention with effect from 1 October this financial year and we hope that those questions will be handled. 

But I would also like to inform you, hon. Members that pensions for local governments have been taken over by the Ministry of Public Service. There is one little constraint; we asked the Chief Administrative Officers to make submissions of those categories that have not been submitted and the process is slow. 

So, we entreat you to talk to the leaders in your constituencies to expedite the process; they are delaying the settlement. But I want to confirm that the Local Government pensions have also been taken over by the Central Government and we only need to include those who were not submitted to us. 

It is also important to note that some local governments, like Amuru, have not submitted their hard-to-reach staff so that they can access the hard-to-reach allowance, and there is a lot of correspondence. 

I conclude by referring to the issue of vehicles. I appreciate that it will save money. We had started on the exercise, but since the ministries got zero release from January to June, we could not complete that exercise as planned. We have been availed the resources for taking a census of vehicles and we hope that by the end of September, we will be able to report on what savings can be made and how many vehicles should remain in the system.

We are implementing the presidential directive to approve vehicles for sectors that are essential. That committee is functioning and only essential vehicles will be purchased and, therefore, there is also the scaling down of purchase of Government vehicles. 

I thank you very much for listening to me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Minister of Finance, do you have something to add?

6.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I congratulate you because it is my first time to contribute when you are in the chair. Issues raised under the Ministry of Finance include the issue of VAT of 1 percent to be given to local governments. The 18 percent that we collect from VAT is all taken to the Consolidated Fund and then given out as appropriated by the Parliament and this will continue as stated. 

The second issue raised was on conditional grants decreasing from Shs 156.9 billion to Shs 151.55 billion and then graduated tax compensation reduced from Shs 44.5 billion to Shs 41.1 billion. This is because KCCA Budget has moved from local governments to Central Government under Vote 122.

The other issue is on late releases to ministries, departments and agencies. Mr Speaker, you will note that we operate a cash budget and we have quarterised this budget. So, every three months, we give out the cash limits according to the revenue we collect. In the final quarter, which is the fourth quarter, the releases are given within those three months. Departments, ministries and agencies are required to operate within their approved work plans. Those who justify utilisation beyond the end of the financial year, we give them an additional three months within which to spend. However, a number of ministries, departments and agencies do not submit reports that are required to be able to get funds in good time. I can assure you that of late, agencies, departments and ministries have improved in the utilisation of funds that are given to them.

These are the areas that were raised under the Ministry of Finance and I thank you for this report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, can you briefly make some responses. I hope you are not going to illustrate too many issues because the matters have been fairly clear. 

6.55
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Through you, I would like to express the gratitude of the committee to you, hon. Members, for the lively debate we have had on the report. We have taken note of the issues raised. Most of the suggestions require that the committee makes a follow-up. On behalf of the committee, I would like to give you assurance that our committee will work very hard, follow up the issues and report to the House.

On the issue of the bicycles, I would like to suggest that the recommendation we had made be amended as follows:

“The committee finds substantial discrepancies in this contract and, therefore, recommends that this committee undertakes full and detailed investigation into this contract and reports to the House in three weeks’ time.” (Applause)

On the issue of the Civil Service College, I would like to confirm that the committee will stand by its observations and recommendations on this matter. I have a copy of the letter which the honourable minister has laid on Table. It is my considered opinion and we discussed the contents of the letter in the committee. It ends as –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was almost getting on the same point of procedure when the minister was laying this letter. The procedure here when you are laying a document, especially a document of that nature, is that you quote the source, the date, the heading and then read the whole letter such that we all have what is contained in that letter. Otherwise, sometimes we get misled. Someone will just quote a small section and leave the key issues. On that point, I request that the chairperson reads the contents of the letter because it is just one page such that we get to know before you come to the conclusion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed and give us the contents.

MR MAGYEZI: Much obliged. The letter is from Uganda Land Commission under the reference ULC/200 dated the 23 August, 2011. (Interjections) The letter is addressed to the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service, Kampala. It is headed, “Confirmation of the Government land at Nile Crescent has been secured for the Civil Service College.”

The contents of the letter, which in the opinion of the committee do not amount to an offer letter, I will read:

“Reference is made to your letter dated 16 August, 2011 referenced ADM/109/283/03 on the above subject addressed to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and copied to the Secretary, Land Commission, among others. 

This is to confirm to you that the Uganda Land Commission Board sat on 22 August, 2011 to consider the matter under ULC Minute 2/2011A30 on 22 August, 2011 where it was recommended by the board –(Interjections)- that the ULC fast-tracks the process of enabling the Public Service college acquire title to the land at Nile Crescent in Jinja Municipality by:

•	Relocating the allocatees of plots comprising these lands and identify alternative land at Walukuba, Jinja
•	Holding a meeting with the said allocatees to inform them of the decision above 
•	Cancelling the titles of the allocatees and preparing a title for the Public Service/Civil Service College 
•	Liaise with other Government departments to ensure that all due processes relevant to the above are duly satisfied and complied with. 

The commission will, therefore, avail the required title to the college only after the above are duly done and completed. We hope the process will be completed as soon as possible.”

The letter is signed by H.I. Kawesa, Secretary, Uganda Land Commission.

It is copied to the hon. Minister of Lands and Chairman, Uganda Land Commission. 

Clearly from this letter - because the committee sat and discussed it - legally, this is not an offer letter for land to the college. It is simply a commitment by the Commission that given certain factors, they will give the land, but it means you have to first remove the allocatees. (Interjections) We do not know what they will demand in terms of compensation. (Interjections) 

In Kampala City, we have had a developer who was given a certain facility and when it was removed from him, you have seen the exorbitant request he has asked for in terms of damages.

We will stand by our recommendation and we are saying, the Minister of Public Service, the Minister of Lands and the Uganda Land Commission, we are giving you three months to secure land and prove evidence of ownership of a plot of land, a facility in the names of Public Service/ Civil Service College. Without that, the committee is not prepared to recommend continuation of activities of the college.

Having also listened to the contributions of colleagues, especially those who were in the Eighth Parliament, about this matter, it is my opinion that probably this is a matter which cuts across committees. It seems there is information with the Committee on Social Services which we do not have in the Public Service committee. So, there may also be information in the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. So, I would propose we have a meeting amongst committees which are concerned and agree on a common way forward.

Mr Speaker, allow me to make a few corrections. Hon. Yaguma, on the school facility grant, he said, this grant is not being accessed by many local governments and that even Mbarara has not accessed it for some time. 

I know that this grant is important for school development, latrine construction and so on. In the policy document of the Ministry of Local Government, the actual release to local governments under the school facility grant last year, was Shs 27 billion. The provision this year is Shs 37 billion. Mbarara district is a beneficiary of the school facility grant and last year they got Shs 390,259,000 million and this year, they are again considered within the grant. It may not be adequate but I think let us correct the facts.

Hon. Kakooza, on the 1 percent VAT, submitted that this was decided in Arusha. I will at an appropriate time lay on Table a copy of the report. I am surprised that an honourable member is not aware of the various advisory notes to His Excellency the President, submitted by the Local Government Finance Commission on this matter, and the commitment by various Government institutions that this 1 percent VAT increase from 17 percent to 18 percent was aimed at establishing a local government fund in view of the abolition of Graduated Tax. 

Therefore, we hold our position and think it is important that this 1 percent VAT be paid to local governments. If we did that including the proposals of the agency fees and royalties – I would not buy the proposal of hon. Kikulukunyu that we should go back to the Graduated Tax. It will be burning our fingers. There are more viable, buoyant and easily collected revenues for local governments. Let us go for those rather than going in a direction which is not going to help us. (Applause)

Regarding the financing of local governments, the committee has put on Table the challenges we are facing in running the local governments. I received a noted from hon. Nankabirwa. Her concern is about the unconditional grant which is increasingly conditionalised because a bigger proportion is turned into wages. 

I totally agree with her and we have raised that matter. That is why we are very happy that this year the unconditional grant has been separated. We have the wage component and the non-wage component. So, now we are able to see that actually the non-wage component supposed to run decentralised service in all local governments is only Shs 25 billion. That is why the committee is strongly recommending an additional Shs 15 billion so that these local governments can have at least something to run their services. Otherwise, the unconditional grant has for a long time been a wage grant and wages are conditionalised. You cannot refuse to pay wages to staff. 

Therefore, we hope that when we come to discussions with the Budget Committee, we shall handle this question extensively, including the question of whether we are allocating resources into wrong priorities. Looking at the expenditure on workshops and seminars, with due respect to the honourable ministers we have here, I think it is important that we look back and say, why did His Excellency the President in the State of the Nation Address insist that workshops and seminars must go down? Why did it come out in the Budget Speech? This was not in vain. It is because we are aware that there are a lot of resources being hidden in some of these items and we shall proceed with the Budget Committee to propose areas where funds can be saved so that they can be allocated to service delivery in local governments. 

Regarding the new districts, I would like to state clearly that the committee is not against creation of new districts. We are only pointing out that there is a study by the Ministry of Local Government about the viability of local governments and the new districts. So, let us be a little patient, but we can put in a request that the minister expedites this study so that our discussion is based on informed decisions. 

I know that there are advantages and challenges on either side of the discussion. I have in person undertaken a study on the creation of districts. There are advantages and disadvantages. Some of the new districts are doing very well and others are struggling. So, let us wait for the ministry’s study report so that our discussions help this country. I would urge Members to remove personal interests and requests and look at Uganda as a nation. (Applause)

On the issue of pension, the committee requested, and we shall continue to urge the Ministry of Public Service that with the improved facility under the IPPS, you no longer have a justification to have a pileup of arrears of pensions. 

So, we are going to request the Ministry of Public Service to establish the current status of arrears of pensions in the Local Government and Central Government ministries. We shall even request that you give us copies of the pensioners of our respective constituencies so that we can help follow up some of these matters. 

We have raised constitutional issues as a committee and we are urging this House to look at these issues very seriously. The first was the question of the unconstitutional grant. This matter is in the Constitution, Schedule 7. It is not a matter for discussion. The formula for calculation of the unconditional grant is not subjective. It does not depend on whether there is this or that. It is in the Constitution and we are urging the Ministry of Finance to adhere to the Constitution and provide the right funds for the unconditional grant. 

The argument that KCCA has moved away from being a local government and it is now in the President’s Office. That argument does not hold. The difference between the unconditional grant of last year and this year – last year it was Shs 156 billion and this year it is Shs 151 billion. The amount of KCC last year was only Shs 1.4 billion, so it does not add up. And I am aware of some districts where the unconditional grant is actually reducing. So, we shall Table this to the honourable minister requesting that this matter be addressed. It is unconstitutional. 

The other matter we have pointed out is the election of the local councils. The law requires that all local government councils must be elected in five years. It does not matter whether there is money or modalities and so on. We are only lucky that there is no smart Ugandan who has taken us to the Constitutional Court on this matter.

We think that the Ministry of Local Government should be tasked with the responsibility of indentifying resources and argue out this case in Cabinet, and we have elections of LC I and LC II very soon. (Applause)

I have heard somebody asking whether we have consulted His Excellency the President on the recommendations we have made. Mr Speaker, while it is important to consult and while it is good to seek opinions of other people, we think that the independence and autonomy of this institution called Parliament must be upheld in view of the principles of separation of powers between the Executive and Parliament. The issues that relate to Parliament should be left to Parliament. We can consult, but when we come to this House as a committee and we say this is the view of Parliament, we should be respected for that and we should not be questioned as to whether we asked the President.  

Finally, I have listened very carefully to the presentation of the Shadow Minister of Public Service. I fully respect my colleague, but I think statements which are exaggerated without substantiation are very dangerous when presented in an august House like this. 

I do not want to believe statements like, “Our civil servants are politically persecuted to the extent of losing their jobs.” This kind of statement can be very dangerous if it comes out in the public; that in the House we are saying that people are getting jobs and they are being persecuted. We must come out with clear cases and table them in Parliament and seek redress. (Applause)

I also want to associate myself with the Minister of Public Service. I do not think that we can start paying bishops’, priests’ and catechists’ salaries. We shall go in a very difficult direction. I would like to urge my colleague, maybe, to withdraw those kinds of recommendations. 

But I associate with him on some of the recommendations like the one on the pension which is very well intended. We shall look at the positive aspects in that statement and see how to carry them forward as a committee. The good thing is that the honourable member is a member of our committee.

To wind up, in line with rule 177(2) of our Rules of Procedure - allow me, Mr Speaker, to quote that rule - “A chairperson or a member of the committee may move in the House that the report from the committee be adopted.” Therefore, having presented the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments, and the ministerial policy statements 2011/2012 with the necessary amendments - (Interjections)- -[The Deputy Speaker: “He is moving.”]- having received lively debates by the Members of Parliament on the report; having carefully noted the adjustments and amendments on the report as suggested by the respective hon. Members; thankful for the excellent stewardship you have given us in this session, I now would like to move that the House adopts the report with the amendments made on the Floor. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Motion for the adoption of the report as has been moved.

7.16
MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, before we adopt a very good report, there have been serious concerns raised, especially with regard to some amendments my colleague made. This is most especially with regard to bicycles for LC Is and LC IIs. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I do it this way? Can I have the chairman restate the amendment he made so that we are clear on what we are going to propose? Just restate it then we can come back to you. Is that okay?

MR MAGYEZI: On the issue of bicycles for LC I and LC II chairpersons, the committee finds substantial discrepancies in this contract and, therefore, I hereby recommend that this committee undertakes a full and detailed investigation of this contract and reports to the House in three weeks. That was the amendment we made.

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I would like to make some amendments on that particular one. If we take it the way he wants it - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, propose the amendment.

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: I would like the recommendation to read as follows: “The committee finds enormous ... “ not substantial. I want to change that one because they are enormous. “…enormous discrepancies in the contract and recommends that an express audit be carried out of the entire transaction and the officers concerned step aside to allow proper investigations.” (Applause)

I beg to move at least with that one in the meantime. (Hon. James Kakooza rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, he has proposed an amendment. Have we understood the amendment he has proposed? 

MR KAKOOZA: The Constitution is clear in article 164(1). I can read it verbatim. “Accountability: the Permanent Secretary or the accounting officer in charge of a ministry or department shall be accountable to Parliament for the funds in that ministry or department.” 

The contract was signed. Forty percent was given, the company is not known. It is causing animosity of LCs in the whole country - by the chief accounting officer. Why do we say that we take three weeks? What for? 

I move and amend to say that the Chief Accounting Officer should be brought to book or the matter is taken to the IGG and we refund the money. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, let me understand this. There was a motion and there was an amendment and there is further amendment. The amendment you are proposing is what we call a second rank amendment which would be the end of amendments for now until we resolve that matter. If that is what you are proposing, which one are you proposing to amend? (Hon. Members rose_) Can I first understand this - because I need to understand where we are going? What are you amending?

MR KAKOOZA: I am seconding to suspend.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because there is seconding and amending.

MR KAKOOZA: No, I am on the second amendment - the second amendment to the original amendment of the committee by hon. Byarugaba that the officer is implicated by the Constitution - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Are you seconding? Hon. Kakooza, are you seconding his amendment?

MR KAKOOZA: I am seconding the amendment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, you cannot do that. You cannot second and then amend. By seconding you have agreed to the text. 

MR KAKOOZA: Yes.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your indulgence and guidance on this matter. My understanding of the Rules of Procedure is that we would first of all dispose of the first proposed amendment by hon. Byarugaba and then thereafter, if there is any other amendment to come, it would come after dealing with the amendment proposed by hon. Byarugaba.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rules of practice in the Commonwealth allow two kinds of amendments. You propose an amendment to a motion. That is called first rank amendment. Then you can propose an amendment to the amendment. That is called second rank amendment. That is where it stops. So, if it goes that far then you have to resolve the matter before you move forward. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the amendment as moved by the chairperson would stand. We would only need possibly to adjust the timeframe. The issues that are being raised by hon. Byarugaba and hon. Kakooza would be handled by that committee, including this issue of having the officers step aside. The committee will handle that once they have started their work. 

So, procedurally, that is how we should be able to move. We would only amend the chairperson’s recommendation that they be given one month or two months from the end of the approval of the budget such that they start from there and -(Interjections)- we cannot handle it because we are still having the budget -(Interjections)- please allow me. I was quiet when you were speaking. 

Just like yesterday, a committee was constituted to handle the issue of the energy sector and the Speaker put it right that this committee will start work after they have approved the budget because we cannot have these things moving concurrently. So, Mr Speaker, I think that is the right procedure. We adopt the chairperson’s amendment with only variation of the timeframe and then the committee will handle that. We were with hon. Kakooza in the committee. 

So, I have made a recommendation to have officers that have misappropriated money based on that article to step aside as the investigations continue. Thus, the committee can handle the matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that guidance is important because we need to pass this budget within the timeframe and any matter that will cause indecision in the process of taking a decision on the budget would be affecting the entire budget process, which is not permissible under the laws in which we operate. With the explanation given by hon. Okupa, can I ask the mover of the amendment to withdraw the amendment so that we take a decision? 

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I moved this because of the concerns I expressed earlier on and I think it is a concern of every Member of Parliament. Unless you are saying that we approve without the US$ 1.7 billion from the budget of the Ministry of Local Government, I will budge; but before that, I still stand by my decision and I do that with a very heavy heart. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. That is beside the point. The chairperson has proposed an amendment that we move the matter back to the committee and at an appropriate time, they will deal with it and report to this House on what course of action they will have taken.  

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, Members are concerned that this matter is linked to the budget. Whereas I would buy the proposal of my brother, hon. Okupa, I believe we are perhaps going to pass this budget in the next four weeks. The Member has moved a motion – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not in four weeks; we have three days to pass it. 

MR EKANYA: But Mr Speaker, with due respect, we cannot pass the budget by 31st because we have so many committees that have not even presented reports; unless you amend – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am saying is that that is what the law says. As of now, we have not made any request for extension of time. So, we are operating within the framework of 31st of this month. We cannot start talking of four weeks. 

MR EKANYA: Based on that, Mr Speaker, I still think that within three weeks, we can handle this matter because the Committee of Public Service  and Local Government has completed presenting their report and there is nothing that stops them from meeting because we are, after all, 382 MPs; but you can see how many of us are here. The committee should handle the work within a period of three weeks and bring a report because this matter is very serious. The other alternative for us would be to move a motion that the permanent secretary be suspended immediately and we do not want to go to that extent until the committee has completed a report. Within three weeks, the committee can bring a report. 

MR OKUPA: We are not approving the budget here. This is going to go back to the budget committee. We can make these adjustments when in the budget committee, but we cannot bring it up at this moment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are approving the report of the committee; we are not approving the budget and he has made amendments which take care of our concerns. Can I put the question? 

MR MAGYEZI: This is just information for the Members. The money we are talking about for the bicycles – the US$ 1.7 billion, was actually appropriated last financial year. So, we can proceed with our budget process, but what I also wanted to point out is that our earlier recommendation was for a forensic audit by the Auditor-General, but this particular House then said that our committee should handle it.

So, I find hon. Byarugaba taking us a little back. I thought we would proceed with the amendment as reading, “The committee finds enormous discrepancies in this contract and recommends that this committee undertakes full and detailed investigation of this contract and reports to the House in three weeks time.”

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance because I thought you were going to move a motion for the entire report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I am going to do that. 

MR EKANYA: So, that means that we have another motion on the report regarding the Public Service College that we also need to handle. Unless you guide that we adopt that motion only, then I can sit down, but if we are going to adopt the report, that means we also need to move a motion on the issue of the service college. I need your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was an amendment in relation to this matter of the bicycles and we have dealt with that and I have not put a question on the report. So, if you have a proposal to make, do so now and then we move forward quickly. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, you had guided very well and that is why you asked the chairperson to go one by one on those amendments that they had proposed. So, I take it that we are still on proposal one and as we conclude that -(Interjection)– yes, it is from that premise that we are proceeding; that he concludes and we pronounce ourselves on that amendment and then he goes to the one of the Public Service college, and finally for the whole report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, can you now restate what you propose as an amendment to your original statement of this issue of the service college? We have finished with the bicycles; so, let us deal with the college. What had you proposed as the new change? 

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, in our earlier recommendation, we said that Government provides the land within the next three months – by 1st November. But with the discussions now, I thought I had pointed out that we are recommending a tripartite discussion of the committees responsible or which are relevant and that was the Committee on Social Services and the Committee of Public Service and Local Government, and I think the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. That was my recommendation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And that would be outside the budget framework. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, when I rose here on a point of procedure regarding the letter, I suspected that what we said here were the contents in that letter because first, if you look at the high level of efficiency within which this letter was produced - it is even dated today. (Laughter) This was a very high level of political engineering to try to usurp the work of the committee. I think it should not go unmentioned that first, the letter which was laid here is not an offer. The minister should withdraw the statement that what was laid here is an offer, and if this level of efficiency can be extended to the pension sector, then people would be getting their pension easily. Having said that, I concur with the recommendations that the chairperson has proposed, regarding the Public Service college. Thank you.  

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to add an amendment that, “Further expenditure on this project be stayed until the recommendations of this committee…” - because the proposal here only stops the caravan training but there are a lot of other expenditures and we do not want to finish the work and find that money has been spent. So, we should stop any further expenditure until the report of this committee is out. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May I get to know whether the chairman is in agreement and then I move to hon. Kakooza? 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have received the amendments; I think the last one which hon. Lyomoki has brought up was already contained in our recommendations but it should now read as follows: “In the meantime, the Ministry of Public Service should hold the caravan training and all other activities of the Civil Service College until the decision of the tripartite discussion by the committees on Social Service, Public Service and Local Government and that of Physical Infrastructure on this matter.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it no longer has to be a decision of the committees; it has to be of the institution of Parliament because the committees act on behalf of Parliament. Can you capture it properly for the Hansard so that we can see it there? 

MR KAKOOZA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, but you should guide us because the amendment which was made on VAT - the Minister of Finance should tell us –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are still dealing with this particular matter. Yes, Mr Chairman, could you recoup it for the Hansard? 

MR MAGYEZI:  The committee is of the view that the proposed Civil Service College is important and it should be built and operationalised. Government should provide land for the Civil Service College so that construction commences this financial year. In view of the additional information which is contained in other Parliamentary committees, we hereby recommend that, “The Ministry of Public Service should not hold the caravan training and all other activities of the Civil Service College until the recommendations of the tripartite committee are approved by Parliament.”

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much Mr Speaker.  There was a proposal that was made by hon. Okupa regarding the letter. Now, do we regard that as a document of this House? In case it is to be withdrawn, then I suggest that the Minister withdraws that bit of the statement she made regarding the letter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the subsequent statements that were made are what show the validity of what Parliament has received. Because the chairperson has made a statement, hon. Okupa has made a statement and they have both been captured by the Hansard. Then whatever has been received earlier now cannot pass for what it had originally been presented. I think that has now been corrected. We do not need to go back to it. Is there any other matter concerning this? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Another amendment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  To which one? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE:  Creation of new districts, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Tinkasiimire, I had already picked hon. Kakooza, so let him finish and then I come back to you. 

MR KAKOOZA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a recommendation of the committee that 1 percent of VAT should go to the local governments to ease the current revenue crisis in local governments. I appreciate that there was money, which was supposed to go to these local governments but there is a restriction by Article 93 of the Constitution; I can read it verbatim:

“Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or motion is introduced on behalf of the Government -

(a) proceed upon a Bill including an amendment bill, that makes provisions for the following -
(i) the imposition of taxation before or the alteration of taxation...” and I know the Finance Act does give leeway that the VAT Act of 2010 puts it at 18 percent.  So, I suggest that the Ministry of Finance should compensate the money for Graduated Tax to local governments rather than changing the VAT rate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what has been proposed by the committee is not to change the VAT rate. As I understood it, they are saying 18 percent but 1 percent of which should be channelled to the local governments, right? He did not say that we should reduce the VAT or increase it. Is that okay now? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE:  Mr Speaker, I would like to propose an amendment to the recommendation of the committee concerning the creation of new districts that: “Excluding those districts that the President has pronounced himself, the committee recommends that the creation of other new districts be halted pending the study report from the Ministry of Local Government.” I also propose that the date of March 2002 be changed to November, thereby giving them three months.  I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, why don’t you first restate the recommendation to guide the House? 

MR MAGYEZI: “Creation of new districts should be halted pending the report of the study which is being carried out by the Ministry of Local Government on the viability of new local governments. The study should be completed in any case not later than 31 March, 2012. Government should provide a clear phased programme and acceptable proposals for the financing, equipping and staffing of all new districts to be created. Government should also ensure equitable sharing of assets and liabilities between the mother districts and new ones at the time of the split. “

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I understand hon. Tinkasiimire to be saying that those districts - I do not know how many there are - which have been already referred to by the minister, should be excluded from that - were they 20 or 21? I do not know.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I think the best way forward should be to ask the minister to come up with a way forward on how Government is going to finance the districts so that they are fully functional without giving a timeframe.

I believe the minister has technical people and he can come up with such a report anytime you give him opportunity on the Order Paper, without us necessarily tying him to 31st March or to those promised by the President, because even now, the President may be meeting people and making new commitments. How do we tie him to only the ones of yesterday?

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is a misunderstanding that the study will lead to the suspension of creation of new distracts. The creation of new districts is a constitutional matter. The Constitution gives the opening to create districts. The only difference the study is going to make is whether these districts are old or new or to be created later and how they should be managed and financed. But the process of creating districts or not creating them will certainly continue.

I think the halt, which the committee was recommending is in good faith because they are saying, let us look at the study first and how you think districts will be managed in a rational way, before we can embark on creating new ones, and our timeframe is about early next year around March, and that is not demanding too much from honourable members. I think we can be patient. Let us get this study out in March next year and following the study recommendations, we can then consider creating new districts, including those which the President promised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that clear now? Hon. Members, can I now move that the report as presented by the committee and as amended and agreed upon be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations. Hon. Members, I have two short announcements to make. Tomorrow, the Parliamentary SACCO will have its Annual General Meeting beginning at 10.00 a.m. You are all invited to attend. From 6.00 p.m., there will be a dinner dance at the City Authority gardens. You are all invited to attend.

Tomorrow, I re-echo my earlier statement on the report of the committees to enable us move quickly with this matter and finish within the timeframe provided by the law. I am advised that the Committee on Foreign Affairs says they will be ready tomorrow, so, this House stands adjourned. Tomorrow is Friday. The Committee on Foreign Affairs says they will be ready by tomorrow afternoon. So, even if we met at 10.00 a.m., there will be no report to discuss. That is the only report that will be ready tomorrow. 

So, can we handle foreign affairs tomorrow afternoon? Because the Speaker had even proposed yesterday that we handle this on the weekends to enable us finish, but we only have one report that will be ready tomorrow afternoon and the one on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will be ready on Monday. 

Concerning the one on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the chairman also advises that they are working hard so that it will be ready by Monday. You are also confronted by a public holiday that might show up on Tuesday or Wednesday; we are not sure, so we cannot plan beyond Monday.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, we have a report on all the Bills; the Finance Bill, the Stamp Duty, the Income Tax Bill and it is ready. So, anytime Parliament is willing, it can be handled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you think we can start on the Finance Bill and those other Bills before we have finished this debate? That would be putting the cart before the horse. We need to finish this and then go to the Bills. That would be the right procedure. I am very happy to know that you are ready and you are just on hold waiting for these other people to clear then we move on.

MR AJEDRA: Mr Speaker, the report of physical infrastructure will be ready by Monday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have all the reports, which are ready reflected so that we can schedule them immediately. On Monday, we could actually do three reports if Members are prepared to go the extra mile, so that we can finish.

Before I adjourn, let me say this. Can we come early enough, say 2.30 p.m. so we can start and finish in two to three hours and then we can move to the other businesses that I am advised will also require the attention of the Members?

This House is, therefore, adjourned to tomorrow 2.30 p.m. prompt. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.50 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 26 August 2011 at 2.30 p.m.) 

