Wednesday, 27 August 2008

Parliament met at 10.48 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE PUBLIC FINANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (CONTINGENCIES FUND) REGULATIONS, 2008

10.50
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Tindamanyire Kabondo): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, this is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Public Finance and Accountability (Contingencies Fund) Regulations, 2008.
 
Introduction:

The Public Finance and Accountability that is, the Contingencies Fund Regulations, 2008 was laid before Parliament on 07 August 2008 by the Minister of Finance. It was referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development by the Speaker in line with rule 29(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and section 44 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act. 

The methodology:

The committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance and his technical team. The committee also referred to relevant literature and laws like the Public Finance and Accountability Act and the Constitution. 

Background of Contingencies Fund Regulations:

A civil Contingencies Fund was first established by a resolution of the Legislative Council on 28 February 1956. This was replaced by the Contingencies Funds Act, cap 150 of 6 June 1962 and revised in 1964. Article 157 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda upheld the importance of the Contingencies Fund and required Parliament to make laws to regulate the operation of the fund. 

The Contingencies Fund Act, cap 150 was repealed by section 47 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 (PFAA) and the Act together with the other public financial management laws, were repealed and consolidated into one law as well as have it updated.

Whereas the PFAA creates the Contingencies Fund, it does not address details regarding its operations. Regulations had to be put in place to guide the operations of the Fund. On 2 May 2008 the Contingencies Fund Regulations were published in The Uganda Gazette.

What are the objectives of the Contingencies Fund Regulations?
1. 	To provide for the allocation of the moneys to the contingencies fund,
2.	 To prescribe the procedures for accessing the moneys from the contingencies fund,
3. 	To provide for the management and administration of the contingencies fund, and
4. 	To provide for the accountability of the funds appropriated to the Contingencies Fund.

Composition of the Contingencies Fund:

According to the regulations, the Contingencies Fund shall be separate from the Consolidated Fund and comprise of the following:
1. 	A permanent capital of Shs 2 billion,
2. 	Such other funds as may be appropriated by Parliament for purposes of the fund,

Madam Speaker, eligibility of the beneficiaries, the administration, the operations, accountability, audit, conditions for use of these funds are laid down in the regulations which have been distributed to the Members. I will, therefore, move to the observations.

Observations:

1. 	The committee acknowledges the rigorous exercise for the approval of the supplementary budget and appreciates the need for the Contingencies Fund, which can trigger a start on emergencies that cannot be postponed without detriment to the public interest.
2. 	It is recommended that the amount of funds in Contingencies Fund be determined by the formula but not a static figure that can be grossly affected by inflation.
3.	The penalty provides for the offenders is only three months and therefore not in conformity to the parent law, which is Public Finance and Accountability Act. 

Recommendations:

The committee recommends that the following regulations be amended as follows:

On regulations in the booklet, No.5 (2)(a) we want to delete “…the permanent capital of Shs 2 billion” and replace it with 0.1 percent of the national budget. 

The justification for that is to protect the fund from the defects of inflation. In other words, if the national budget for this financial year is about Shs 5.6 trillion, 0.1 percent of that is about Shs 5.6 billion, which we propose should be made the starting capital of the fund.

Regulation 8(b) we want to delete, “prior to the time when the approval of Parliament shall be sought.” The justification is that the minister has already been given discretion to make decisions at that point. So, there was no need for that approval of Parliament.

On regulation 14, we want to delete “…three months.” and replace with “…three years or a fine not is exceeding 250 currency points or both” as prescribed in the Public Finance and Accountability Act. The justification is to be in conformity with Finance and Accountability Act.

Conclusion:

The Contingency Fund is key in mitigating unforeseen circumstances that could greatly affect the lives of the people. I, therefore, urge the House to adopt this report as a matter of urgency. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. But hon. Nandala, you are a member of the committee!

10.57
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I am a member of the committee but I have deliberately decided not to attend meetings of the committee because of conflict of interest and when you have a conflict of interest, you always declare it. But I am not against the whole issue.

The law is clear under Article 157 of the Constitution which says: “Parliament shall make provision for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund and shall make laws to regulate the operations of that fund.” I am looking at a law and not a regulation. First of all, there must be the main law and then you can put the regulations to see how to operationalise the main law because regulations are not laws. 

Having said that, the committee is right that we need a Contingencies Fund to deal with unforeseen circumstances but –(Interruption)

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Madam Speaker, first, we are talking about the regulations because the law is in the Finance and Public Accountability Act. When you read Section 10 of this Act, it provides for the creation of the Contingencies Fund. So the law is already there. But in the Constitution under Article 157, you are supposed to have a law and have regulations that govern the performance of those funds. So the law is already there, that is the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, Section 10 and now we are putting in the regulation that will manage the operations of that fund.

10.59
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Madam Speaker, the issue that the Shadow Minister of Finance is raising is something that maybe we would be helped on by the Attorney-General or even the Chair because the specific Article of the Constitution directs us to make a law to operationalise that. And just to say that it is hereby established, that cannot be a law to operationalise in the sense that we imagine the framers of the Constitution had in mind. Because of the importance of this fund, our own thinking is that we ought to have made a proper law that operationalises this provision of the Constitution because that would allow us to put in that law things that you are trying to bring as regulations. You know regulations are things that can be changed almost at the whims of somebody –(Interjections)- but that is a fact; the regulations can be changed very easily. 

Secondly, the kind of effect that we want see done in such a way that if you are going to debate changes in the regulations – you know debating changes in regulations is not the mandate of Parliament but the Executive. They do all the debate, give all their reasons and come with a regulation to lay on the Table and you can comment on. 

But if elements in that regulation were part of a law, I can assure you, no government can sit as an Executive and change that. And you have got to watch this very carefully because I think the importance of the Contingencies Fund should not be diluted by the suggestion that Article 10 of the Finance Act covers it. What we do is make this a substantive thing and we repeal what is in the other law; there will be no contradiction at all.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Fortunately, the members who are raising the issues were here when this House repealed the Contingencies Fund; it was 2003 and we were here. There must have been reasons why it was repealed and replaced by the other law. I do not know what you want the minister to do. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are right we were here. In fact the capital cannot be in a regulation. This Shs 2 billion or whatever figure we shall agree upon should be in the law, unless – basically that is the major reason that if the Shs 2 billion were in Finance – that the permanent capital would be this, that is how we would operationalise it. I am bringing this because true, we need a Contingencies Fund but we are saying there must be a law for it with the basics; the permanent capital is the most important thing, the withdrawal and then the operationalisation should be in the law. If you want, we can amend the Public Finance and Accountability Act to put that there and we move on. Otherwise, we are not -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I must complain about what you are doing. First of all, you are a member of the committee. You denied the committee your knowledge and expertise; you withheld it intentionally; you know we have 21 days deadline and then you come here when it is one day to go and you know we have a problem yet this same House asked for these regulations. You are not being fair to the House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I got an SMS that we have a Finance Committee meeting yesterday while at the same time we were having a meeting, which was already scheduled for NSSF. We know we are all under pressure to make sure these things move, but we need also to have time. Otherwise, this comment of mine, I had passed it to my brother -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But my problem is that you withheld that knowledge from the committee. This thing has been out there for 21 days.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: The fact of the matter is that I was going to raise the matter but since hon. Nandala-Mafabi is here, it was only fair that as the Shadow Minister for Finance, he would raise it. 

My concern is about the fact that in doing what the last Parliament did – and I think none of us individually can be held accountable for the action of the last Parliament because it acted as a different Parliament - it is even possible that at that time we looked at what was important and missed out the reality that in providing just one clause in that particular law, we did not meet the expectation of the Constitution. Because in all cases where the Constitution directs that Parliament shall make laws, what you expect to see is substantive law and regulations. That is why it says laws that specifically address the concern provided in that article of the Constitution.

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from the honourable Leader of the Opposition concerning the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, which provides that regulations be made concerning contingencies. Is he saying that that law is not an effective one and does not do what the Constitution requires? 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Let me just read what is in the Constitution. Article 157 says Contingencies Fund and it reads: “Parliament shall make provision for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund…” Make provisions, which is probably what you did and then it goes on to say, “…and shall make laws to regulate the operations of that fund”. (Interjection)- No, what is in the Public Finance Act is to make provision for the establishment and then subsequent to that, the Constitution demands that you make laws. Read the Constitution, Mr Chairman. 

We end up in difficulties because we do not fulfil the directive of the Constitution when we bring regulations as laws. What you did was to establish; you made provision for the establishment and I have no dispute with that. It could even remain there but subsequent to that, the Constitution says you shall make laws to regulate the operations of that fund. Now what you have brought – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, I think that the Minister of Finance is proceeding according to the existing law. This House sat here and repealed that Contingencies Fund Act, enacted this law and in Section 10 it says, “There shall be a Contingencies Fund for national emergencies into which shall be paid all sums appropriated by Parliament for the purpose of this fund”. This is section 10 and then in the same law, he is given authority, “Statutory instrument made under this Act shall be laid before Parliament as soon as possible after its publication in the Gazette…” which he has also done. 

This is the law we are following. I do not know what you want the minister – you wanted the fund; you wanted the contingency money; you want to deal with the emergencies and now you are saying, you know we are not walking properly. No, hon. Members; if there is a problem it can be revealed but for now this is the existing law and the minister has complied. Let us proceed with this and other things can be done later.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Madam Speaker, you have just read Section 10 and it meets the first part of Article 157 of the Constitution, which says very clearly that Parliament shall make provision for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund. Section 10 makes provision for the establishment. Subsequent to that, it says, “…and shall make laws to regulate the operations of the fund”.

My understanding of that is that there will be a separate law that clearly defines. You could even have made that provision under the same Act but if it is already provided for in the Finance Act as it is. I know it is only one Article my brother, which fulfils the first part. This is not to say that we want to undermine the establishment of the Contingencies Fund because it has been a demand. I can even go back to my contribution on the emergencies that took place last year when we specifically made reference to the establishment of a Contingency Fund to allow government to respond urgently to these things.

My problem is putting what is substantially required of us and as a substantive - that is why they said “laws”. The framers of the Constitution knew that you make the substantive laws and the accompanying regulations. That is why they said “laws”. If for now we need to operate and agree that at a later stage, many of the provisions that should be the law are made into a substantive law and that subsidiary regulations to deal with minor administrative matters are handled, we do not mind and the country must really appreciate this. 

I said this in an interview this morning when I was asked about the Shs 7 billion that the Minister for Disaster Preparedness said was now put aside. I repeated that if we had the Contingency Fund, we would immediately draw from it without fearing that the amount we need is not adequate. If mistakes were made, it does not allow Parliament to disregard a directive of the Constitution. This is all we are saying, Madam Speaker.

11.12
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to submit that the substantive law, Public Finance and Accountability Act exists and is operative. Under that Act it is clearly provided that contingencies regulations be established and this is not the first such regulation. There are many others already in existence and they have been operating so this is an addition to those. I hope that the honourable Leader of the Opposition and the shadow minister are not suggesting that all the regulations, which are in existence for contingencies and so forth are illegal and also against the Constitution. 

I would like to suggest, Madam Speaker, that it is in the national interest and indeed it has been the desire of this House that this Contingencies Fund be established quickly and I have been under pressure to bring this regulation, which I have now done. 

I would like to pray that we go ahead and establish this fund so that it becomes operative and so that we can respond to emergencies when they occur and carry out refinements as needed. I think it would be not in the national interest to say that we do not establish this Contingencies Fund, which is clearly provided for under the existing law passed by this House, constitutional. I think we should proceed and pass this contingencies’ regulation, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The Minister of Finance is misquoting us. We are not against the establishment of the Contingencies Fund, no. If you have been listening to what we have been saying everyday, we said this Contingencies Act should come in place. The way forward is that you can change this regulation to an Act instead of just bothering yourself because this is just a matter of saying the capital of this Contingencies Fund - because you know how to register a company; it is more or less like an Act. You have to have the substantial law to deal with the issue of capital and the permanent capital cannot be put in a regulation. That is basically the reason. Capital will never be a regulation, Mr Minister. It must be defined and we know the definitions, and the definitions are not mostly in a regulation. They can be in the Act and a regulation is just for operationalisation.   

I plead with the Minister of Finance to change the name of the regulation to an Act or a Bill so that we deal with it and move. Otherwise, as it is now, we are making a very big mistake.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Should the form really defeat the substance? Hon. Byanyima.

11.16
MR NATHAN BYANYINA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, much as the minister is emphasising the importance of the Contingencies Fund, fine it is long overdue, but I would like him to take note of what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is talking about. Today we have a saint in the Ministry of Finance; tomorrow we shall have a devil. We would like this money to be protected. We have seen what has happened before, people siphoning out money. A Contingencies Fund is an important fund that we talked about in 1996 here. You remember the case of Mehta when the Ministry of Finance diverted all the money and the minister came here and told us that we had a guarantee for Mehta. 

We are saying the Contingencies Fund is important especially in unforeseen circumstances disaster and what have you. But there must be a specific law for it as we had for the Road Fund. You remember the minister had deviated and put it in the Finance Bill; you remember very recently, it is very fresh in your minds. He did it himself here and he later went back and put his acts together. So what we are saying is that he can simplify this and say, “Please, let us have it in place but I will go back and do the needful for the safety of our funds ….” Because today we have Suruma and tomorrow we shall have another person. 

I do not want the chairman to stand up; do not really disturb this arrangement. We all understand the importance of the Contingencies Fund but there must be a law. We could have made a mistake by having it in the other Act but since we have seen the mistake, let us move but ensure that the minister comes back with a law to protect this country.  What has happened in NSSF is fresh in our minds. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are two things we can do. We can either do nothing and tomorrow the regulations become law automatically - yes, that is what it means. Because he laid them and he published them in the gazette and that is what the law says that if we do nothing in 21 days, they become law. So we can either do that or then ask him to come back because I do not know what else he wants us to do.

11.19
MR LULE MAWIYA (NRM, Kalungu County East, Masaka): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that we are being caught up by time but what my colleagues are raising is very important. In financial discipline and even as a matter of law - like we did in the supplementary expenditure - that capital or that initial capital or the percentage is provided for in the law and you cannot simply change it through the regulations. And that is why I actually commended the chairperson and the committee for having put into percentage terms the Shs 2 billion because tomorrow it may be another figure. So if we put it to percentage terms - 0.1 percent - it cannot simply come as a regulation. I am saying that much as we cannot go into the management and administrative arrangements of the fund like it is being put here, Parliament has a duty and if you read out fully the provisions of that law you could find that surely this one could have been a function of Parliament and not a function of the Executive through a statutory arrangement. 

Therefore, I suggest that not to be caught up by time, we can agree with my colleagues and the Executive. We know the process through which a law can be formulated but we have had precedents here when the law has been amended within hours and it is done. I, therefore, think that if we have tomorrow, we can use today and tomorrow so that we can put things in order other than being –(Interruption)

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to inform my colleagues that I do not know which other law we are talking about regarding the Contingencies Fund because a Contingencies Fund is provided for in the Constitution. It comes in the Public Finance and Accountability Act and in that Act, we stated that the minister will issue regulations which are subsidiary laws and they will be laid on Table and actually the minister did that. I really think we have gone through all the processes which are required regarding the operationalisation of the Contingencies Fund and I would urge my colleagues to really support the report of the committee.

MR MAWIYA: That is the information from my colleague. But we should avoid doing things – tilting things to suit our interests of the day. We do not want to create an impression that things are being done correctly when actually they are not being done correctly. Parliament has a function, which function we relegate to the Executive. This is purely a function of Parliament - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which function?

MR MAWIYA: The initial capital, Madam Speaker. Because even if you looked at the law it is not - actually the function of the Executive should have been simple; it should have been very simple. But once we say that this amount is paying - the initial capital is permanent, it cannot come under a regulation. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Member for giving way. The information I want to provide the Member on the Floor with, and probably for hon. Kaddunabbi to benefit from, is that the Constitution is very clear. It has been read that the Parliament shall make a provision for the establishment of the Contingencies Fund and shall make laws to regulate the operations of the fund. 

My understanding is that the Public Finance and Accountability Act established the Contingencies Fund but again it remains a constitutional command that this Parliament shall make a law to provide for the regulation and operationalisation of this fund and section 10 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, I think, is inadequate in terms of giving details. So, I would like to request the minister to concede because this is to insulate this fund and to protect it. And I think the request is not contradicting what the minister wants. So, I really wanted to provide this information that we should comply with the constitutional command which is very clearly written.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know you are hanging on this issue of, “The Parliament shall make laws.” I do not know whether you are suggesting that it should have been a Private Member’s Bill from this House rather than from the minister. If that is what you are saying then that is a different matter. I want to know whether that is what you are saying. Yes! Who was supposed to move this House to make these regulations and the laws? Was it us or the minister?

DR BARYOMUNSI: No, Madam Speaker. I think the way laws come to this Parliament is clearly established. It could be a Private Member’s Bill but it could also be from the Executive but Parliament has a duty to pass the law irrespective of who initiates it. So, whether it is a minister or a private Member I think what it requires is that the law should be passed by this Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Obviously no other institution can pass the laws. It is this House. But anyway -

11.26
MR SIMON EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the minister was making a submission he referred to the Public Finance and Accountability Act 2003 but our law, in the Constitution, Article 157, states that Parliament shall make laws. So, if Parliament is to make laws I do not know whether the Public Finance and Accountability Act has now changed to become a Contingencies Fund Act. Because what the Constitution is trying to make clear here is to make an Act of Parliament that will be operationalised by the regulation which the minister has already laid on Table. So, if this Parliament is to be comprehensive, what I would request Members of Parliament to do is to make an Act of Parliament that will be operationalised by the present statutory regulation that the minister has laid before Parliament. I thank you.

11.27
THE MINSITER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, Parliament in its wisdom has made the Public Finance and Accountability Act and in making that Act, which is a law, it has provided in that law for the creation of a Contingencies Fund. Unless Members are saying that this is illegal because what we are doing here is implementing the requirement of the law made by this House and we have done it precisely as prescribed in the law; unless the submission is that that existing law which provides for the creation of a Contingencies Fund is unconstitutional then I suppose that is a matter that I cannot deal with. It must be dealt with elsewhere. But the law has been made and that law provides for a Contingencies Fund and we followed precisely that law in bringing a regulation for the creation of a Contingencies Fund. Unless you can demonstrate that what we have done is not in line with an existing law or that the existing law is not in line with the Constitution then I think we should move on and make good use of this House’s time. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.29
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): I think to put what we are talking about in clear context to Members, because we do not have the Public Finance and Accountability Act -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is here. Who does not have it?

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: They do not have it in their hands. Please, I want to read. Please, let me read Section 10(2) to know that if the minister is arguing we could as well say he is arguing for his self interest -(Interjections)- please, I am advancing my arguments. You can read one to advance yours. 

Sub-section (2) says this: “The minister may, if he or she is satisfied that an urgent need has arisen for expenditure which could not have been foreseen and which cannot be postponed without detriment to the public interest, authorised by warrant under his or her hand, address to the Accountant-General, advances from the fund for the purposes of meeting such expenditure.” Now you can see the import of what we are saying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. Read from No. 1. Read the whole of section 10.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: No problem. Let me read the whole provision. Section 10(1): “There shall be a Contingencies Fund for national emergencies into which shall be paid all sums appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the fund.”

(2) “The minister may, if he or she is satisfied that an urgent need has arisen for expenditure which could not have been foreseen and which cannot be postponed without detriment to the public interest authorised by warrant under his or her hand, address to the Accountant-General advances from the fund for the purposes of meeting such expenditure.”

(3) “Where an advance is made under sub section two, a supplementary estimate for the purpose of replacing the amount advanced shall be laid before Parliament at its next sitting.”

Well, it all depends on what you want to achieve and how much value you put in the provisions of the law. If you look at the Road Fund, there is a body that manages it. They do not give the right to an individual to decide on how the fund is expended. And, therefore, what we envisage and I believe what the framers of the Constitution envisaged in providing for the Contingency Fund in Article 157 of our Constitution is that you would make a law that says that this body will have either a board or that it will operate like this, like all the other bodies that manage our affairs are established. 

Within that law you can also make provisions on how to access; how to deal with this and that –(Interjections)– if we do it this way we will be doing what we are supposed to do. Right, the Minister’s argument merely that because Parliament had already made the law – by the way when you made this law you repealed laws that were still valid. And that is how Parliament works, Mr Minister. If you bring us a separate law, this one will be repealed because without doing that it will become redundant. The problem we have is dealing with things because of expediency. You need to provide and consolidate all laws governing public finances –(Interjections)– not Contingencies Fund. When you did that there was outcry about Contingencies Fund and you thought the quickest way to deal with it was to provide for it under a law, which is intended for something else. I am sure if I looked at the preamble, you will realise that it does not talk about the Contingencies Fund; the preamble is here; I can read it for you.

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to say that the law, as it stands and as it specifies, was not intended to do what it says should be done? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are fighting over spilt milk. This very House made this law and in doing so, it repealed the other one by providing for a Contingencies Fund here. So unless you are now saying that we do nothing until the law comes. If that is what you are saying, please tell us. 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Madam Speaker, if you can allow me say something because it is very important for the House to appreciate and I am reading the Preamble to the Public Finance and Accountability Act. It reads: “An Act to provide for the development of an economic and physical policy framework for Uganda; to regulate the financial management of the government; to prescribe the responsibilities of persons entrusted with financial management in the government; to regulate the borrowing of money by Government; to provide for the audit of Government state enterprises and other authorities of the state; and to provide for other connected matters.” 

If the intention of this Act was also to provide for the contingencies fund, it would have catered for it under this provision. I beg to submit that the Contingencies Fund was only included in this Act as a new-jack reaction to the demands of Members and not as an intention to fulfil the requirements of Article 157 of the Constitution. And I argue that substantially, we stay this regulation; we should not operate the Contingencies Fund and we will ask the Minister to, within six months, submits to this Parliament a Bill to operationalise Article 157 of the Constitution.

11.37
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the concerns of honourable members, but I would like to say that Parliament is not ending today. Parliament is still around and if any Member wants to move any amendment, there is no harm in doing that. First of all, let me say that I support the report because it is within the framework of the law as we have ably been informed.

The Contingencies Fund is a very urgent issue as honourable members will appreciate that in managing society there is a lot of environmental uncertainty. We have already seen this in natural disasters like the Ebola that hit my area recently. I also now hear that for the peace talks to continue, there should be some money –(Hon. Nandala-Mafabi­ rose_)– let me finish my submission irrespective of your being a shadow minister; I appreciate your concerns.

I think we should adopt this report and if there are any amendments to make, that can be handled at a later stage because Parliament is still here. Maybe, the concern of Members is that if we allow this expenditure to be made before the minister tables the Bill, we will be doing a post mortem. But, as I said, Parliament is still around. I think that at an appropriate time any Member will be free to move the amendment to the effect that before expenditure is done, the Minister consults Parliament. Otherwise, what the Minister is requesting Parliament to do is entirely within the framework of the law. We shall not be doing anything wrong, constitutionally because Article 157 is very clear, Madam Speaker. 

So I beg the indulgence of Members: this is a very urgent matter. We should have approved it yesterday considering the circumstances we are in. Madam Speaker, I beg to move that we adopt this report and that if there are any amendments that any Member may want to move, that can come in say, a Private Member’s Bill. We will be obliged to add that amendment. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.41
MR CHARLES OLENY (INDEPENDENT, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to ask the House to take cognisance of the fact that the committee, in the first place, put in a lot of effort to look at the laws that did exist. 

When you look at section 3 of page 1 of the committee’s report, you will see the background. It is absolutely clear that the laws that have to do with the Contingencies Fund have been evolving over the years. Just for the benefit of the Members, you can look through it and you will find out that initially, the civil Contingencies Fund was first established by a resolution of the Legislative Councils on 28 February 1956. This was further replaced by the Contingencies Fund Act, Cap 150 of 6 June 1962. It is important for me to read this because hon. Mafabi you are a Members of the committee, but you have not provided the wisdom that you want to provide now to the committee. But I want to put it on record that the effort of the committee is very clear on what it did. 

This was revised in 1964 and Article 157 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda upheld the importance of the Contingencies Fund and required Parliament to make laws to regulate the operation of the fund. The Contingencies Fund Act, Cap 150 was repealed by Cap 45 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. The act together with other public finance management laws were repealed and consolidated into one law as well as to have it updated.

Having indicated this to the august House, I am therefore in no doubt that what the minister did and what the committee has recommended to this House is proper and it is just befitting that this House goes a head to pronounce its self on what has been put before it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.44
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometime back, we enacted the Nations Audit Act. When we were doing that the major argument was that we needed to enhance the Office of the Auditor-General and grant it autonomy, even though the regression on the operation of the Office of the Auditor-General was provided for in the Public Finance and Accountability Act. But because of that need to consolidate and grant more autonomy and independence to that office, it was found necessary to enact a completely different Act and we did that. When we did that, we repealed all the provisions in the Public Finance Act that were dealing with audit in that respect. 

As hon. Byanyima has said, there was also the Road Fund Act which was enacted and the earlier attempt had been to include it in the Finance Bill for that year. But because of the wisdom that Members appreciated then – because of the importance of the Road Fund, we said that we should remove it from the Finance Bill and enact a completely new Act. 

So I would like to put forward my understanding of what my colleagues are saying. They are saying what whereas the Public Finance and Accountability Act purported to operationalise the provision of the Constitution in respect to the Contingencies Funds Act, the provisions which were put in the Public Finance and Accountability Act were inadequate. And as you see, there are only three paragraphs in that law dealing with the Contingencies Act. Then subsequently, it talks about the regulations and statutory instrument. 

From what I hear, these three paragraphs were inadequate to do the job of operationalising that provision of the Constitution to the extent that a fundamental issue which the regulations are purporting to want to deal with – the issue of share capital should not be dealt with by the regulations. I think we need to do it positively that now we realise that what the Public Finance Act was trying to do was not done well, even if we were the ones who did it. We can own that and say that we need to come up with a separate law that will deal with all those issues and repeal the three paragraphs in the Public Finance Act. I see no problem with that; we have not regretted the Audit Act or the Road Fund Act -(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, the Public Finance and Accountability Act provides for the protection of public finances; to make sure that there is accountability of public finances. But it recognises in section 10 that there could be emergencies which are critical to the public interest, for example, the case of Ebola and foot and mouth disease and floods which require swift action. Therefore, in the public interest, that law provides that there should be a Contingency Fund and that the regulations should be established for that fund.

Hon. Member, when you say that it is inadequate, what is the basis of your opinion? I think that is just an opinion. But I want to inform you that the law clearly provides for the protection of public funds and also allows for the protection of public interest in an emergency and provides these regulations to ensure accountability for expenditure in time of emergency. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not want to read the list of names of the Members of this committee but I think it is an act of bad faith for you to accept to be a Member of that committee; two, to avoid meetings; three, to attend and fail to sign the report; and four, to fail to write your minority report so that we can understand that you participated and disagreed with this report. 

Hon. Oduman, you are a Member of this committee. I think it is an act of bad faith; you attend and if you disagree, you file a minority report and it comes here with this report. But now you are taking us for a ride. No, that is not the way we are going to work. 

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, yes, I am a member of the committee and I really associate with the issues in this report because if I did not I would have written a minority report. But the issues I am raising now are issues that have risen from the general debate here. When we bring our report here, it is for purposes of it being enriched by other honourable members. So my comments are based on what honourable members have said here. I am not running away from the committee report, but I have heard the views of the Members here and I am saying that is only fitting that we do as we did with the Audit Act, and like we did with the Road Fund Act to take the positive aspect that Members bring up in this House, and those possible aspects I am talking about are that we would buy the positive contributions Members are making and create a completely differently law and repeal the provisions in the Public Finance Act in order to give a lot of meat to this law and protect the fund. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want you to come out clearly, and say, “I am supporting this for now, but I want the law to come.” But you are moving around. So what do we do in the meantime? We leave a vacuum?  If you want a vacuum, we leave it. Come out clearly.

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, I would support a Member who has said that a lot of substantive issues that should have been in the main law have been brought up to be included in the regulations. It is only better if those issues could come up in the main law rather than in the regulations and one of them is the issue of share capital. That is because share capital is about how much money will be on that account. That is a substantial issue that cannot be dealt with under the regulations. I realize it now. It should be dealt with in the main law.  So that is the issue I support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Come out clearly, what do we do now?  We leave it?  That is what I want you to say. 

11.52
MR FREDERICK MBAGADHI (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to appreciate the concerns of my honourable colleagues.  However, it is quite clear that a law is already in place: Public Finance and Accountability Act. However, in this case honourable colleagues are concerned over the issue of the protection of the Contingencies Fund in terms of accessibility, management and administration. But when you look at the observations of the committee that did this good work, you will realise that among the objectives of the regulations they are talking about, one of them is to prescribe the procedures of accessing monies from the Contingencies Fund; and secondly, to provide for the management and administration of the Contingencies Fund.

I really feel that the work that the committee did was really done in good faith. But in case of any gaps which Members are taking note of, those ones can come later. But as of now, honourable members should come up to support the recommendations of the committee. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

11.54
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the committee, and all these concerns raised by our colleagues were also raised in our committee. But we found out that due to the situation, this fund was necessary. And through our interactions with the minister, we said that since there is a creation of that fund, which has not been in place, and because it was not in place, there was no regulatory framework and even the Ministry of Finance could abuse that Contingencies Fund. So it is better we have a regulatory framework and an account be opened for this fund by this regulatory framework so that situations like disasters and other catastrophes that the country has been going through. Let this fund be provided wherever it is needed.  

What we have to do now is just to pass it, and after passing it, then we bring an amendment. If there is a gap which Members take as a serious concern, it can be amended within the law. But what is happening now, there is Hepatitis, you had the shortfalls in the other National Budget - and now you are leaving all those situations not catered for.  

Even as we stand now, the Northern region is facing a problem of diseases and the minister has no money for that. What are we going to do with the situation in the short run? The best way is: if there is a gap within the Public Accounts Finance Act and it can be amended. But right now the minister is seeking to be authorized to have a regulatory framework so that an account is opened. When it is opened and there is a misuse of that fund, the Auditor-General has the right to deal with that because he is independent. I urge this House that for now, you cannot afford not to have this fund within the budget.

11.58
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am really happy that I have not heard anybody here who does not want this emergency fund. So at that point, we are together; everybody wants the emergency funds.  

But we also know that under Section 10 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, this fund shall be created –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, could you restrain hon. Nandala?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, hold on, please.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, Parliament also decided that under that Act, the Public Finance and Accountability Act, regulations to guide the operation of these funds will be made. So we are trying to create regulations of operating this fund. We are following what is in the Act. Now what is the problem? All of us here know the importance of the emergency funds. Just recently here in Teso, government was being castigated for delaying to go and act.  Now they want to bring the funds, and you are saying, “No”, what is the problem?

We have been told these funds are going to be a trigger force; you moving in very fast and then you can go in the details later. But in the meantime, where emergencies are involved, things can move on. So I appeal to my colleagues that let us support the report from the Finance Committee. People are talking of a standing committee - these emergencies are unpredictable. You may take two years without an emergency, why are you creating that one? These are emergencies and they must be handled in an emergency way. So, I am appealing to my colleagues that we support this - and it is well laid down. If you go to No. 3, the committee has put it very clearly how –(Interruptions)

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, we have been debating the issues pertaining to the Contingencies Fund and I appreciate that all the Members have agreed on how to establish the Contingencies Fund. But is it in order for the hon. Member of Parliament, the pre-current Speaker, to mislead this House that we have refused the creation of the Contingencies Fund?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have asked you, do you want us to leave a vacuum or do we accept that the law is a bit inadequate but we use what us there for now and give the minister time to bring another law? Because you can repeal this, this Parliament is not ending today. Do you want a vacuum? If you want a vacuum, I am happy. If you do not want a vacuum, tell me.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker has asked the question. She is saying: do we leave it as it is? The Constitution was made in 1995. From 1995 to date there have been disasters and something has always been done. Since there have been disasters and we have handled it, it is right to do the right thing now. This Public Finance and Accountability Act says, “There shall be…” First of all, “There shall be…” does not mean it has existed. You must establish it first. And what the regulations are trying to do is to establish: “Hereby is established a Contingencies Fund, with a share capital of Shs 2 billion”. Then after that we go on operationalisation. First of all, we do not have it established. We must deal with the issue of establishment. We are not arguing because we do not need the Contingencies Fund but let us establish it first. Having established it, then the regulations will follow. 

I have read about the 21 days and I have been following – I have got the Contingencies Fund; it was printed on – I do not know whether printing or what but it was printed on 20 February 2008; it was gazetted on 10 May. It came to Parliament here Under Public Finance and Accountability, they are saying a statutory instrument with a span, which will expire after 21 days, or will become effective. We are saying these are regulations; it is not a statutory instrument but a regulation, which we want to agree on. So unless we have agreed, they cannot say that they will become effective because they are not statutory instruments. And we should not accept something that is defective to move. [Dr Suruma: “Clarification”.] I will accept.

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, the regulation we are trying to establish says under part V, the Contingencies Fund that “Subject to section 10 of the Act …,” that is the Public Finance and Accountability Act, “… there is established a Contingencies Fund to cater for national emergencies. 
(2) The Contingencies Fund shall comprise a permanent capital of Shs2 billion and such funds may be appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the Contingencies Fund.”

So what we are doing here is precisely what the law requires. We are seeking to establish the Fund. [Prof. Latigo: “By regulation?”] Yes, that is what the law says. That is the law. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we want to thank the minister for defining the preamble of the regulations. It is saying the regulations want to establish the Contingencies Fund. How can you establish something in the Constitution by a regulation? -(Interjection)- I said give me information and you gave me good information, which I am using –(Interruption)

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Madam Speaker and hon. Members let me beg one thing of you: the Contingencies Fund is already established under the Public Finance and Accountabilities Act and that is factum non argumentum. What the minister is only doing is just complying with section 44 where he is required to bring the regulations to Parliament and where Parliament is supposed to pronounce itself on those regulations within 21 days. Should you not do that then those regulations are deemed to be in force. 

That is the essence of what we are doing here. Members are at liberty to think about changing the law but what the minister has done is to comply with the 1995 Constitution and comply with the law in 2003 of the Public Finance and Accountabilities Act and has gone further to bring the regulations under section 44. The duty of Parliament is simple: to endorse those regulations or if they do not, after 21 days they will be regulations. And later on when Parliament deems it fit, it can do what they like. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what the law says and that is why I have been telling you that if we do nothing, it will become law anyway. 

MR BYANDALA: As I conclude, Madam Speaker –(Interjection)– I was still on the Floor. As I conclude I want to appeal to my colleagues like hon. Nandala that preambles are not part of the law. What is in the preamble cannot be quoted that the law says this in the preamble. It is not a substance; a preamble is not. I appeal to my colleagues that we should support and pass this. Thank you very much.

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, we may need your guidance here. Is it procedurally correct to use a subsidiary law to enforce a command of the Constitution? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have an existing law, which was going to set up that fund; you have not repealed that law. And that is the law as it is now. Maybe it is not perfect but that is what is there. Yes, until you repeal it that is what we have. But also, you have spoken and the minister has heard. Why don’t we finish with this business and ask him to come back and create another law because this House is not ending today. We are not going on recess today. 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Madam Speaker, when the debate on this matter was going on, there was even an unfortunate attempt to mislead the argument that we are advancing as ambush or ill motivated. It is not. All we want is that we show respect to the very Constitution that we accepted to defend. All we want is to be courageous enough when we see mistakes to accept that there were mistakes and commit ourselves to addressing it. 

We made an earlier submission that if the minister can commit himself to bringing a Bill to operationalise Article 157 of the Constitution within a set period that we can agree upon, we will accept that should emergencies arise, we will use the existing law to address that emergency. In fact the existing law even allows Parliament to declare disaster and that opens Parliament to appropriating money to meet that disaster. And Parliament has never failed government on this. On the contrary, it has been government that has to be pushed sometimes to respond to disasters. And, therefore, the doubt cannot be on the side of Parliament that without this regulation, without what is provided, emergences cannot be dealt with. 

But as I said in the preamble, the Public Finance Act in its preamble - and preamble is also part of the law - definitely does not address the Contingencies Fund. We accept the good intention of putting it in that Act. But with the arguments that you have heard hon. Minister, it is also in your personal interest because if emergences arose in three –(Dr Suruma rose_)- I said in your interest; I did not say personal. No, I said in your interest. If like the Minister of Disaster Preparedness predicts that there will be rain all over the country and you apportion money to go to Agago; to go to Kanungu; to go to all these places, I can assure you even when you have done your best, there will be complaints. And people will bash you here the way you have not believed. 

But if we establish the fund with a body to manage; with a regulation to set up procedure for considering emergences, you will still achieve your objective and you have a body that will be mandated to account for those activities. This is all we are saying. It makes good governance, Mr Minister. But if as I see some people are thinking, we are not against your consideration of the regulation. You did a very good job. We have no problem with that; our problem is not the regulation. Our problem is that the law is not as substantive as the Constitution expects, and that is our challenge. If you could concede that but if you argue otherwise, then my advice to the hon. Speaker and to the House would be that maybe we are not understanding the law well. If the Attorney-General came and helped us on this matter any interpretation that he gives, we will accept. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members I appreciate whatever both sides of the House are saying but I want to put on record my displeasure with the members of this committee on the Opposition side who are members of this committee who withheld their participation from the committee without informing the Speaker. They have failed to file a minority report and they are coming here to jest on the work of this House. I want that on record; it is in bad faith. I now defer this matter; let us move to the next item. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I.	THE REVISED  REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2007/2008
II.	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE OF FISCAL YEAR 2008/2009

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

12.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Lule Mawiya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have the rare privilege of presenting the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the ministerial policy statement and budgetary estimates for the Financial Year 2008/09.

Introduction:

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution and rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Foreign Affairs examined the recurrent and development estimates of Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Votes 201-229 - Missions Abroad and Vote 021 - Ministry of East African Community Affairs for the Financial Year 2008/2009.  

The committee further examined the mandate of these departments, the policies they are implementing to fulfil their mandates and the administrative/ institutional set up in place to actualise their vision, mission and goals.

The committee also analysed the background to the budget, the Budget Speech and now wishes to report its findings and recommendations.

Methodology:

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee held meetings with the political and technical leadership of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, missions abroad, Ministry of East African Community Affairs and members of the East African Legislative Assembly. 

The committee also studied previous ministerial policy statements and parliamentary reports on the sectors. We also carried out an inspection of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters building to assess the possibility of the ministry to house the Ministry of East African Community Affairs as a strategy to mitigate the problem of office space currently faced by the Ministry of East African Community Affairs.

Vote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

Mandate:

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is mandated to maximise benefits for the harmonisation of Uganda’s foreign policy and domestic policy objectives. The ministry is charged with the responsibility of promoting Uganda’s national interests abroad. 

The budget performance during the financial year 2007/2008 is laid down in the table. The achievements during that financial year are also laid down on that same page.

The funds allocated during the financial year 2007/2008; in the interest of time, I beg that the members look at them. They are well laid down.

Planned activities for the financial year 2008/2009: recurrent activities are also well laid down - Members can go through them to save time - and so are the development activities.

The amounts requested by the votes for the Financial Year 2008/2009 categorised under (a), headquarters, are clearly given out there on the table; and (b), missions abroad, are also clearly given down there.

Unfunded Priorities in this Financial Year:

i) 	CHOGM Secretariat chair-in-office, Shs 303 million. 
ii) 	Maintenance and operations of the fleet of 30 BMW protocol vehicles worth Shs 253 million. 
iii) 	Organisation of Islamic Conference chair-in- office, Shs 120 million. 
iv) 	Acquisition, development and management of Uganda’s properties abroad, Shs 29 billion. 
v) 	Opening of a mission in Abu Dhabi and consulate in Dubai and Mombasa amounting to Shs 1.4 billion. 
vi) 	Enhancement of Foreign Service allowances for Foreign Service officers and catering for the local staff wage bill in missions which amounts to Shs 8 billion.
vii) 	Integration of Great Lakes Region activities in the main streamlined activities of the ministry which amounts to Shs 108 million.

Observations and Recommendations:

The committee observed the following:

1. CHOGM 2007: 
i) 	The committee observed that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs paid Shs 9.15 billion to some hotels for reservations for CHOGM delegates out of which Shs 7.23 billion was expected to be recovered from self paying guests. This would act as guarantee to the hotel owners and delegates for availability and utilisation of venues. However, minimum efforts have been made to recover these funds.
ii) 	The ministry was also expected to make other recoveries from the disposal of inventory of furniture and equipment kept at various designated CHOGM venues. The delayed disposal of these assets is highly questionable.
iii) 	Government undertook some investments in some hotels in a bid to boost their preparedness for CHOGM. However, some hotels like J&M Airport Road Hotel received funding of Shs 2.21 billion in the week preceding CHOGM and could therefore not be ready for the event. The process of capitalising hotels was not transparent and violated the procurement procedure because no advertisement was run to attract applications.
iv)	It was further established that no valuation of J & M Airport Road Hotel was done with a view of turning the government contribution into shares. To this date, the status of Uganda Government shareholding in this hotel is in balance as no share certificate has been issued. The committee was informed that the government is at the mercy of this hotel as far as this funding is concerned.

Recommendations:

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs should expedite the recovery of Shs 7.23 billion from venues that were utilised by CHOGM delegates. 

The ministry should ensure that the disposal of inventory of furniture and equipment kept in various designated CHOGM venues is executed this financial year in accordance with the PPDA Act. 

The Government of Uganda should opt out of the J & M Airport Road Hotel investment and ensure recovery of Shs 2.21 billion by the end of this financial year.

Acquisition, Development and Management of Property Abroad:

i) 	The committee observed that almost all Uganda Government properties abroad are in a dilapidated state due to lack of adequate and sustained maintenance over the years. The government runs a risk of severe penalties including injunctions from the local authorities as well as demolition at our own cost. The publicity of Ugandan properties has generated a very negative image of and for our country. 

ii) 	Whereas the ministry intends to secure Shs 29 billion from non-tax revenue to kick-start the development, renovation and routine maintenance of some of these properties, this source of revenue is inadequate. The ministry also lacks a comprehensive policy on the acquisition, development and management of properties abroad.  

iii)	 Some Ugandan properties abroad have remained under the management of Uganda Property Holdings Limited. These properties need to be accorded diplomatic immunity for their safety, which can only be attained if they were under the control and management of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  

Recommendations:

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should develop a comprehensive policy on the acquisition, development and management of Ugandan property abroad.  

All Ugandan properties abroad, including those currently managed by Uganda Property Holdings Ltd, should be transferred to and effectively managed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to promote national interests.  

Government should strongly consider the acquisition and development of property abroad a priority come Financial Year 2009/2010.  

Opening of New Missions and Consulates Abroad:  

i) 	Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee observed that the government intends to open a mission in Abu Dhabi and a consulate in Dubai and Mombasa. Dubai has become the main business hub of Uganda’s business in the Middle East and it’s a requirement by the United Arab Emirates that in order to open up a consulate in Dubai, you must have a mission in Abu Dhabi. The total financial requirement for the above amounts to Shs 1.4 billion.

ii) 	It is a strong feeling that the opening of a mission in Netherlands, which has become a business hub in the Scandinavian region, will go a long way in generating economic benefits to Uganda. However, the Minister of Foreign Affairs does not have a Netherlands mission among its priorities for this financial year.  

Recommendation:

The government should consider opening up a mission in the Netherlands as a priority come Financial Year 2009/2010.

Support to Ugandan Associations in the Diaspora:

The committee observed that the Government of Uganda made a financial contribution of US$ 20,000 to the Uganda North American Association (UNAA).  Ugandans in the Diaspora have continued to contribute significantly to the economic development of this country. However, in the absence of clear guidelines and criteria for identifying and supporting such Diaspora organisations, the scheme is subject to abuse.  There is a strong feeling that some of these organisations have political inclinations and can be manipulated for political ends.

Recommendation:

The committee recommended that the government should develop clear guidelines/criteria for identifying and supporting Ugandan associations in the Diaspora.

Donor Funded Projects:

The committee observed that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has continued to access donor funds for a number of projects which are neither declared and reflected in the policy statements nor integrated in their medium term expenditure framework ceilings. A case in point is the Great Lakes Region Project. This violates the principle of budgeting, denotes financial indiscipline and may cause macro-economic instability.

Recommendation:

The committee recommended that all donor funded projects and activities should be declared and subjected to the due budgeting process. 

Accounting officers who fail to declare donor funded projects under their jurisdiction should be personally held accountable.  

Continued Accumulation of Domestic Arrears:

i) 	The committee observed that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has accumulated domestic arrears amounting to Shs 15 billion, the largest amount of which is Uganda’s outstanding obligation to international organisations. Under the commitment control system, accounting officers are not required to incur any expenditure before securing the requisite funds. Therefore, the continued accumulation of these domestic arrears is a reflection of the ongoing financial indiscipline in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

ii) 	The continued accumulation of domestic arrears in various ministries/agencies and departments is an indication that commitment control system has legal defects that make enforcement very impossible. 

Recommendations:

The committee recommended that government should take up the outstanding arrears accruing from her obligations to international organisations as statutory obligations and clear them accordingly.  

The instrument regarding the commitment control system should also be reviewed by Parliament to make it legally forcible.

Supplementary Funding:

The committee observed that it has become a practice by most ministries/departments and agencies to intentionally leave out some key activities in their annual budgets which they later on submit to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as spending pressures to attract supplementary funding. A case in question is the OIC which we have just hosted, which also attracted supplementary funding as if the government did not know that we were supposed to host this conference.

Whereas the Budget Act of 2001 provides for the approval of supplementary expenditure not exceeding three percent of the total approved budget, this legal provision is unfair because it is not proportionately spread across votes. Some ministries have ended up getting supplementary funding exceeding 50 percent of their approved budgets, hence crippling the performance of other ministries/agencies.

Recommendation:

The committee recommended that the Budget Act, 2001 should be revised to ensure that the supplementary expenditure of three percent applies to approved budget of each vote to minimise the crippling of activities of some ministries at the expense of others.  

Votes 201 to 229: Missions Abroad

Secondment, Appointment, Deployment and Recall of Ambassadors and Foreign Service Officers:

i) 	The committee observed that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs does not have a clear policy on the recall and disciplinary control of ambassadors and senior Foreign Service officers. On a number of occasions, some ambassadors and senior Foreign Service officers have stubbornly defied their recall and redeployment from missions and embassies. For example, Ambassador Elizabeth Bagaya defied her transfer from Berlin to Abuja and continued to incur rental costs at the expense of the Ugandan Government.  

ii) 	It was also established that some officials who were appointed ambassadors more than two years ago have remained un-deployed to date. Cases in point are Ambassador Christopher Onyanga Par and Dr Moses Ebuk who were approved by Parliament for appointment as ambassadors but have remained redundant to date.

Recommendation:

The committee recommended that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in consultation with Public Service Commission and the appointing authority, should develop a policy on the recall, deployment and disciplinary management of ambassadors.

2. 	Non Tax Revenue

The committee established that missions abroad had projected to collect Shs 5.33 billion in the FY 2007-2008 as NTR. However, the exact amount collected and remitted to Uganda Consolidated Fund account was not reported in the policy statement. Missions abroad purportedly utilised part of this NTR at source but no authority for utilisation at source and amounts utilised at source could be availed to the committee. 

In view of the aforementioned, the committee strongly believes that there is gross mismanagement of this NTR by the missions abroad.

The committee recommended that the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury should revoke the appointment of accounting officers of missions abroad who mismanaged NTR and they should never be reappointed in the above capacity.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should authorise missions abroad to utilise part of NTR as appropriation in aid with strict controls.

3. 	Facilitation to Foreign Service Officers and Ambassadors:

i) 	The committee observed that there is persistent inadequate facilitation to Foreign Service officers and ambassadors as exhibited by poor office accommodation, residential facilities, transport and inability to carry out other key activities like national days’ celebrations. This impacts negatively on their performance. 

ii) 	It was also established that most Foreign Service officers in missions abroad do not stay with their spouses and children. This is partly explained by the limited facilities availed to such immediate family members to enable them cope with the high cost of living in foreign countries. For example, the education scheme for children of Foreign Service officers collapsed.

The committee recommended that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should increase the recurrent budget of missions abroad to enable these missions effectively execute their mandate.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in conjunction with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should urgently review the enhancement of allowances for Foreign Service officers and rejuvenate the education and health schemes for their children and spouses.

4. 	Supervision and Accountability of Missions Abroad:

i) 	The committee observed that there is weak political and technical supervision of missions abroad by both the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Parliament. The current political supervision being undertaken is not effective and creates room for mistakes. Some missions take over two years without being visited by any ministry official. Parliament in particular has not been able to effectively execute its oversight function over these missions abroad due to limited funding; for example, only Shs 50 million has been earmarked for Parliament’s Committee on Foreign Affairs to carry out this oversight function in this financial year.

ii) 	Whereas the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has continued to submit its policy statement to Parliament and politically account for the activities of missions abroad, these spending agencies and their accounting officers are constitutionally accountable to Parliament. I can refer you to Article 155(1) of the Constitution and Sections 5 to 6 of the Budget Act, 2001. The policy statement of Ministry of Foreign Affairs does not even reflect the achievements and planned activities of these missions yet they are allocated substantial resources by Parliament every financial year. 

Recommendations:

The committee recommended that the Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should avail adequate funds to Parliament to enable it carry out its oversight function on these missions abroad.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs should scale up the level of supervision of the missions abroad.

With effect from FY 2009/2010, missions abroad should prepare and submit to Parliament their policy statements for consideration.

Madam Speaker, I have just received communication from the PS of Foreign Affairs that they are intending to visit three missions, that is, New York, UK and I think Berlin but the ministry is depending on these missions to facilitate the ministry officials who are going to supervise and carry out this work. So, you can see the extent to which we are operating.

In conclusion, the committee recommends approval of the following resources for Vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Vote 201-229, missions abroad, for the Financial Year 2008/2009 in order to carry out the above outlined programmes and activities:

a) 	Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs: recurrent expenditure, Shs 18,960,137,000; development expenditure, Shs 818,591,000; and a total of Shs 19,041,728,000.

b) 	Votes 201-229 - Missions Abroad: recurrent expenditure, Shs 35,205,000,000; development expenditure, Shs 1,149,000,000; and the total is Shs 36,354,000,000.

Vote 021 - Ministry of East African Community Affairs: 

The Ministry of East African Community Affairs is mandated to promote Uganda’s interests in the East African Community. The budget performance during the FY 2007/2008 is as given in that table. The achievements are also detailed out and the funds that were allocated in Financial Year 2007/2008 are also on that same page. 

Planned activities for the Financial Year 2008/2009 are also given on that page, which include both recurrent and development activities. Also on the same page are the unfunded priorities for the Financial Year 2008/2009. 

Lastly, on that same page are the amounts that are being requested for in this financial year. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee observed and recommended the following:
1. 	Coordination of the East African Community Affairs. 
i) 	The ministry plans to ensure effective implementation of the Customs Union and establishment of the Common Market, Monetary Union and Political Federation for East African states. However, apart from the fast tracking consultation programme, there have been minimum efforts to reach out to the various Ugandan communities and other stakeholders to keep them informed and participate in the integration process. 

ii) 	With the implementation of the Common Market and Monetary Union, mobility of factors of production will be paramount. In particular, the legal regime among the partner states must provide mechanisms for easy identification and movement of nationals across borders. Whereas Kenya and Tanzania have gone a long way in this area by providing national identity cards, Uganda is yet to address this problem.

iii) 	It was established that the fast tracking of the political federation was shelved by the East African Community Summit. This notwithstanding, the Community is currently focused on the implementation of the Common Market and Monetary Union with a timeline of 2013.

Recommendations: 

The ministry should design a comprehensive programme to ensure the participation and involvement of the various Uganda stakeholders in the integration process i.e. the East African Legislative Assembly, Uganda Chapter, the Parliament of Uganda, local governments, the business community and the public at large.

The Government of Uganda should, in conjunction with other Community states, ensure that work underpinning the Political Federation is sustained by fast tracking the Common Market and Monetary Union within the timeframe stated - 2013. This must be accompanied by deeper sensitisation of the East African populace on matters of the Community. 

2. 	Staff Establishment as at 30th June 2008.   

There is thin coverage of human resource within the ministry. Out of the approved structure of 63 staff, only 27 positions were filled at the end of Financial Year 2007/2008. This means that the ministry is performing at less than 50 percent of the staff establishment. Many of the posts within the ministry are vacant especially the departments of economic, political and legal affairs which are critical departments in the ministry. This also impacts negatively on the effectiveness and efficiency of the ministry. 

The committee recommended that the ministry should, in conjunction with the Public Service Commission, expedite the recruitment of staff to fill the key positions in the Ministry of East African Community Affairs to enable it effectively execute its mandate. 

3.	East African Community Institutions and Projects

i)	The committee observed that Uganda hosts a number of East African Community institutions and projects. The Community is yet to establish many more projects and institutions which are distributed to the member states based on the principle of equity, demand and capacity to host. A clear understanding of these institutions and projects by Parliament of Uganda and other stakeholders, including the general public, will go a long way to enhance supervision and acceptance in the population. 

ii) 	Uganda was recommended, among others, to be the home of the East African University Council headquarters. As a requirement, Government was expected to avail land for this project. However, no land has been allocated to this project to date. 

iii) 	It was also established that a number of institutions and projects that existed under the former East African Community were shared by the former member states. On a sad note, a number of these institutions and projects that were taken by the Government of Uganda have been abandoned and are in an obsolete state. The cases in point are the East African Flying School Soroti, Port Bell and Jinja harbours. 

The committee recommended that government should come out with a comprehensive policy on rehabilitation and upgrading of some of these institutions that are of critical importance especially in view of the East African integration. 

Government should also urgently avail land on which to build the headquarters of the East African University Council. 

4. 	Minister of State for East African Community Affairs:

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee observed that the practice in Uganda government is that in order to enhance effective and efficient service delivery, every substantive minister is assisted by a state minister. This however is not the case with the ministry of the East African community Affairs. During the consideration of the ministerial policy statements, the committee was unable to interface with the substantive minister because he was out of the country on medical grounds. As a result, the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of the East African Community Affairs, hon. Eriya Kategaya, was represented by the Minister for General Duties, Office of the Prime Minister. 

It was further established that all other East African partner states have a substantive minister and a deputy in charge of the East African Community affairs, which is not the case with Uganda.

The committee recommended that there is an urgent need for the creation of a new portfolio within the Cabinet of Uganda to provide for a minister of state for East African Affairs and this minister of state should be resident in Arusha. This will enhance effective supervision, representation and also coordination of the East African Legislative Assembly and the Community at large. 

5. 	The Ministry of East African Community Affairs’ Strategic Plan:

The committee observed that whereas the East African Community has a strategic plan in place, the Ministry of East African Community Affairs is yet to develop one. A strategic plan is a vital instrument that not only justifies the existence of an institution but also provides for a strategic sense of direction.

The committee recommended that the Ministry of East African Community Affairs should expedite the formulation of a strategic plan that fits into that of the greater East African Community. 

6. 	Supervision of the East African Community:

The committee observed that there is weak political supervision at the Community as a whole. The current Ministers for East African Community Affairs are occasionally visitors to Arusha. It is a strong feeling among members of the East African Legislative Assembly that the current political supervision being undertaken is not effective and creates room for mistakes and delayed implementation of programmes by the secretariat. A case in point is the budget for this year that could not be passed by the East African Legislative Assembly sitting in Nairobi, Kenya. 

The committee recommended that the East African Community member states should scale up the level of political supervision by making at least the ministers of state for East African Community Affairs permanent residents at Arusha.

7. 	Late Submission of Ministerial Policy Statements:

Like other ministries, departments and agencies, the two ministries under our jurisdiction submitted their policy statements after the 15th day of July 2008, thus breaching the Constitution and Budget Act, 2001 timeline of 30th June. This delay negatively affected our committee programmes though some information was later availed. On a sad note, the policy statements had structural defects and a lot of information gaps. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should in consultation with the Parliament develop a harmonised format for ministerial policy statements. 

Sorry, I think I have not brought this out well. Madam Speaker, when we met the two ministries, members of my committee could not effectively handle their policy statements. The reason was that the policy statements had a lot of gaps and these gaps concerned very vital information which the committee needed so as to carry out its supervisory role effectively. We had to send back these ministries. We requested for information but even though information was brought, some other vital information, like I have shown you in our report, was not provided. This somehow crippled our oversight function of these two votes.

8. Increased Rental Expenses:

The committee observed that every financial year, government spends billions of shillings on rent to accommodate various ministries, departments and agencies. This practice is very costly in the long run and yet more cost effective options could have been explored. 

The committee recommended that the government should develop a comprehensive policy on acquisition and development of land to house ministries, departments and agencies. Government can explore the option of acquiring and developing land through mortgage or public-private partnership which is cost effective. At the moment, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is actually enjoying being housed in their headquarters, which saves a lot of public resources.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to conclude and ask the House to approve the following resources for the Vote 021, Ministry of East African Community Affairs, for the Financial Year 2008/2009 in order to carry out the above outlined programmes and activities: recurrent expenditure, Shs 10,214,765,000; development expenditure, Shs 250,000,000; and the total is Shs 10,464,765,000.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, thank you.

1.03
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I am standing in for hon. Okumu, our shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs, who went on a trip to Nairobi on official duty. I am Kibanzanga Christopher, Member of Parliament for Busongora South and shadow Minister in charge of Presidency and Anti-corruption. Our brief response is to add onto what the committee did not include in the report. Otherwise, we concur with the committee report and congratulate ourselves for work well done.

The foreign policy of a country is shaped by its strategic interests. As the chairman indicated, there are a lot of gaps in the policy statement of this ministry. One of these gaps is our strategic interest in dealing with other countries. We demand that those who are concerned in the shaping of our foreign policy sit down and define the strategic interest of our country and we own this interest as a country. For us on this side, we give security highest priority, and trade, tourism, industry and the sovereignty of our country. We must survive.

Today Uganda’s image, as the chairman has said, is represented by dilapidated buildings. All the flags, demoralised Foreign Service officers and poor facilitation give a picture of what Uganda is. This is not good for our motherland. How do you hoist a flag which is in tatters in a foreign country? It reflects badly on our own country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, acting shadow minister, please stick to the text. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much. The Opposition wishes to register, with disappointment, the status of our assets abroad, as the chairman said, and calls upon the government to fully consider and salvage our image abroad instead of hiring international firms or individuals for millions of dollars to improve our image. The government should rather renovate our assets and facilitate the staff in our foreign missions with professionalism to improve our image.

The Importance of Foreign Affairs:

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and our missions abroad played an important role in our economy last year. They secured more than 602 scholarships although the distribution leaves a lot to be desired. The ministry secured foreign aid from Rome, Italy, World Food Programme, IFAD and many others yet our Rome mission owes the Zambian Embassy unpaid rent for over seven years now. There is a fear that our embassy in Rome can be evicted any time.

Our mission in Brazil, through the Dutch and Belgian Governments, secured not less that 50 million euros and more than 1,500 tourists annually come to Uganda, yet we do not have even a mere consulate present there. So, our strategic interest as a country is not represented.

The above missions are just examples of missions abroad; even with poor working environments, they have tried to keep Uganda’s image alive. All missions are in deplorable situations and need special attention.

Protocol:

We propose that the order of precedence be worked on. Last financial year we talked about this and the Leader of Government Business promised to go and work on it. Up to today, we have not seen it and it impacts badly on our country. 

State House Role in Foreign Affairs:

It is alarming to learn that resource allocation for diplomatic work is heavily tilted towards State House directives, leaving the ministry helpless in foreign missions. Politicians in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs would prefer to source the service providers from outside the ministry, other than using the available staff, with the interference from the President’s Office. This undermines the capacity of the existing staff since the juicy responsibilities are done by the State House connected individuals. There is need for us to build institutions and respect those institutions if we are to survive as a country. 

Investment and Tourism:

Whereas Uganda Investment Authority is doing a commendable job in bringing investors in the country, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is ignored and yet they do donkey work to attract investors to Uganda. The payment of Ministry of Foreign Affairs staff is very poor compared to Uganda Investment Authority staff. We need to harmonise the contribution by these two sectors and treat them equally and we hope that makes sense. 

As we have said, Uganda owns a lot of properties abroad: in New York, London, Nairobi and Mombasa. The recommendation of the committee is that these properties be transferred to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. We recommend that this issue needs a lot of study so that we see where we should place these properties because even the properties which are still under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are really in a bad shape. 

We propose that the appointments of our staff in foreign missions reflect the national character of our country. The ministry of East African Community Affairs, as the chairman has said, needs to be strengthened. This ministry should be constituted and shaped by what we intend to achieve in the East African Cooperation, if we are to survive as a country. Our political ambition to lead and become leaders of the East African Community should not blind us from our strategic interests to belong to the East African Community. Someone should, for example, explain to us why our herdsmen who were in Northern Tanzania were expelled and whether such acts do not undermine the integration of the East African Community. For us, we attach a lot of sentiments and significance to cultural integration.

Lastly, can the minister explain the circumstances under which the Government of Uganda paid Shs 3.6 billion for the membership of Burundi to the Community? To our understanding, Burundi is a sovereign country whose Parliament should appropriate funds for their membership into the Community. When did Uganda start running the budgets of other countries to start paying for Burundi’s membership? May we know from what Vote we are going to draw that money? It is painful; our staff abroad are being underpaid, our property abroad is in bad shape, including our flats, and here is a country paying Shs 3.6 billion. Opportunism cannot shape our foreign policy as a country.  

In conclusion, by saying that Uganda as a country has failed to clearly define our foreign national policy and our interest abroad, our relations are temporary and have no basis for future leaders to build on. Our national interest should be well defined in order to determine the countries we should relate with. As I have said, our strategic interest should define and determine our foreign policy. I think that makes sense. We beg that you adopt the report. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yesterday there were members on this side who had not spoken. I do not know whether they are ready.

MR KALIBA: Madam Speaker, I am the vice-chairperson of this committee and I am getting disturbed. We have raised a lot of issues that have a direct bearing to finances, but the Minister of Finance is not here. In the same vein, I am getting concerned that we are also raising very pertinent issues regarding the East African Community Affairs but still the minister in charge is not here. I do not know whether you have been informed about this. Otherwise, I feel a bit disturbed. I need your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance informed me that he was going for a health break and he would be coming back, so I expect him back. The Leader of Government Business is taking charge of the business of East Africa and the Minister of Foreign Affairs is here.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I think the concern of the deputy chairperson is that we have been moving on very consistently with the budget work, but this morning the Minister of Finance came and diverted us and he went away. That shows you how he demeans this Parliament and how he does not take this ministry serious. Foreign Affairs is the mirror of this country, how can he miss out in this? He should be here because we are talking about money, but how can he come with his personal interest here and runs away?  

Please, Madam Speaker, save us from this embarrassment we have with the minister. We cannot continue like this. He should have a minister here consistently to take note of what is happening in Parliament; it is his budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My difficulty is that I have a note here, which he wrote and it says he was going out briefly and coming back. So, I do not know what to do because I have the note here. 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Madam Speaker, since the minister has assured you that he will be coming back, maybe today we have an early lunch and then come back to work as usual. This will allow time for the minister to be informed that he should be here before we proceed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not saying that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is not important but I want to really give sufficient time to the following report.   

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, as I said earlier, I think it would be okay for you to use your own discretion to call one of the ministers of finance as we continue, because he is likely to derail us. We would rather continue -(Interjections)– no, but we know the pace at which we have been moving. We have been handling only two committee reports per day and the moment we break off, we will only have to handle one committee report. I think let us use the ministers who are here to ensure that one of the ministers from finance comes here to listen to the members views rather than adjourning before our usual time. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, can I ask the Minister of Health to go and ring the Cabinet Secretariat and tell the Minister of Finance that he should return or send somebody here. In the next 20 minutes he should be here.         

1.22
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the well presented report, but I have a few issues to raise. 

One is about the negative forces in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Since 1997, we have had problems with the negative forces there. To me, it seems there is no goodwill on the part of DRC and UN to solve the problem. For us who come from the Rwenzori region, we live in perpetual fear of attack, but the ministry has never come up here to tell us what is going on. The other day I listened to the Defence report and there was no mention of the PRA forces. Now, in the policy statement I see another group, the RPA, on page 6. I do not know; is it PRA or RPA? There is confusion on page 6 and the minister should clarify on this.

The other issue is about the 30 vehicles - the BMWs - that we are paying Shs 253 million for. How are we running this country? What are these vehicles doing? They are becoming a liability for this nation. When you look at the hotel, government paid Shs 9,015,000,000 for reservations for foreign delegates, out of which Shs 7,023,000,000 was to be recovered. Now in the report it is mentioned that there is minimum effort to recover it. Surely, how are we running this country? I remember in this time of CHOGM, we would just pass monies hurriedly. Now on recovery, we get reports that there is minimum effort. 

Still on the hotels, there is this J&M Airport Road Hotel, which received Shs 2,021,000,000 a week prior to the hosting of CHOGM. Was this passed and given in good faith? May this Parliament be informed of who owns this hotel and why this person is not refunding the money? The money was not used; we think the money is there, so government should receive that money. If not, I call on Members of Parliament to stand to be counted on this issue. 

The other issue is about the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that has continued to access donor funds that are not declared in the policy statement. Why is this so? This has a serious bearing on the credibility of our budget –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I first of all thank the honourable member and I want to seek clarification. He has asked three specific questions. One, how are we running the country? Secondly, he has called on the members to stand up to be counted. There are many ways we could stand up to be counted. We can initiate a censure of the responsible minister. We can also refuse to pass the budget now. Can I seek clarification from the member so that he gives us a way forward on what we specifically must do in order to be counted?

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, hon. Dombo. Now that you have again asked this question, it is up to Parliament. I have generated a debate, let us see how we can move -(Laughter)

To say that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs does not have a clear policy on recall and disciplinary control over the ambassadors and people in Foreign Service is an absurdity. If you can deploy someone and then you say you no longer have control over them, then why is the ministry there? I am questioning the ability of the ministry. 

On the poor facilitation of the ambassadors and people in Foreign Service, I think this is a disservice to this country. As one honourable member has just noted, the Foreign Service is a mirror of this country. Now that these people are under funded, how do we expect them to move?

1.29
MR SAMUEL BYANAGWA (NRM, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this golden chance; I am very happy. I thank the committee for the catalogue of problems regarding foreign affairs. I think when you balance the whole paper, the merits are very few. 

I am a supporter of government but I think there must be a deliberate effort to uplift our image abroad. There are many problems but I am mainly concerned with No.2 on page 5 - “Acquisition, development and management of property abroad”. I have had a chance to visit some of these properties that belong to Uganda Government, like in Mombasa, and I even had supper there. These properties are generally dilapidated. Secondly, the culture of maintenance is non existent. Maybe it is reflecting some of its aspects internally here. 

Three, I have a brother in foreign affairs, but they seem to be starved when it comes to salaries. How are they expected to survive? 

Four, the Uganda Property Holdings Company Ltd is just a company that is interested in its own profits. The embassies and high commissions of other countries, whether here or overseas, give them an acceptable public image. Ugandans are proud people but we seem to be denied this. I am calling upon government to task the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Foreign Affairs on why foreign affairs are poorly funded at the lower ranks of funding.

Government should divest itself from this culture of renting buildings and hiring vehicles. I think this has a bearing on corruption. Let us get these properties built, maintained and a clear policy from government worked out on how to maintain them. I propose that we have an equivalent of the organs on corruption, like IGG, because we put up a building but maintenance becomes a problem. I thank you very much for giving me this chance and I hope for more chances in future. (Laughter)

1.32
MS ALASO ALICE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, I have four issues to raise. I do agree with the insights of the committee and the concerns of my shadow minister. 

I would like to look into the matter of recovering monies from the CHOGM hotels. Prior to CHOGM, we all said in here that government having divested itself from businesses it should have come to this House and given us a clear understanding of how we were going to become shareholders as a government in these private businesses. At that time, anyone of us who spoke like that was perceived to be an enemy of CHOGM. Unfortunately now, we are back to that level and I am glad that the committee is raising this matter. 

This is public money and it must be recovered. You just do not go dump money in Munyonyo, dump money at J&M Airport Road, dump money in your relative’s hotels, at the expense of taxpayers in this country. This is very suspicious and I would like the committee also to go beyond just demanding the recovery of this money. 

There are these items you were looking at - the equipment that was purchased for CHOGM. At the risk of being handled like hon. Otto the other day, I am going to do a bit of rumour mongering here. We are told that some of this equipment has already been sold. The committee should go and do a physical audit; check if the printing machines that were ordered are still there. Most of this equipment is already in people’s hands and this is taxpayers’ money. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I want to comment on the Ugandan generosity when it comes to these big meetings - CHOGM, the Arab Organisation of Islamic Conference and whatever else you need to mention, including meetings that are hosted by Parliament. When we go out of this Parliament, the Commission gives us money and when we go into those countries, we are asked to pay for our accommodation. We pay for our food most of the time, but when it comes to Uganda, the generosity is so reckless. It is so absurd!

You do not know why we decide to pay for hotel rooms. All that these people need to do is to confirm the booking. If you are coming, confirm the booking. That is what they ask of us when we get out of this country. Here, we give them coffee for free. We pack our coffee! I do not know how much coffee we gave to these visitors when they came and yet they should have actually gone to our coffee shops and bought our coffee and left the money with us. We pack for them coffee, we pack for them tea, to the extent that it becomes unnecessary for them to buy anything when they are leaving. I find this very reckless! 

We even hire transport. Madam Speaker, I travelled with you on one occasion and when they received us, they also asked us for transport. We pay, we give them money for transport but here you are asking for 30 BMWs at the cost of 253 million; to escort who? I consider this reckless. Every time we go out, we pay, but not when it comes to Uganda. We are, first of all, poorer than those economies where we are being asked to pay, but when it comes here, we slaughter the only bull that we have in the kraal to show that we are very generous. I think we should style up. 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs should work within the means available to it. It is pointless to come back here and say, “We do not have money for Foreign Affairs” when the wastage is clearly evident. What point are we seeking to prove and to whom when we give out a lot for free? We book accommodation and we pay for it and then we are also saying that we are the very ministry that does not have money. 

I also want to associate myself with the concern raised by the Shadow Minister. What is the rationale of paying for Burundi’s membership to the East African Community? Why Uganda? Where did we take a decision that we are going to be the ones? Are we forcing Burundi to belong to the East African Community? If we are forcing it, is it a role that has been assigned to Uganda? Is it a role for the rest of the members of the East African Community? 

You know that at the start of this process of integration, centres of excellence were identified. Our centre of excellence for this country, Soroti Flying School, is in tatters. The aircrafts for training are very old and they are only two instead of seven. They should be of a certain category – I am not an expert in those areas. The dormitories are in a bad shape, the classes are in a bad shape. The Government of Uganda cannot find money to meet its commitment to the East African Community as regards its centre of excellence but it can find money to recruit Burundi to belong to the East African Community. 

If you compare our centre of excellence, Soroti Flying School, to the tourism institution in Kenya, ours becomes a centre of embarrassment while the other ones become centres of excellence. So, what is the rationale? Do we have too much? How do you begin feeding your neighbour’s children when your own children are starving and malnourished like the Soroti Flying School? I think somebody should help me to understand this. 

Finally, we are talking about foreign missions but I think foreign missions should also take a central role. Recently, we had those xenophobic problems in South Africa and you could hear countries like Mozambique concerned about their people in South Africa. We had problems in Kenya, but it looked like we did not have missions in those parts of the world. Ugandans were literally left to gamble on their own. These missions should try, even in the very difficult situations, to be relevant to Ugandans especially in times of crises. If you are going to have to find your own way and wait for three weeks for a statement, and then you hear from a minister as though you do not have an ambassador or anybody in Kenya, I think it is not worth the money. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

1.40
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much for this opportunity. Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the chairperson and the members on the Foreign Affairs Committee for presenting an executive summary in their report. 

My concern is on page 3. I am aware that as a country, it is to our advantage to improve our image internationally, it is to our advantage to promote our tourism, trade, industry, etc. However, there is no way we can promote our country in the various areas I have mentioned without effective advertisement of the country called Uganda internationally. 

If I can recall, I think it was towards CHOGM that I heard, and I stand to be corrected, that there was a company which was contracted to advertise our country in order to promote our image internationally and I think it was paid almost US$ 1 million. This company was supposed to advertise our country on various major international media like CNN et cetera. I want to know from the minister whether this arrangement was effected and what the results are. 

Whenever we travel abroad, it is really becoming a problem to most of us explaining where the country Uganda is found. I was recently in Australia and New Zealand and it took me a lot of time explaining to my fellow participants about a country called Uganda. It is more disappointing because only when you mention the late Idi Amin is when they will say “Oh yes, that is the country you are talking about.” I wonder whether the Minister of Foreign Affairs is doing enough in order to advertise our country. It hurts when you travel to those countries and our President is not known at all-(Interjection) I am giving you testimony –(Interruption)

MR MUWULIZE: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. I remember hon. Sebaggala was on record during the campaign of CHOGM saying that actually Uganda does not deserve to host CHOGM because of lots of reasons he gave. Uganda, headed by His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, has successfully hosted CHOGM basically to showcase Uganda and to show that Uganda is known everywhere. I do not think all Heads of State that were here and members of the states they represent do not know His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Also for the record, hon. Latif Sebaggala, I do not usually want to distract you but I am aware that the President of this country made a state visit to Australia and New Zealand last year. He was even photographed with the Maori, an Aboriginal person from those areas. So, when you say that the President of Uganda is not known, I think that is not true. Say something else.  

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I want to correct the record. If hon. Muwulize can recall, he knows that I supported the hosting of CHOGM; it is on record. 

His Excellency the President might be known in New Zealand and Australia by the leadership there, but I am talking about the participants who came from various countries. That is the message I am sending. If I talk about this kind of arrangement, it is like I am trying to remind our ministry that they have a lot to do. They have a lot to do in order to advertise our country and also our President. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving way. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I just want to give hon. Sebaggala is that about two weeks ago, I visited Mexico and I was in Mexico City for one week. When I reached the airport, I took a taxi and the taxi driver asked me, “Where are you from?” I said, “I am from Uganda”. He then asked me, “How is President Yoweri Museveni?” (Applause) So, the President is known even in countries like Mexico which are very far from here. That is the information I wanted to give you. President Yoweri Museveni is very well known even in Mexico and Latin America. Thank you very much. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker -(Ms Muhanga rose_). Hon. Muhanga, with the Speaker’s permission -(Laughter) 

MRS MUGISA MUHANGA: Thank you very much, hon. Latif Sebaggala, for giving way and thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Sebaggala, you recall that last year you and I went with the President of the Republic of Uganda to attend the AU conference in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. During this conference, I hope you recall very well the meetings we attended with Ban Ki-Moon and delegations from the European Union and the ululations that the President could attract whenever he came to the African Union. 

It was not only members of the African Union at this summit but a lot of observers from most of the countries around the world came to attend the AU conference. So, hon. Latif Sebaggala knows very well that our President is one of the most prominent people in the world according to what happened in that conference where we were together.  

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you so much –(Ms Alaso rose_)- with the Speaker’s permission. (Laughter) 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I just thought that I should ask my colleague, hon. Latif Sebaggala, to emphasise that Uganda as an entity needs to be known even more than President Museveni because we need tourists. No tourist is going to come here and say, “I am looking for President Museveni.” We are not going to earn foreign exchange from people coming to see President Museveni. We need to know Uganda; we need to know the Kasubi Tombs, Nyero rock paintings. That is what we are paying these technocrats to do outside this country. 

As to whether President Museveni is known, let me tell you, Saddam Hussein was known; everybody can be known for whatever reason, but let Uganda be known for a good reason. (Applause)  

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much and I thank my colleagues for the information they have given me but I would not like to be diverted. The point is very clear; we need to advertise our country to the rest of the world so that we can be known as a country. 

Finally on page 4 about opening a mission in Abu Dhabi; it is true Dubai is becoming the business hub not only for Ugandans but also for the entire world. For the last three years, we have been talking about opening a mission in Dubai and many Ugandans who go to Dubai for various reasons find it extremely difficult that the only mission they have to run to is in South Arabia and really it is far away from Dubai. We know that most of our prominent businessmen and women here in Uganda go to Dubai for their business trips -(Member timed out)

1.50
MS VICCY KYOKUHAIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am very sorry for the interruption and I just want to ask for your indulgence to raise this issue but in order to enable people who will in future read our Hansard to coherently follow what we are debating, the practice that is being allowed, I would rather that a warning bell is sounded so that somebody debating can conclude a point. But when the system cuts off before somebody has made a conclusion of what he is saying, many statements will be hanging in our Hansard and it will affect people in future to coherently follow what exactly is following.

May I, therefore, procedurally propose that if there are about two minutes or a minute to the winding up of somebody’s time that he must be warned so that he can make a conclusion of what he is saying? It will be better, could be in future the Parliamentary Commission may want to create a timer so that as you talk, you can look on the timer and make an effort to wind up on your time and make a coherent debate. I am sorry but I just want to ask your indulgence that if the Clerk can assist us to do this, it would make us debate better. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that glass you see there (on the Table) contains sand. It is supposed to be used and watched by Members, but for some reason - even the Business Committee brought up this matter and said, “Why don’t we use that timer?” because you can see the sand moving down and know how you are doing it. So maybe we should ask the clerk to check it. If it works, why don’t we use it so that Members can time themselves based on that? That is why it is there.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, on that note with your permission can I be allowed to conclude? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let the hon. Member for Isingiro - we shall do that during the lunch break and see whether it works. But let us proceed now. 

MS KYOKUHAIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern in on page 6; I concur with the committee’s recommendation that we should have a comprehensive policy on the acquisition, development and management of our Ugandan property abroad -(Dr Mallinga entered the Chambers; and Ms Chekamondo) (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank the Minister of Health for doing the needful. He has brought the Minister of Finance. (Applause)

MS KYOKUHAIRWA: Madam Speaker, some of our properties abroad are so dilapidated to the extent that they should be demolished. When you go to Nairobi and look at our Uganda House, a building that is in the middle of the city, you cannot believe that it should even bear that good name of Uganda. When you go to Mombasa, our warehouses are ever busy and they make business. We should be getting some good money out of those warehouses. It is like milking a cow that you do not feed.

We need to do much and see who should manage these properties. When we went with Public Accounts Committee Members, it is as if there is a conflict between the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Foreign Affairs as to who should manage what. Last year we found out that Ugandans had about 1,000 cars parked in Mombasa and we were told that 200 cars had been given out to Southern Sudan for free. I am told that the remaining are to be sold, I do not know who is selling and how our people - because those are the properties of our Ugandans. How are they going at least to have some money – they imported the vehicles, they failed to clear and the government is to sell those vehicles. Are those people going to be paid what they had already spent on the vehicles? I do not know. The minister can tell us.

I want to also recommend that our properties should be managed well so that this country can have some income from them. I thank you.

1.57
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to associate myself with the recommendations of the committee. On page 4, I observe that there are items that are not funded, which have been categorised as unfunded priorities for Financial Year 2008/2009 amount to Shs 39.1 billion. I have no idea how the Member did his mathematics. It appears he added up the entire section. I think it causes a lot of concern. Among the items that are not funded, is one of maintenance of the 30 BMWs. Here are vehicles that we purchased with tax payers’ money, they served for barely four days and already they need Shs 253 million to be serviced. I do not think that reflects good financial management on the part of Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Two, the committee observes that there is un-recovered money from hotels. According to my calculation, the total amount that needed to be recovered was Shs 9.4 billion, you add Shs 7.23 billion to Shs 2.21 billion which totals to Shs 9.44 billion that ought to have been recovered and has never been recovered. However, I would like the chairman of the committee to remind me whether the Shs 8 billion that was said to have been given to the Speke Resort, Munyonyo has been recovered. If it has not been recovered, I do not see why it is not added to the Shs 9.4 billion that we need to recover. 

On the issue of equipment, which has not been disposed of, I would request the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to give us a total inventory of the equipment that was received in the name of CHOGM because in our committee of ICT, we were told that the Ministry of ICT was responsible for purchasing all ICT equipment and when we asked the ministry about where this equipment is, we were told most of it was distributed. So the Ministry of Foreign Affairs would help us to know where this equipment is and what is remaining.

On the facilitation of embassies, I have a very big concern, especially on the mission in Rome. We are told the embassy is going to be evicted but also the Ambassador Rwabita himself - I had an opportunity to go and visit his residence when I was in Rome last year, but you would wonder how the ambassador who represents Uganda in Rome and in other various organisations would have a two-room apartment. 

I want to speak about the defiance of the directives -

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, I did visit Rome recently and had an opportunity to visit the Ambassador’s residence and it is not correct to say that it is a two-room apartment. He has several bedrooms and a sitting room, but not two rooms. 

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you honourable minister, I think you have provided some more money for him. On defiance of superiors on directives; it is bothering to hear that an ambassador has been transferred and the ambassador refuses to vacate an office and here government continues to pay for that ambassador who is not deployed. And recently we read in the papers that there are some people who have even defied directives of the President. I wonder whether this is now becoming an acceptable mode of conduct of people in government.

On protocol and order of precedence, my colleague from the Opposition asked that there should be a review of the order of precedence in protocol. As far as I am concerned, last year the Ministry of Foreign Affairs published a list of order of precedence; I do not know whether hon. Kibanzanga is contesting that list or he wants to review that one. Thank you.

2.03
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak and I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee for a job well done. The report has brought out very pertinent issues that need our attention as Parliament. 

Also allow me to thank the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for a good job done because at least Uganda is no longer looked at as a pariah state in the world. At least we can walk with our heads up and be able to talk about our country and introduce ourselves to other people as Ugandans which never used to happen during Amin’s era. I would also like to thank some missions abroad for being good and hospitable to some of the Ugandan officials that go abroad. In particular, I want to mention the mission at Cairo. I think that mission is one with a difference. The people are kind; they are hospitable and are willing to help. And I think that should be promoted and appreciated by us people who normally visit such missions.

However, I would like to observe that some officers at the missions are not happy with government officials who go to different countries without paying a courtesy call at the Embassy and yet they believe that it is very important for government officials to do that before they can hold meetings with other people to get valuable information about those countries so that when they are talking it is from an informed position. I want to call upon colleagues that whenever you go abroad, please call at our missions first so that you are given information that will guide you in your discussions and visits abroad.

However, like one of my colleagues has mentioned, at times we are disappointed when we visit countries and they say they have never heard about Uganda and the only person they know in Uganda is Amin who died some years ago. Madam Speaker, you remember when we went to Denmark and this other big man said he had heard about Uganda and the only things that he knew about Uganda were Amin and Kony. And yet we know that Uganda – first of all Idi Amin died many years ago and Uganda is no longer under insurgency and we are moving on as a country. I think for some of the missions that have not gone out to publicise Uganda positively should do so in order to promote tourism and trade in our country. I know they are doing some work but they can do better to promote the image of our country, to promote tourism and trade in our country, especially, our coffee, flowers and many other products that can fetch us a lot of money as a country.  

I was disappointed by the mismanagement of the non tax revenue at the missions and I would like the minister to tell us exactly what steps he is going to take in order to bring the culprits to book because mismanaging funds is punishable. In any case, we did not know even how much money was mismanaged. Can the minister maybe tell us exactly how much money was mismanaged so that we get the proper punishment for these people?

Finally, I want to talk about the Ministry of the East African Community Affairs. When I look at the budget of Shs 10 billion, I wonder whether this is enough to accomplish the work and succeed in promoting Uganda’s interests in the East African Community.

When you look at page 12, paragraph 4.0, the mandate of the ministry is to promote Uganda’s interests in the East African Community. I find this a bit ambiguous as I don’t know what these interests refer to. I can guess that they include trade and political interests but Shs 10 billion is not enough to accomplish the task. Is it the ministry that requisitioned for this budget? 

When I look at the achievements in the FY 2007/2008, my colleagues maybe can help me. When I look at the achievements in relation to the mandate, they do not make a lot of sense. When you look at the planned activities for FY 2008/2009 vis-à-vis the mandate, I also get lost. I am not very comfortable first of all with the mandate of the ministry and secondly with the achievements and planned activities -(Member timed out)

2.10
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Page two on OIC, there is a blank and then release of Shs 9.7 billion. What is this? Does it mean that we never plan for this activity and that we paid for an activity when we have a lot of domestic arrears, which should have been planned? Is this poor planning?

Contributions to national organisations are an important issue and I don’t see any reason why we are saying that we should not fund that activity. I think the basic thing we should deal with is which of these we should belong to otherwise it is very important that we have these organisations that are really necessary to us and plan for them. This is better than having arrears, which eventually put our name in disrepute. Despite the fact that we are saying we want to advertise Uganda, if we are not people who pay our debts, that is worse than anything.

I have seen that we want to create a mission in Abu Dhabi. If this is really important, then why don’t we fund it? Maybe we are not interested. We have money in GAM and we have money that we used for buying second hand BMWs. Is a BMW more important than this issue? I think that this ministry is not serious because if you feel that we need this embassy or high commission, it should have been budgeted for among the priorities instead of bringing names and we move on.

My next issue is Uganda’s properties abroad. I am worried because first of all the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has failed to maintain its own property and now it wants to add on more. What do you mean? Uganda House in Nairobi is a kiosk. What more do you want us to give you? I think Ministry of Finance should sit down and see the best way to manage these properties. You can only do the coordination but you should not be the one in charge of these properties because you have already failed to manage your own.

If I go to the ones that UPHL is managing, these are properties formerly owned by Coffee Marketing Board, Produce Marketing Board and Lint Marketing Board. These are farmers’ properties and they should return them to us the farmers. They are not supposed to be for you. Yes, I am talking again as the Chairman of Bugisu Cooperative Union. Coffee Marketing Board was owned by us and we need our property. You do not have authority over them and you should quickly hand them over to us.

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Madam Speaker, my colleague here is saying that the properties in Mombasa belong to Ugandan farmers of which he is a chairman of a cooperative Union. Is he here as a chairman of a cooperative union or as a Member of Parliament?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker has just smiled and even failed to rule because she knows that I am a farmer. 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I think that we should not gloss over this issue that he is talking about. It is true that the government owned a number of structures in Nairobi, Mombasa and even here but we know that there is a company well registered here. Let the minister tell us the owner of that company and how much money has accrued to that company. We cannot be kept in suspense. This Parliament is entitled to know how much money has been collected in terms of rent so that we can be accountable, please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think what the Members are saying is that they are not satisfied with the arrangements that you have in place for managing those properties. So when you are answering, don’t worry about his being a farmer.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that is very important and you have said the right thing. First of all, the Uganda House in Nairobi is in a prime area in Nairobi where the generation of rent is high. The Ministry of Finance knows better but I am told that UPHL is a loss making company. We have given it assets, which should generate income but we have no cheque coming to the Consolidated Fund. I think that the minister is in a better position to address that. That is why Members are saying that the mismanagement of these assets by these people should be dealt with accordingly.

You are talking about advertising Uganda. It is true that we have seen some of these embassies. Most of them are in areas that experience winter and they have to install heating systems and pay for electricity. You don’t give them enough money to keep the place heated up and you say they should keep the embassies going. How can I go into a cold embassy when it is supposed to be heated? What is that? Also, these are Votes. We need capital development for these missions so that they are able to maintain their properties in the form of repairs.

This brings me to the point of non tax revenue. This revenue is highly mismanaged at missions. The reason is because they get they get money from this source to maintain the properties, pay for heating and in the process, they get some for themselves. That is why we are saying that we need a full budget to deal with those properties abroad; maintain the embassies or the high commissions and their staff. It is not good to have staff that is poorly remunerated. Having said that, the Ministry of Finance can confidently talk about the NTR because there are embassies, which collect a lot of NTR but they never remit it. They use excuses of maintaining them.

Madam Speaker, as regards East Africa, I think if you do not book a plane two weeks in advance in Arusha you will never get it. That means that we are busy going in and out of there. That being the case, Government of Uganda should find a way of cutting costs –(Member timed out)  

2.17
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I want to begin by thanking the committee for the report and also the shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs for the statement. 

The Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs created the impression that the foreign policy of our country is not shaped by our strategic interests, that we do not know why we belong to the East African Community, why we are associating ourselves with our brothers and sisters in Sudan and the ANC and things like that. I wanted to say that the shadow minister is not right. We know why we belong to the East African Community and our strategic interests include trade, among others. Also, we know why we supported SPLA and ANC and our strategic interests there were to have an independent Africa. I just wanted to correct that impression.

Having said that, on page 7, our accumulated domestic arrears regarding contributions toward foreign organisations stand at Shs 15 billion, which is much higher than the budget of the Ministry of East Africa. I think the Minister of Finance and government should sit down and sort out those organisations that we think are absolutely necessary for our country and which are within our means and belong to those for the time being as we progressively acquire more funds to belong to others that we think are also necessary.  This is because to continue committing this country, well knowing that we do not have the funds is not right and we should avoid this.  

I am also aware that as the committee reports, the Ministry of Finance has been absolutely undisciplined in terms of the contributions that we make to these organisations in the sense that they do not pay attention. It seems that they do not take seriously the fact that we should belong to these organisations and I think the Ministry of Finance needs a caution to this effect.  

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): The clarification I would like to make is that the sectors decide which organisations they should belong to and how they should allocate resources accordingly from their budgets. It is not the Ministry of Finance, which tells the sectors the organizations they should belong to and which ones they should not belong to. If they have limited resources and they want to belong to many international organisations, they will end up in arrears and we do not have control over that. We cannot decide for them issues of membership of international organisations.  

However, if this august House gives us that authority then we can limit them accordingly and say, this is the list of authorised and accepted organisations and here are the resources for them. But as of now and in regard to indiscipline, it is not the Ministry of Finance but the various sectors, which decide which organisations to belong to.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is it not time that as a country we sat down and agreed to what we want to do and where we want to belong? Because if you say the sector should decide, they think everything is important.  Don’t you think we should organise ourselves centrally?  When I was in the Cabinet, these arrears were there. I left Cabinet and those arrears have found me here.  

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, I agree that as a country we should agree but I do not believe that it is the Ministry of Finance, which should tell Ministry of Foreign Affairs that they should belong to this organisation or that. That is not the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Minister of Finance you are the custodian of the past. Supposing you vote a Cabinet Paper and say, friends these are the things we have, let us agree in Cabinet as a country. You are the custodian of the past.

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, if a decision is taken and we agree that these are the organisations of greatest interest to Uganda, then we will be very happy to avail the necessary resources to make sure that we fulfill our obligations in payment of contributions.

MRS SENTONGO: I believe Uganda is a member country of the United Nations and if it is so, it must have friends and deal with them accordingly. I do not understand and this is the clarification I am trying to seek from the Minister of Finance. If you leave everything to the sector ministries to decide what to do and what not to do, that leaves me in abeyance as I do not understand. What should they do if you do not give them a go-ahead as a responsible minister? Who is responsible for paying the affiliation fees and that kind of thing? It seems you are saying that we do not need these affiliations or any interactions with any international bodies. How are we going to survive?

MR MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Actually before we join these organisations, at the back of our minds as a country we are trying to pursue our strategic objectives. As a country, there is no organisation that we join, which is less important. Therefore like you are trying to guide, Madam Speaker the Leader of Government Business should coordinate Finance and these other ministries like Foreign Affairs and East African Community Affairs so that we fulfill our commitments and obligations as required. Otherwise, whichever organisation we join is as paramount as any other. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance and honourable members for contributing towards that. But –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The motion we are discussing has been moved by the Minister of Finance and I know that the strategic interests of this country are a preserve of the Head of State, who is a fountain of honour, who guides us on where to belong and what we should do. What is said in this section is talking about domestic arrears in international obligations. What I want to seek on procedure is: the minister has just said that the sectors should decide on which organisations we want to belong. If they chose today that they do not want to belong to certain organisations, what will happen to the arrears that have been committed here? Will Uganda not be known more for being a bad debtor and a bad committer on certain organisations than we should? If they chose not to belong, will the domestic arrears on international obligations automatically end? Could the Minister of Finance guide us before we continue debating his motion?

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have made provisions for domestic arrears amounting to Shs 300 billion in this budget and these funds are allocated to the various sectors so that each of these various sectors can meet as many or as much of the arrears arising to them as possible. This is the maximum we believe we can afford to allocate for the clearance of arrears. So, we will continue to allocate funding every year. Last year we had Shs 280 billion; part of this was for pensions arrears and part of it was for other arrears such as arrears to international organisations and we hope to continue this policy. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are you assuring the House that in the next financial year, come this time of the year, we shall have less domestic arrears in respect to –

DR SURUMA: Well, Madam Speaker, if the sectors incur additional arrears even as we are clearing past arrears, I cannot make that assurance. The best option would be that the sectors stop incurring arrears. In other words, they are given MTF ceiling; this is to say we indicate to each sector the amount of money we propose to make available to them based on passed budget levels. Then within that ceiling, they have to make a judgement on the priorities and this is very important. It means that it would be nice to belong to four international organisations but given the budget available, perhaps it is better to take two and forfeit two. But if they decide they want to remain in all four when the budget is not available, that means they are incurring arrears and as Minister of Finance, I do not have the authority to say do not belong to such an organisation. I need a higher authority to tell me that they should not belong to such an organisation. I cannot dictate to a sector which international organisation they should belong to or not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, but I thought that when the hon. Minister of Finance reads the budget, he is reading it on behalf of the President who has a broader view of the entire government. 

On page 8, this issue of Parliament approving ambassadors without really knowing whether the vacancies are there for them to be deployed and therefore sometimes ambassadors roaming around for years and years is dangerous; dangerous to the careers of these individuals because you lock their careers. A person cannot get a job anywhere else if he knows that he has been appointed but he has no job. Maybe this Parliament in future should consider approving those appointments where we are sure that there are vacancies like we do with the boards, like we do with other appointments including ministers. 

On the missions abroad, given the culture where I come from - the Kiga culture - I am not quite sure whether I am really qualified to –(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I just want to give information to the House that actually there is no shortage of ambassadorial career diplomats in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It is a ministry, which is flooded with people like that at that level. So, to really bring in political ambassadors from outside does not indicate that actually there are vacancies. There are no vacancies of an ambassadorial nature in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. There are a lot of brothers and sisters who should be ambassadors but they are suffocated by political appointees. So I just want to remove this impression that whenever people are appointed into the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, it is an indication that there are no proper people who should be appointed at that level. There are people who should be ambassadors. Thank you.

And I think what is happening is what we saw last week that actually people are not promoted. You can be in a position in the civil service for 20 years and then they bring a stranger from the street and he becomes your boss. This is what is also happening in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR BAHATI: Thank you. In conclusion, I just want to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee. On page 10 he said “The Ministry of Foreign Affairs does not even reflect the achievements and planned activities of the missions abroad.” Then as a committee, if an institution does not show the achievements, does not show the planned activities, why are you allocating money to these institutions if you do not know the planned activities? 

On page 16 the committee once again uses – I had said that given the culture that I belong to I do not know whether I should be talking about diplomatic issues - but the committee uses very strong words that there is weak political supervision of the East African Community. Are you talking about the structural issues? Are you talking about the individuals holding those political offices? What are you talking about? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. But hon. Member, on the issue that you raised about the missions, the committee’s disappointment was that the ministry projects itself as the one doing everything and fails to report the good things done by the missions. That is their problem. I think that is what they were saying.

2.35
MS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I have a few comments to make.  

On page 4; I know many people have spoken about this, the management of our properties abroad. Year in year out, since the Committee of Foreign Affairs was merged with the Presidential one; we have been talking about this issue of maintaining our properties abroad. But I do not know what the problem is with the Ministry Of Finance because these are properties which can get us money; we can hire those which we cannot use and instead of hiring offices for our officers abroad they would be using these. And to make matters worse even this company has failed to do this; the Uganda Property Holding Limited. It failed and at one time we were told that it was even soliciting money from government so that it can maintain itself. So, why do we keep the same company when it has failed to manage? Why keep it managing what it cannot? Therefore, the ministry or government should look for a proper company which can manage to manage these properties. 

Madam Speaker, when you come to domestic arrears, I think the Minister of Finance should work with government and not to leave it because these organisations are cross-cutting in various ministries. So, government should sit and decide on where we should be obliged to belong. Once we do this, the same government should sit and plan out how to pay for domestic arrears so that every year we know those which we have decided on and those which we have not decided on but we have a debt with them; this is how we are going to pay so that we give it a time limit. It means that we shall know that after five years we would have done away with domestic arrears.  

On page 8, this is to do with supplementary and unfunded priorities. Ministries are told to make priorities and they do it. But then you find that those priorities are not funded and then after passing the budget the ministries come up with the blessing of Ministry of Finance to ask for supplementary and then we find that we have look for that money for those supplementaries. These supplementaries have caused us problems and we know that this House has been embarrassed because of supplementaries. I am requesting, if possible, to see that we try to see that we minimise having supplementaries on issues which we know are obvious; maybe it is difficult.

For the issue of ambassadors, political and career diplomats, I do not think it is only Uganda Government. You find that even those developed countries have both political and career ambassadors. So perhaps we have to decide for how many we have for political ambassadors and how many for careers. But when it comes to appointment of ambassadors I think that is sometimes beyond the ministry; it is the appointing authority but when it comes to recalling and posting, the hands of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are somehow tied because it is not the appointing authority. So it all depends upon the appointing authority to recall an ambassador and to appoint another one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiryapawo, I think you are confusing this House. You mean that if the government recalls an ambassador and the ambassador does not come and they post a substantive ambassador there, that person can remain? Is that what you are saying? Can the President recall one and then – although he has posted somebody else there; like it happened in Germany?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much Madam Speaker and honourable whatever -(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member should respect other Members of Parliament in this House. It is very debasing, even on himself, it has become his habit to disrespect other Members of Parliament. Is he in order to continue with this kind of behaviour in the House by addressing honourable members inappropriately? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am really surprised because the honourable member and hon. Kiryapawo have been part of the Budget Committee for over two years. It is inconceivable that you do not know her name. So, you are out of order to call her or any other Member of this House, or “honourable whatever”. Please address Members properly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think I will try my best to learn everybody’s name because I have a problem with pronunciation since I come from the mountains. But I will try -(Interruption)

MR BUKENI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I come from the mountains of Masaba but I know and I respect the honourable members here and I know their names moreover this is my first term in Parliament. Is the hon. Mafabi, a person whom we have very high hopes in as people from Masaba, in order to come here and say the people of Masaba or from the hills do not know the names of people they live with? Is he in order? (Laughter) Is he in order to say that he does not know the names of hon. Members of Parliament in this House when he has been with them on the same committee for three years?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And he is endangering his prospects. If he does not know the people they will not give him what he wants.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I apologise for the mispronunciation. I think what is coming up is clear that there is a conflict. When somebody who is appointed politically does not subject himself or herself to the supervision of the ministry, that is why I think the committee came up and said, “There is weak supervision by the ministry”. Why? The ambassadors who were politically appointed will refuse to subject themselves to the administration of the ministry. I think the ministry should come up clearly to tell us how they are managing these Ambassadors who are politically appointed. Why do we not appoint career diplomats?  

MS KIRYAPAWO: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable member. Although he cannot pronounce my name, I know he is Nandala-Mafabi and Budaka and Budadiri  are not far from each other and there have been inter-marriages –(Laugher)– he may even be my – anyway, I was saying that those who are politically appointed are recalled by the appointing authority. Therefore, if somebody has been appointed politically -(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to invite the minister to respond so that we can conclude this report and do other business.

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Okello Oryem): Madam Chairperson [Hon. Members: “Madam Speaker”.] Sorry, Madam Speaker, my apologies to colleagues, Members of Parliament.  

Let me begin by thanking the chairman and his committee for this report. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs considers the committee as its partner in the issues of managing the foreign policy of this country. The ministry is grateful for the concerns highlighted in this report, all of which we do support.  

Let me now respond first to the report by my colleague who is the acting Minister of Foreign Affairs. Madam Chairperson, sorry, Madam Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you should come to this House more often –(Laughter)- it might help you.

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Yes. My colleague the shadow minister gave a gloomy image about the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which I think and believe are not true. He alleged that the ministry does not have a strategic interest, which is wrong. We have, as a Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Government of Uganda, a strategic interest, the priorities of which are the national sovereignty and independence of Uganda, followed by our security and national interests, and lives and property of our people. This is followed by the promotion of tourism, trade and investment, by promotion of regional integration and cooperation, peaceful co-existence and combating terrorism and mobilisation of external resources for our national programmes.  I therefore, strongly disagree with the position he highlighted.

On the issue of our missions abroad, which many colleagues here raised, I would like to say that the picture is not that gloomy. Madam Speaker, if you are to go to London today, you will be very proud to see the image of our property at the Trafalgar Square and the residence of the High Commissioner. It has been renovated and it is a pride to Uganda.  

If you go to France you will see that our property there is in top most condition. If you go to New York; if you go to South Africa, these properties are in very good condition.  

It is true that our property in Brussels is in a poor state. The same applies to our property in Nairobi. But we hope, funds allowing, that we will be able to bring them to the same conditions like those in London, France, New York, South Africa and other cities.

Uganda’s image abroad is not determined by our properties abroad. Uganda’s image abroad is determined by what our country is doing in terms of its foreign policy. Uganda today is known for having hosted one of the best CHOGM conferences ever held. It is known to have hosted the best OIC ever held. We are today known for being peacekeepers in Somalia. We are today on record for being the next host country for the AU Summit and we are also soon becoming Members of the Security Council 2009. I think we should be proud that Uganda has achieved this.  

We have taken note of the issue of protocol. There have been amendments and corrections on the position of protocol; protocol is not static.  There have been changes in this government and this country. We have just recently moved from a one party system to a multi-party dispensation and hence, there have been various changes on how protocol is administered. But I am glad to inform you that I do have here the order of precedence provided to me by my ministry, which I would like to table to this House.

The issue of State House encroaching on the funds of Ministry of Foreign Affairs is also true. State House has its own funds in relations to have administering its affairs vis-à-vis foreign affairs. Whenever the President is engaged in matters of foreign travel and issues of concerning foreign affairs, such issues are squarely budgeted for under State House accounts. 

It is true that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs participates in promotion and investment and tourism, and my mission will continue in that effort. Although we have not achieved the magnitude in which we do desire, reports indicate that more tourists are coming to Uganda and the level investment increasing year by year. This indicates the level in which our missions are working in terms of attracting more investments and tourism into Uganda.  

On the issue of the negative forces in the DRC, there are efforts by the Government of Uganda to make contacts with some of the negative forces in the DRC in an attempt to engage them in dialogue, in similar manner in which we have engaged the LRA. There is communication going on between the Minister of Internal Affairs and the leaders of some of these negative forces. It is true that we have challenges with our neighbours of the DRC on this matter, but we are engaging them diplomatically on how to over come the difficulties which the DRC is having in handling these negative forces.

On the issue of the 30 state protocol cars, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, whereas the sum of Shs 253 million sounds enormous, when you break down the amount; divide the 30 vehicles by 253 million, it comes down to each car having an annual budget of just around Shs 8.4 million and a monthly budget of Shs 702,000 per vehicle. I think Shs 702,000 per month per vehicle is by any standards acceptable. Considering the fuelling, allowances for the drivers and maintenance for such luxurious car; I think this amount is justifiable. We do need state protocol vehicles –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minster, I thought these are ceremonial cars we used for the conferences? Do we have a conference every month for which we must per service fees?

MR OKELLO ORYEM: we do not have conferences, but we do have visitors who come regularly to Uganda; we have special envoys and state visitors who come regularly into Uganda and those vehicles are used for that purpose. 

But on top of that, when these vehicles are parked, they need to be maintained otherwise the get rusty, the batteries would run down and so on. These were advises that were given by the chief mechanical officer from the Ministry of Works on maintenance of these vehicles. 

So my view is that Uganda deserves them and we should be proud owner of these vehicles. In the past, you remember that we used to hire vehicles and we used to have ramshackle vehicles to host our visitors, but we are now the proud owners of such vehicles that we similar to those in the countries that we do travel to. 

The issue of recoveries from hotels, I have been instructed that the amount of money outstanding in the hotels is Shs 3.775 billion – Shs 3.8 billion that is recoverable. And of that we have so far recovered that is recoverable and so far we have recovered Shs 1.134 billion. Efforts are under way to recover the rest. There are discussions going on between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and hoteliers on how to recover the rest. But to say that there is minimum effort made to recover the funds is not exactly true; we are making every effort to make sure that we recover these funds.

When we talk of the issue of hospitalities, it is common practice the world over to give hospitalities in meetings when hosting such functions. Ordinarily, Uganda gives hospitalities to heads of state and may be two or three of his delegates depending on the relationship we do have with that country. 

It is also common practice that when HE the President travels abroad, he too is offered hospitalities by the host country he travels to. So I think it would be wrong for us to remove this practice at this point because it will not be in line with the practice out there and I do hope that we continue with that same spirit. 

It is not true that we are too generous with our hospitality; our hospitality is moderate and is determined by our budget. I will not comment, Madam Speaker on the issue of the President’s popularity that is being addressed by other members on the floor, but I wish to address the issue of Uganda being known abroad. Uganda is known by many people out there; I am proud to be a Uganda and in my next life, if God gave me an opportunity to come back to earth, I would not like to be of any other nationality but Ugandan. When you travel the world today, following our efforts to host CHOGM, in all the Commonwealth Countries, Uganda is known in all cycles. If you travel to all ICC, I am sure they will know you from Uganda. 

I was recently in the None Alliance Movement in Iran and the whole house waited for the comments from Uganda on the issue of the intended ICC indictment on Bashir. The impression is that I received was that Uganda was popularly know at that level. 

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, in July last year we were in a UN conference in Vienna with the Speaker and we had the opportunity to be hosted by one of our citizens, Dr Abel Rwendeire at his residence. A citizen of Austria of who takes care of our interests expressed concern on how to improve Uganda’s image abroad following a documentary know as the last King of Scotland. And she said that most European countries still believe that Idi Amin is still in charge of this country. And they were very worried as she raised the concern and gave us that assignment to come and inform this Parliament on how to address the matter. I do not know whether the minister is aware of this problem because he believes all is very rosy; but this is a testimony which we carried. I was there myself. Hon. Sarah Nyombi was also there together with the Speaker. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But who authorised that film to be made here and who got the royalties? 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This one is a clarification to the minister. I am proud, like he is, of hosting CHOGM and the IOC but my concern is that we do not seem to be making a follow-up to seize the opportunities arising out of convening these very important fora of diplomatic intercourse. You are aware that in the global village, in the new international economic order, there are competing countries interested in technology transfer, capital mobilisation from multinational corporations. And actually you may host CHOGM and member countries use your hospitality to attract these people to their own destinations. So, what are you doing to make sure that we make a follow-up? What plans and strategies are in place to make sure that our foreign missions out there are helping to attract investors? I was in India, where I found out that our embassy is representing about eight neighbouring countries, and you are aware hon. Minister that they are doing a very good job in terms of bringing us some good investors but they are overstretched; they are not being assisted; the mission is failing to cope with the so many people who were having follow-up issues on CHOGM because the mission is not well facilitated. I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That message was already in the report of the committee. The committee took notice of that. Please, conclude. 

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the history of Uganda cannot be swept under the carpet. The film that hon. Odit is talking about depicts, even though comedy wise, the history of Uganda, which we cannot hide. But similarly on the same breath the President made a DVD on the beauty and wonderful scenery of Uganda, which is seen the world over. The President produced this DVD, Gifted by Nature, about two years ago and it circulated and it is in many libraries the world over but it is not true that in Europe people –(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, I beg your pardon to stand on a point of procedure because of the budget topic that we are discussing. Actually the minister is not procedurally right to keep on saying that actually Uganda is properly portrayed abroad. I would like to speak from a point of experience that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MS MUGERWA: The point of procedure is for the minister to tell us the truth as far as information on Uganda is concerned. The budget for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs does not have a budget line to give out information on Uganda. A lot of stakeholders in Uganda should be contributing to this budget line to ensure that their sectors are promoted but the ministry does not have that money and the money, which is given by the Ministry of Finance, is not enough to promote Uganda’s image abroad. What the Minister should do is to appeal to other stakeholders who should sell Uganda in as far as their interests are concerned. This is the procedure that I –(Laughter)– sorry, is the minister procedurally right not to give a proper picture as far as his finances and as far as his activities and role is concerned? Because he is carrying a heavy baggage in his hands but he does not have funds. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think sometimes you are not listening. The Minister said that if he is given enough funds he will do what we want him to do. That is what he said. He has said that already. Please, proceed and conclude.

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the issue of properties in Mombasa; the properties in Mombasa are former Coffee Marketing Board properties. These are mainly warehouses and accommodation. And these properties are being help by the Uganda Property Holdings Limited. It is true that these properties need to be renovated; they are in a poor state. But we hope that with time, funds allowing, those properties can be brought into proper state and be used for what it is for.

Yes, there might be shortcomings within Uganda Property Holdings but I am glad to inform you that there is a new board, which was recently appointed by the Ministry of Finance. Let me hope that the new board will be able to manage the properties more effectively. 

The issue of NTRs, yes I totally agree that any officer that mishandles NTRs should be brought to book. It is surely unacceptable for anybody to misuse public funds for their own use. I made this matter very clear to the permanent secretary and we hope that once the Auditor-General have done their report, they will be able to recommend that those officers who mishandle the NTR should show cause why they should not be disciplined. 

The issue of ambassadors and recalls from ambassadors; Madam Speaker, we do have a policy on appointments and recalls of ambassadors. On average, an ambassador serves for four years, they return home; spend another four years and then are eligible for appointment. It is true I have seen in the report as indicated, some ambassadors who have once recalled did incur expenses in the missions at the expense of government. I have instructed the permanent secretary that even political appointees who are appointed ambassadors should abide by the book. I have asked the permanent secretary that any ambassador who is a political appointee who does not abide by the rules, he should prepare a report indicating the shortcomings of that ambassador and forward it through the minister so that that particular issue is brought to the attention of the appointing officer. 

There is no ambassador or any individual whether a career or political appointee who is entitled to do as he wishes while out there in our missions abroad. 

We do intend and hope to open a Mission in Abu Dhabi. We do hope that this can be supported. The importance of Abu Dhabi as a strategic centre for trade and business is obvious today with regular flights of Emirates Airlines to Dubai and thousands of Ugandans travelling to Dubai for business purposes. 

On the inventory of items used during CHOGM, there is a report that has been prepared by the committee on the inventories and they have a draft report on the items: computers, furniture and other items that were purchased during CHOGM. It is hoped that once they have got the final report, then those properties would be disposed of according to the PPDA regulations. 

If I may answer the issue of Burundi: “Why did Uganda pay US $2 million towards Rwanda’s contribution?” Madam Speaker, the decision of Uganda to make a contribution of US $2 million was a decision that was taken during the summit of Heads of State when Burundi indicated that they could only make a contribution of US $1 million to the annual budget of 2008/09 towards the East African Community Budget. The whole budget was US $ 9 million. The Heads of State then resolved to share the balance of US $8 million among themselves to be able to contribute to the requirements of the East African Budget. So, Uganda, Tanzania, Kenya and Rwanda did each contribute US $2 million. It is not only Uganda that contributed the US $2 million. This was done by the heads of state to enable the secretariat, projects and programmes of the East African Community to continue short of which, there would have been an impasse. So, it is not only Uganda that contributed but also the other four countries also contributed as agreed by the Heads of State jointly. 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Minister. Mr Minister, we are just considering the East African Community budget for Uganda in this particular sitting of the House. Looking at the figures that are provided in your budget, could you explain to the House why Burundi was required to pay a total of US $9 million given that the kind of figures you are asking from our country is far less than that?

MR OKELLO-ORYEM: Madam Speaker, this US $9 billion was for the financial year 2007/08 and 2008/09. This was the contribution that was expected from Burundi for which they indicated that they would not be able to fulfill and hence they asked the other Heads of State resolved to make contributions to enable the East African Community to function. 

The issue of the land for the East African Community Institutional projects –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when are we going to finish this report? You had an opportunity to contribute. Ask quickly since you had stood up.

MS ALASO: I was waiting for you to let me. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Having listened to the explanation perhaps the rationale of paying the contribution of Burundi, I want to know from the minister whether it is going to stop here or Uganda and the rest of the countries are expected to continue meeting Burundi’s obligations so that as a House we are prepared and we know that a midst our scarce resources, Burundi is also part of our problem.

MR OKELLO-ORYEM: Madam Speaker, I do not think that this will be a regular thing. I think this was just a one off to enable Burundi, which is a new member of the East African Community and it has difficulties at this particular time and hence the intervention of other Heads of State. In this case it is hoped that when other states - God forbid that Uganda should face such a difficulty - in future  should also exercise a similar gesture and make contributions to Uganda’s needs.

Uganda is ready to avail land to the Inter-University Council for East Africa at Kyambogo through the Ministry of Education and Sports for the construction of its headquarters. So, the issue of the land for the Inter-University Council is now in Kyambogo, courtesy of the Ministry of Education and Sports.

Madam Speaker, let me return to the report. Let me thank the committee for the recommendations. We do accept all the recommendations that they have made in this report. We do appreciate the acknowledgements of the challenges of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs through these recommendations in fulfilling some of its obligations. 

We do thank the committee for drawing the attention of these challenges to this House and we do hope that by drawing these challenges, particularly financial constraints, in enabling us fulfill our obligations will encourage this House to pass this budget and probably allow us in future to be able to fulfill our obligations. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Finance there is a recommendation, which relates to you, where the committee requested you to design a format for the presentation of a policy statement, especially in regard to the gaps in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I do not know whether you want to address it now, or you will address it when you are responding?

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have indicated to sectors that we have prepared new recommendations or variations or improvements in the format of the sector statements and we will be addressing that in due course.

3.22
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGH AFFAIRS (Mr Lule Mawiya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank honourable members for the interest and support they have continued to give to this sector. 

I just want to briefly say something here. Concerning the budget ceiling of the various sectors, but in particular of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, normally, budget ceilings are done as a result of classification that is done by the Ministry of Finance. The Foreign Affairs sector is classified as a non-productive sector - actually as a consumption sector. However, we cannot forget the role that is played by the Foreign Affairs sector as far as investment is concerned. Therefore, we are appealing to the ministry to reclassify the sector so that it can attract more funding.

The issue of our properties abroad has been talked about at length and there is no need to over emphasise this. However probably to correct the impression that has been created that Uganda is not known abroad. Uganda is known but how the people perceive Uganda is actually the concern of Members which is depicted through the way we are represented by our missions abroad. Much is needed in this sector. 

Finally, I think the committee was very clear in what hon. Bahati was referring to, that concerning the political supervision of East Africa. I think if I read properly we said that lack of supervision is as a result of, in our case Uganda the lack of an opening in the cabinet structure. The minister of State for East African Affairs, which is in line with other member states and also the non-residential status of the ministers in East Africa on a wider scale.

Otherwise, I would like to thank you for according us all this time so that our report can be debated at length. I thank you for your support and continued interest in this sector. 

I would like to thank my members on the committee and our staff that are attached to this committee, both ministries and their staff. I thank you very much. Once again, I would like to beg that our report be adopted. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, perhaps the other issue we would like to ask the Leader of Government Business is the one that relates to the representation in Arusha and the structure of the Ministry of East Africa because it has been coming up. It is time really the Leader of Government Business talked to the President about this concern from the Parliament, about the structure of that ministry and the need to appoint a deputy resident in Arusha. 

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Can I answer?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are instructing you. There is no need to answer. We are instructing you.

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to indicate that Foreign Affairs is classified under public administration and we do not consider public administration to be a non productive sector. All sectors are productive and that is why they are given resources. They are of value to the country and to the people. So, it is not correct to say that the Ministry Foreign Affairs is not a productive sector. That is a wrong classification and gives a wrong impression.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do adopt the report of the committee on Foreign Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: The House is suspended until 4.30 p.m. 

(The House was suspended at 3.36 p.m._)

(On resumption at 4.35 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding)

PRESENTATIOPN, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, in your presentation, you do not need to go into all the details. You can give the high lights and maybe majorly the recommendations of what you want us to do for you.

4.38
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Rosemary Seninde): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker for that guidance. I am begging for your guidance because I do not see my ministers of –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they are both here and they have been here since morning. The Minister of Education is here as well as the Minister of Health. (Laughter)

MRS SENINDE: Oh, I have seen them. They are both here, I am glad. Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the committee on Social Services on policy statements and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2008/2009. ­­

HON. MEMBERS: Where is the report?”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you passed the copies on your way in; they are on the tables. 

MRS SENINDE: They are finished –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has someone removed them?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, a few minutes ago there were very many copies outside there but it seems somebody has removed them and we thought they had been brought to the House. So somebody could be holding them somewhere I don’t know for what reason.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Members who are already in here already have copies. Let us proceed.

MRS SENINDE: Madam speaker, the Committee on Social Services considered the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the ministries of Health and Education and Sports for Financial Year 2008/2009 in accordance with Articles 90 and 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure and Section 9 of the Budget Act, 2001.

In the interest of time, honourable members you will bear with me, the methodology the committee followed is on page 1 and this report covers the following Votes for the Ministry of Education and Sports, and also for the Ministry of Health, all indicated on page 1.

Our committee faced some challenges. The committee noted that for the 2008/2009 budget cycle, the preparation of sector budget framework papers, ministerial policy statements and budget estimates was changed to emphasise vote functions. This was as a result of new guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  

The committee noted that important information like the amount of money received by sectors as well as progress on implementation of Parliamentary recommendations; among others, are omitted in the guidelines.  The committee could not readily get some of this information.  

Secondly, the committee invited the Ministry of Finance for a meeting to clarify on specific issues. The deliberate failure of the minister to honour the invitation of the committee, let alone failure to respond in writing to the issues forwarded to him in spite of various appeals, was considered contempt of Parliament.

In regard to the Ministry of Education and Sports and in view of the budget performance of the Financial Year 2007/2008, the sector mandate is to provide for support, guide, coordinate, regulate and promote quality in the delivery of education and sports to all persons in Uganda for national integration, individual and national development.  

Overall, the sector received Shs 767.09 billion, which is 16.1 per cent of the national budget, inclusive of donor projects from government for the Financial Year 2007/2008, compared to Shs 720.84 billion, which is 17.6 percent in the Financial Year 2006/2007 out of the total national resources.  

The overall budget, of the recurrent budget performed at 97.1 percent by the end of the Financial Year 2007/2008. Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify that this slight under performance was mainly because of the higher underperformance by education standards agency and physical education and sports votes.  

Madam Speaker, the table of on page 3 indicates the allocation by programme for the financial year 2006/2007, and 2007/2008 for vote 13 of the recurrent budget. 

Page 4 has a table, which indicates the development budget performance of Financial Year 2007/2008, where the overall budget performance under the development budget was at 93.7 percent and the under performance was mainly due to the under performance of emergency construction and rehabilitation of primary schools and development of PTCs projects, which received less than what was approved.  

Still in the interest of time, Members will bear with me. I am not going to go into the key achievements. However, I would like to commend that the Ministry of Education made a number of achievements as they are indicated on page 5 for the primary sub-sector.  

For post-primary level, those are the achievements and many of them indeed but the committee could not put everything on paper.

On page 6, we have the achievements by the BTVET sub-sector; we also have achievements for the Higher Education.  In the interest of time I am not going to read all this.

On page 7, we have the physical education and sports sub-sector.  Those are the achievements, actually some of the achievements; otherwise they are many.  For special needs education, guidance and counselling those are the achievements.  

On the issue of budget resources for Financial Year 2008/2009, the projected resource for the sector is Shs 899.344 billion, which is 17.5 per cent of the national budget, inclusive of donor projects for the financial year 2008/2009. 

The table on page 8 indicates the summary of resources to the Education sector for the financial year 2007 to 2009. As indicated in that table, the total resources for the sector have been increased by Shs 132.26 billion mainly to cater for Universal Secondary Education and continuation of other programmes, including UPE and various projects in the sector for rehabilitation of secondary schools in the country.

I feel it is important that I point out the challenges for the Education Sector budget of the Financial Year 2008/2009.

VAT Resources and Arrears for Donor Funded Projects:
The committee noted that the Ministry of Education and Sports will not be able to implement various projects and programmes, some of which have already been agreed on with donors due to inadequate resources because of VAT. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports informed the committee that given the constraints ceiling of the development budget and the pressure of implementing various key policies like Universal Secondary Education, the sector has been unable to pay accumulated VAT commitments.  This will affect the following projects:

•	Emergency construction and rehabilitation of primary schools, 
•	ADB III and IV, development of secondary education, 
•	Rehabilitation of national health institutions, development of BTVET and development of Primary teachers colleges.  
•	World Bank support to post-primary education
•	Re-location of Shimoni PTC 
•	The SFG for local governments and support from Kfw and Irish Aid.  

The committee was also informed that the allocation to the sector for development expenditure under headquarters for financial year 2008/2009 is only Shs 30 billion, which implies that if the sector must meet its VAT obligations, then the available resource on this budget line item will be reduced to Shs 5 billion, which puts at risk up to 90 per cent of physical output from the sector for the Financial Year 2008/2009. By reducing output, this means that the Education sector will not be able to serve the country more equitably because more schools and other institutions which were to benefit from these loans are going to be knocked off.

Furthermore, the committee established that the ADB III and IV projects together with the World Bank support to post-primary education projects meant to rehabilitate secondary schools into centres of excellence cannot progress if the VAT gap is not sorted out by the Ministry of Finance. We have attached a list of centres of excellence and beneficiary BTVET institutions for the benefits of Members.

The committee found the option of reducing the sector output unacceptable because it will undermine the principle of equity in provision and access to education in the country which is a major policy objective of the Ministry of Education. 

For that matter the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should provide funds to offset the VAT component on the above to facilitate the Ministry of Education and Sports to sort out this problem this financial year. 

The Ministry of Finance should revise the policy that abolished tax free procurement of goods and services on all these projects or else all the loans to finance these projects be reconsidered until the Ministry of Finance adequately provides enough counterpart funds to the sector.

Funding gap for Universal Secondary Education: 
The Ministry of Education informed the committee that the budget for USE of Shs 38.5 billion for the Financial Year 2008/2009 will cater for S.1 and S.2 for term III academic year 2008 and S.1 and S.2 and S.3 term II and II academic year 2009. This implies that a whole class, that is, S.1 beginning school year 2009 has not been allocated any resources. The total requirement for three classes inclusive of projected senior one enrolment is Shs 65.13 billion inclusive of headcount costs amounting to Shs 350 million. This leaves the sector with a deficit of Shs 26.632 billion. The details are indicated in table 4.

The committee, therefore, recommends that in view of the importance of USE and the need for an effective education system that allows a clear transition from UPE to USE, this important government programme should take priority in the budgeting process so that there is no doubt in the population about government capacity to sustain her own programmes. 

The Ministry of Education should expedite the completion of seed schools where there are no schools, and where there are community schools, the government should negotiate with the communities to take over the schools, improve their infrastructure and facilitate the implementation of government programmes.

Under-funding of physical education and the sports sub-sector:
The committee observed that Shs 1.79 billion allocated to physical education sub-sector is grossly inadequate. This is to cater for all its activities including salaries, allowances, office supplies, travel abroad and inland, vehicle maintenance, procurement of sports equipment, contribution to international organisations and the contribution to all national and international sports competitions. The ministry requires Shs 2.059 billion for major national and international sports competitions that require funding contributions by Government in financial year 2008/2009.

The committee recommends that the budget for the sports sector should be clearly disaggregated or broken down into the various components. This will enable each item to be clearly budgeted for in order to avoid embarrassing scenarios at major international sports events due to lack of equipments and other requirements. 

At this moment, I want to make it clear that probably the performance of Uganda in the recently concluded Olympics is a clear testimony of how inadequate funding can cause international embarrassment: if Kenya could come up with 16 medals, why not Uganda?

However, the committee made a number of observations and recommendations for the pre-primary and primary sub-sectors: 

On the issue of school feeding, the committee was informed that the policy on school feeding remains that parents should provide their children with food to carry to school for a midday meal. Whereas the committee supports this policy as designed, there are, however, concerns that in some areas or parts of the country, parents barely have food to eat at home and therefore cannot afford to pack for their children. There are also differences between rural and urban settings which may not allow the policy to be uniformly applied. 

For that matter, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Education should examine the different conditions prevailing in different parts of the country and should repackage the policy to suit the prevailing circumstances. Meanwhile, the committee recommends that the modalities of how this policy is implemented should be mutually agreed on by the parents and the schools.

For UPE funds, the committee observed that UPE funds are sent through districts, which leads to unnecessary delays and abuse hence affecting the performance and management of schools. For that matter, the committee recommends that with effect from 2008/2009 Financial Year, the funds should be remitted directly to the school accounts and the committee demands that the minister must report quarterly on the implementation of this recommendation to Parliament.

For secondary education on the issue of registration of secondary school candidates, the committee noted with concern that there are some unscrupulous head teachers who do not register candidates in secondary school who have paid for registration. 

The committee recommends that district educational officers should always prepare reports on the status of registration of secondary school candidates by the 1st of May every year, which should be submitted to the district council and the resident district commissioners.

About teaching of sciences, the committee noted that despite making science subjects compulsory at O’ Level, most schools in the country do not have adequate laboratories. The Ministry of Education and Sports reported that out of all the 911 Government schools, only 455, that is, 50 percent have functional science laboratories. This implies that students in 50 percent government schools do sciences without access to laboratory facilities. The same challenge is faced by private schools.

The committee finds this a major challenge to our entire education sector especially in our quest for skilled manpower that will transform this country. This also borders on concerns of equity in the provisions of quality education for all in the country. This perhaps explains why some districts in the country cannot afford science students in their quarter admissions. 

The committee recommends that government should consider laboratory construction as a key priority and that the construction of the laboratories should take into account accessibility by students with disabilities. 

The Ministry of Education should also work out an arrangement where students in those laboratory lacking schools are given opportunity to share and utilise science laboratories of neighbouring schools at least for the students to get the feel of the apparatus and equipments as they prepare for the examinations.

For special needs education, a number of schools were reported to have shortage of specialised teachers, brailed textbooks and other materials and specialised sports equipments. There is also no brailing machine at UNEB. This does not only demotivate the students with special needs but also affects their entire education life. 

The committee observed that there is no post of interpreter in all levels of training institutions and as such various appointment bodies cannot have them deployed. The provision available is for teachers who have knowledge and skills in sign language. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports informed the committee that during the ministry’s restructuring process the post has been approved for the headquarters. But the committee recommends that the post of interpreter should be created not only at the headquarters but also to the various institutions so that students with special needs are not neglected. This will also to enable unemployed graduates specialised in the field to be employed.  

Secondly, the budget for different categories of the disabled should be clearly disaggregated into the various components of disability so that each group is clearly budgeted for.  

Vote 132 - Education Service Commission (ESC) 
Recruitment of teachers: 
The Commission reported that it recruited a total of 2,363 teachers for secondary schools during the last financial year. Following the concern of the committee and other stakeholders regarding staffing in hard to reach areas, the Commission carried out school based interviews.  

Furthermore, the Education Service Commission informed the committee that there are areas that have been identified as “hard to reach and hard to live” by criteria agreed upon in Cabinet. These are classified due to the remoteness, physical features, difficult climate and those considered hostile places to dwell in. Such areas do not attract many applicants for teaching posts.  

The committee recommended that the policy of school based interview should be continued as it is the most effective way of attracting teachers to the areas they are already familiar with. 

The Ministry of Education should provide to Parliament the criteria used to select the hard to reach areas, the list of the schools and also the incentives offered to the teachers in those areas.  

On the issue of scheme of service, the Commission developed a scheme of service, which is a human resource management tool that addresses teachers’ appointment and development.  The scheme will be rolled out in a phased manner starting with primary schools sub sector. A total of Shs 1 billion was allocated for the scheme for the Financial Year 2008/2009 for primary school teachers by the Ministry of Education and Sports.  

A total of 4,171 primary school teachers will be promoted from the post of education assistant scale U7 to senior education assistant scale U6 and the five ladders in this sub-sector include the following: education assistant, U7; senior education assistant, U6; principal education assistant, U5; deputy head teacher, U5 and head teachers, U4. 

The committee recommends that the criteria for selecting the first beneficiaries be clearly spelt out to the concerned stakeholders to avoid unnecessary anxiety.

For the case of higher education when we look at universities, the general observation is that most of the universities have huge funding gaps arising from inadequate subventions from Government. This has had various effects on the functioning and management of the universities ranging from failure to remit National Social Security Fund, salary shortfalls and universities lacking basic requirements including instructional materials. 

The committee recommends that government should expedite the discussion and subsequent implementation of various studies and reports of visitation committees so that lasting solutions are reached in the financing of universities and the salary policy.  

Vote 136 - Makerere University:

The committee observed that there is a persistent financial management crisis rocking the university. The university has failed to harmonise and resolve the issue of salary enhancement, which is resulting into repeated threats of strikes among the academic staff. 

The committee recommends that the stakeholders should redefine the priorities for the areas of expenditure for the internally generated funds. The minister should comply with section 17(1) of the Budget Act, which provides that a minister responsible for any Vote on Appropriation-in-Aid shall make a quarterly report to Parliament on the manner in which the funds from the vote are expended.  

The Ministry of Education and the University Council should address this issue to a meaningful end so that academic programmes are not interrupted. 

The university management should ensure that all the funds due to lecturers including the National Social Security Fund contributions are paid according to an agreed manner between the management and staff.  

On the issue of university bank accounts, the committee learnt with shock that the university runs 132 bank accounts although the Auditor-General’s report had even put the figure higher than this and had recommended for closure of some of these accounts. Whereas the university explained that all these accounts were approved by the council by quoting the council minutes of the 65th meeting held on 17 December 1992, the committee was not satisfied with how the University Bursar can effectively monitor all these accounts since some belong to individual departments or units within the university.  

For that matter, the committee recommends that the university implements the Auditor-General’s directive to close some of the accounts and the Ministry of Education should report to Parliament on the progress of implementation of this recommendation.  

About the duplication of programmes, the committee was informed that the university has established a Quality Assurance Committee that checks quality and vets all programmes to avoid duplication. 

The committee recommends that National Council for Higher Education should ensure that all programs offered by the university are harmonised.  

Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School:

On the issue of legal status, the committee is happy to report that the legal wrangles between Makerere University and Makerere University Business School had come to an end. Accordingly, all programmes that had been approved by Makerere University Business School without being referred to Makerere were duly sent to Makerere for approval and all undergraduate programmes, except the distance learning ones, were approved.  

The committee recommends that Makerere University should expedite the process of approving the remaining programmes so that students do not get problems at the time of graduation.

For Busitema University, the committee is happy to report that the university now has its own Vote that is 111. This will facilitate decision making, funding and enhance its ability to mobilise funds from the other sources. 

The university informed the committee that it targets new, unique and relevant academic programmes. It is also developing an Institute of Mining and Petroleum Development to house the proposed departments of mining, engineering petroleum, water engineering and environment engineering. The programmes are being introduced in a phased manner.  

Being a multi-campus model university, the programmes will run at the university headquarters that is Busitema and its other campuses of Nagongera, Arapai, Mbale and Kaliro.

The committee was also informed that following a presidential directive, Namasagali College has been taken over by Busitema University. However, the committee was informed that Jinja Tourism School, which was to be one of the campuses, had been transferred to Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry. 

The committee recommends that Busitema University being a multi-campus university and given its concentration on highly specialised science programmes should be provided with more funds. The university, however, should desist from the temptation of duplicating programmes and diverting to market driven Arts programmes. 

For Mbarara University of Science and Technology, there is an issue of salary disparities. The committee noted with concern that the existence of salary disparities resulted from Government’s decision to enhance salaries of academic staff only. Whereas Government allowed institutions to enhance the salaries of non-teaching staff using non-tax revenue, Mbarara University does not have the capacity to do so due to limited sources. 

The university is also faced with problems of recruitment and promotion of staff. Government has included Shs 200 million in the Financial Year 2008/2009 budget for the purpose. However, it will be inadequate as Shs 500 million is required.

The committee, Madam Speaker, recommends that the ministry addresses the problem of piecemeal enhancement of salaries to prevent unrest in the university.

Mbarara University should also devise means of generating revenue to be able to enhance salary of its non-academic staff as done by other universities given the constrained sector budget.

On the issue of the Kihumuro campus, the committee was informed that the university has completed its master plan and the estimated US $70 million will be required to develop the necessary infrastructure. But the committee was dissatisfied with the continued infrastructure development of the old site despite the approval of the master plan. 

For that matter the committee recommends that Mbarara University should start investing its available development budget for developing the Kihumuro campus, other than waiting for all the required funds to be availed at once. 

For Kyambogo University, the committee noted with concern the increasing arrears in Pay-As-You-Earn accumulated by the university up to Shs 2.3 billion. This was created because when staff were integrated into Kyambogo University, their salaries were harmonised and paid using the M-scale. The harmonisation of the salaries resulted in wage funding gaps since the university was operating a neutral budget. The arrears accumulated due to inadequate wage bill, poor cash flow and heavy financial commitments, interest from URA and low university fees. 

The committee was also informed that the validation exercise for the staff was completed and implementation awaits approval of the university council. 

The committee for that matter recommends that the Ministry of Education should present a report to Parliament on the validation exercise within a months’ time.

For Gulu University, the key issue is salary shortfalls or wage deficits. The committee was informed that Gulu University has a wage bill deficit of Shs 1.5 billion. This deficit occurred because the medium term expenditure framework ceiling for the wage bill does not take into account employees in post and growth in employee numbers. 

The committee was concerned about this development because it has resulted into huge wage arrears and failure of Gulu University to pay her NSSF contributions, which in turn may lead to strikes and freezing of university accounts, thus disrupting academic programmes. 

The committee for that matter recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Ministry Of Finance and Gulu University should look into the funding and expedite the issue of resolving wage shortfalls to avoid possible unrest from the university. 

For Uganda Management Institute, the committee was informed that UMI has not been receiving development funding from government. However, this financial year 2008/2009, a provision of Shs 300 million has been made for UMI to renovate the hostel and this is included in the institute’s non-wage recurrent budget. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the development budget for UMI should be provided in the subsequent years. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we are now going to look at the Ministry of Health. The sector mandate is equitable delivery of good quality health services to the population of Uganda, and the mission is to provide the policies, guidance and standards, facilitate district health services and manage nationally based health services. 

As far as the budget performance for 2007/2008 is concerned, the total allocation to Vote 14 for financial year 2007/2008 was Shs 203.99 billion, of which Shs 56.5 billion was Government of Uganda budget and Shs 147.43 billion was donor projects. Out of Government of Uganda budget, Shs 43.629 billion was spent by end of May 2008 while of the donor projects, Shs 40.2 billion had been spent by the end of May. 

This low performance of the donor component was due to the fact that the figures were not updated by the time we met the ministry, since most donor projects are not directly supervised by the Ministry of Health but by the Ministry of Finance which directly transfers the information to the health sector. 

The expenditure performance for the Ministry of Health headquarters is given in table 5 on page 20 and this shows the approved budget, the amount realised, amount spent and the balances as at end of June 2008. From the table, it can be noticed that the Ministry of Health under Vote 14 spent up to 95.2 percent of the approved budget. Four percent was not released and 0.9 percent was the unspent balance, which was returned to the Treasury. 

Generally the Ministry of Health made a number of achievements although we would not put everything down, and those are some of them. You will bear with me. The general achievements for the health sector and also achievements for Vote 134 of the Health Service Commission are all indicated on page 21. 

In the interest of time, colleagues, table 6 indicates the health sector resource envelope of the financial year 2008/2009 and the total is Shs 643.533 billion. 

Colleagues, I believe it is important if I point out the health sector priorities for the Financial Year 2008/2009. The Uganda National Health Policy and Sector Strategic Plan of 2005/2006 to 2009/2010 directs efforts at accelerating the improvement of the health of the population, thereby creating a workforce that can contribute to the economic and social development. 

Therefore, the main priorities for the health sector are:
1.	Strengthening primary health care service. 
2.	Infrastructure development.
3.	Purchase of basic medical equipment for primary health care.
4.	The Uganda National Minimum healthcare package will also continue as priority health care intervention for addressing the high disease burden in Uganda.
5.	Strengthening of the referral system and also human resource development.

The committee made a number of observations and recommendations and on general observation. There are donor funds of budget resources. 

Members, the committee observed that the Ministry of Health is not effectively participating in negotiations for funds or resources being donated or overseeing the use of these donated funds hence frustrating the implementation of the sector wide priorities of the Ministry of Health. 

The committee recommends that henceforth the Ministry of Health effectively participates in the negotiations for funds being donated to the ministry and identifies priority areas for the utilisation of the donated sector funds. 

The committee further recommends that government should review the functioning of the sector-wide approaches with the view of strengthening the participation of the Ministry of Health in the regulation and utilisation of the donor funds.

On the issue of salaries of health workers, the committee was informed that due to the urgency of the issue regarding salaries revisions for health workers, the Ministry of Health was to find Shs 18 billion from within the sector budget ceiling of 2008/2009 to enhance the salaries. The implication is that other planned activities will definitely be affected. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should find money to compensate for the affected activities and to cater for salaries enhancement for the subsequent years. 

About the land titles for hospitals, the committee is also happy to report that all referral hospitals are processing their land titles. Some already have acquired them for instance Arua, Fort Portal, Masaka, Gulu, Soroti, Jinja, Mbale, Kabale, Mbarara and Hoima. 

The committee recommends that all the other health facilities, including health centre II and health centre IV and district hospitals, should get their land titles to protect their land from encroachers.

Vote 162 - Mulago Hospital:

The overall objective of Mulago Hospital is to continuously improve the quality of tertiary healthcare services delivered to patients and to contribute effectively to the development of healthcare services in Uganda as a necessary support to the government programme of poverty alleviation.  

Under this Vote, there is the management initiative to improve healthcare, which involves the expansion of the private patient’s services pharmacy, the PPS, and this is being expanded to cater for the increasing demand for drugs and medical sundries. It also intends to ensure that drugs required by the PPS patients are available when required. 

Secondly, there is vision of Mulago III. The idea of Mulago III is to provide for state of the art healthcare facilities to mainly cater for paying patients. It is planned that part of the funds generated by these facilities will be used to improve the quality of services and the existing facilities of the hospitals. 

Mulago managed to make the following achievements. Mulago made a lot of achievements but we managed to point out a few because we could not put everything down. So, that is also indicated on page 24. 

Then I would want us also to look at the staffing in health. The committee noted with concern that the recruitment and retention of skilled staff has remained a major problem in the health sector in general and Mulago National Referral Hospital in particular. The current remuneration is inadequate compared to the basic cost of living. This causes demotivation, demoralisation of staff, hence higher attraction for better conditions elsewhere.

The committee recommends that the issue of staff remuneration, recruitment and retention should be prioritised in the HSSP so that adequate resources are provided for in the sector budget ceiling as opposed to the selective pay awards to health workers arising out of industrial action. 

On the issue of equipment, the committee was informed that the need to acquire modern and appropriate equipment is critical for the hospital as a national referral health facility. However, this cannot be realised within the current funding provision levels for the development budget. 

The committee recommends that the funds generated at source should be effectively utilised to mitigate funding gaps where appropriate, including purchase of equipment, as donors are being sought to help in the funding. 

For the case of feeding of patients, the committee was informed that the feeding of patients in the hospital setting is part and parcel of the treatment. The current budgetary provision of patient feeding is Shs 161 per day yet the cheapest meal on the market is now Shs 1,500. Mulago requested for an increase in the budgetary provision to address this -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, that is disaster preparedness but I thank him. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should increase the budget allocation to Mulago to meet the market price of feeding patients since it is part of treatment. 

In view of congestion of patients, the committee observed that although Mulago is a national referral hospital, it deals with all sorts of cases which have led to congestion of patients. 

The committee recommends for the upgrading of Kampala Division health centres to hospitals. A plan should also be worked out by the Ministry of Health, Mulago hospital and Kampala City Council where consultants and specialists should be posted to the division health centres.

On the issue of funding of the Uganda Cancer Institute, the committee was informed that Uganda Cancer Institute is quite unique within Mulago hospital. It is the only specialised facility in the country for the treatment of cancer and in the previous year, 2007/2008, the committee recommended allocation of Shs 1 billion over and above the regular allocation to the institute. However, the committee was disappointed to discover that these funds had been diverted to other programmes. This Financial Year 2008/2009 an allocation of Shs 2.7 billion has been made. 

The committee recommends for the expeditious processing of the Bill to facilitate the institute’s operation and the expeditious opening of the institute’s own accounts starting this Financial Year 2008/2009.

About the Uganda Heart Institute, the committee is happy to report that the Uganda Heart Institute is now operational and some heart patients can now be operated upon in Uganda. This is a welcome development and thanks should go first to the committee for fighting for the Uganda Heart Institute and secondly, we want to also thank the Ministry of Health in general and Mulago hospital in particular for these achievements. 

The committee was further informed that a new building is going to be constructed to house this institute and of course the Ministry of Health provided architectural designs, which were very impressive. 

The committee also appreciated the efforts of the private sector in carrying out heart surgery. 

This financial year, Uganda Heart Institute will receive Shs 4.879 billion for its operations and a special account has been opened with the Bank of Uganda so that the institute can effectively manage its funds. 

The committee recommends that Ministry of Health should consider increasing the funding of the Uganda Heart Institute due to the increasing cases of heart patients in the country. 

For the case of Butabika Hospital and particularly on the hospital land, the committee was informed that Butabika hospital has acquired the land title for the hospital land. However, the committee noted with concern that the land title acquired has far less land than originally known.

The committee was informed that the Minister of Lands handed over the certificate of title of Butabika Hospital Land to the Minister of Health. The title was later withdrawn by the Secretary to the Uganda Land Commission who accompanied the Minister to the function at which the title was handed over. Later the acreage of the new title given back to Butabika Hospital had been reduced to 189.76 from 300 acres [Hon. Members: “Shame!”] The committee was not at all satisfied with the explanation given by the Minister of Lands that about half of the land on the original land title was a swamp and was therefore cut off.

The committee recommends that Parliament investigates this matter to establish whether this land is indeed swampy and bare as alleged by the Minister of Lands. 

We also recommend that Parliament should investigate the circumstances under which this so-called swampy land was cut off from the original title and who owns it now. (Applause)

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, on the issue of regional referral hospitals – of course there are general observations in respect of these hospitals, but first of all I want Members to know that among the referral hospitals, we have Arua, Lira, Fort Portal, Masaka, Gulu, Soroti, Jinja, Mbale, Kabale, Mbarara and Hoima. 

There are general observations that were made and the committee was informed about the general state of most referral hospitals. I would like to report that almost all of them had the following major concerns.

There is the issue of inadequate funds to cater for all hospitals’ requirements; there are issues of inadequate accommodation for medical workers; there is lack of enough staff; there are drug shortages and poor and dilapidated infrastructure. The other major concerns include obsolete equipment that need to be written off, high utility costs and arrears for insistence, of water and electricity.

Still on the issue of upgrading Mubende and Moroto hospitals, I would like to inform the House that the Ministry of Health requested Ministry of Finance to provide additional funding in order to upgrade those hospitals to referral status. However, the additional resources have not been provided though the committee was informed that the Ministry of Health intends to peruse the option of elevating the two with their current budgets to ensure the referral status is obtained within the Financial Year 2008/2009.

The committee recommends that since this has been long over due, the Ministry of Health should ensure that it is effected without further delay.

Still on the issue of rehabilitation of referral hospitals, I would like to say the committee was informed that partial rehabilitation of Jinja, Hoima, Mbale and Fort Portal has been done and that work on Arua Regional Referral Hospital was still going on. Masaka is to be rehabilitated under the JICA Project, while Mbarara will be rehabilitated under the ADB Project. 

A development line has been created for all the eleven hospitals and the funds for the development budget are to be transferred directly to the respective hospitals with effect from this financial year. Madam Speaker, the hospitals have also been granted permission to spend the non-tax revenue at source.

The breakdown of these is indicated in annex B for your benefit. The committee reiterates that the funds should be sent directly to the hospitals and that the Ministry of Health should ensure value for money.

On the issue of accommodation for staff, I would like to say that it was reported to the committee that hospitals lack accommodation for the medical staff, which causes difficulties in settling new staff and ensuring the staff are easily accessed when required. The ministry indicated that status of the housing problem in the sector. The proposed interventions to address the issue are contained in the health sector master plan.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the funds provided should also cater for the staff accommodation to solve this problem. And government should consider waiving taxes on utilities such as water and electricity extended to health facilities to make them affordable.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of social health insurance scheme, the committee was informed that the Ministry of Health is in the final stages of designing it. The actual analysis and harmonisation of the legal framework to provide payment mechanisms, accreditation guidelines, costing of benefit package, administration and management of the scheme are also being done. 

Following the completion of the above process, Madam Speaker, a Bill will be drawn and tabled before cabinet for approval and later presented to Parliament.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health expedites the issue of processing a Bill to address the social health insurance scheme and it be brought to Parliament as soon as possible.

Madam Speaker, as far as the Uganda AIDS Commission is concerned, the committee noted that for a long time, the budget for this commission is put under the Ministry of Health yet the Commission falls under the Office of the President. In the past, the committee has repeatedly recommended for the transfer of this Vote to the Office of the President, but this has not been adhered to. This constrains the sector ceiling yet it has so many unfunded priorities, which could utilise the funds reflected in the sector ceiling for the Uganda Aids Commission. It is also worth noting that the policy statement for Uganda AIDS Commission is considered by the Committee on Presidential Affairs and not that of Social Services.

The committee, therefore, recommends that since the Uganda Aids Commission has its own vote under the President’s Office; its budget should be handled under that office, where its policies are dealt with from. In future the committee will defer the Ministry of Health budget if the vote is not transferred to where it belongs. For that matter, the Prime Minister should explain to Parliament this anomaly. (Laughter)

On the issue of maternal health, the committee was informed that the ministry had designed a road map for this to focus on improving services for reproductive health. Under this, the ministry will ensure that every constituency has at least one theatre, which will be operational; will provide free Mama Kits; revitalize maternal audits and take action on health workers who mishandle mothers.

In the Financial Year 2008/2009, the ministry plans to do the following - but Madam Speaker, in the interest of time I will ask my colleagues to read that.

The committee was further informed that the Public Finance and Accounting Regulations require that they use item-based and not programme-based budgets so that the draft estimates do not reflect as reproductive health, but rather as wage, medicines, general supplies and so forth.

The committee recommends that matters of maternal reproductive health should be prioritised and resources mobilised to address the funding gaps.

Vote 134 is for the Health Service Commission. The Commission is mandated to recruit health workers at headquarters, the national referral hospital, that is Mulago and Butabika and all the other regional referral hospitals. It also provides guidelines to local government authorities to follow during the recruitment of health workers. 

In addition, the Health Service Commission supports District Service commission while recruiting senior medical personnel. This commission is also responsible for ensuring discipline and ethical behaviour among health workers.

The committee noted with concern that some districts lack district service commissions and so could not recruit during the last financial year despite availability of wages to pay the staff. The funds were returned to the treasury for failure to recruit in health centres yet there is critical need for staff in almost all health facilities in the country. The committee recommends that Government assists districts to have functional district service commissions in place.

As far as the Health Service Commission is concerned, on the issue of attraction and retention of health workers, the committee was informed that there is persistence attrition of worker in government health facilities. 

The Health Service Commission called for a need for a national forum for attraction and retention of health workers to include all stakeholders, for example, Ministry of Health, among others, so as to generate solutions during this forum. 

Madam Speaker, given the gravity of the problem, the committee recommends that a national forum to discuss strategies to attract and train health workers be held urgently. 

About the staffing structure in the health sector, the committee noted with concern that the health service strictures are inadequate to cater for all the health facilities in the country. 

The Health Service Commission reported that the structure reflecting the actual need of health units should be developed instead of using one worked out against the budget sealing. This will enable Government to appreciate the manpower gaps in the health sector. 

It was also reported that the position for medical superintendents in referral hospitals is not regularised in that civil service structure. This has demotivated most of the doctors who have been working in acting capacity. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service regularise the post of medical superintendent in the civil service structure as soon as possible. 

The committee made some observations as far as the general hospitals are concerned: that general hospitals have for a long time been neglected and grossly under funded. Most of them need urgent refurbishment while some of them need to be upgraded to fit in the situation within which they operate. Hospitals like Kawolo, Iganga, Kiryangongo and Mubende, which are along high ways, should be upgraded and equipped to handle emergency cases especially due to terrific accidents. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health prioritise the refurbishment of general hospitals and upgrading of the highway hospitals.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of health centres II, III and IVs, the committee noted that the health centres right from health centres work with a lot of difficulty ranging from uncompleted structures, lack of equipment, inadequate staffing and above all, lack of drugs.

The committee further noted that the first set of health centre IVs were constructed on faulty architectural designs. The ministry assured the committee that these structures, especially operating theatres are being re-modeled to make them suitable. 

The committee was informed that the all the 155 Health Canter IVs are operational but at different operational levels and 40 of them are offering surgical services, 37 do not have theatre equipment and 80 still lack key personnel particularly antithetic and medical officers. We have attached annex C and D for details. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should equip all health centre IVs and recruit the appropriate personnel in order to make all centres fully functional. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of spraying DDT, the committee was informed that the Ministry of Health had started spraying DDT in the Northern part of the country, that is, Apach and Oyam Districts, and had realised reduction of Malaria cases in those districts. However, the process had to be halted due to a court injunction following a petition by some producers of organic products in Lango. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health intensifies sensitisation and education on DDT and sprays in areas that are ready as it completes the court proceedings.

On the issue of special needs, the committee was informed that the final draft of the disability rehabilitative care policy is ready and that the new structures in the health facilities are designed with provisions to take care of the disabled. In the old structures, provisions are being made to ensure that the disabled can access the services. 

The committee recommends that all health centres, but more especially the maternity wings comply with the new policy and the process of adjusting the new ones be considered and funds be earmarked from within the sector budget.

There is also the issue is private public partnership for health policy that is the PPPH. The committee was informed that the draft policy on PPPH is ready and the Ministry of Health is due to table this before Cabinet for consideration. Under the partnership, Government is to continue supporting health institutions because of the contribution they make to the health sector. The support from Government enables the institutions to reduce the fees subject to the changes in costs of inputs and offer preventive health services like immunisation free of charge.

The committee recommends that this should maintain especially for those health centres that offer specialised treatment and those that have facilities that are not available in Government institutions. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should put a monitoring mechanism in place to ensure accountability.

In conclusion, the committee would like to emphasise that the education and health sectors play a key role in development of the country. Government should give them the priority they deserve and increase their funding in order to march the global expectations of the Millennium Development Goals. 

The committee recommends that Parliament do approve the following amounts for the Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health respectively. For the Ministry of Education and Sports budget estimates indicated in table 7, Vote 13, Ministry of Education and Sports Headquarters: recurrent budget is Shs 106,097,067,000 billion and the development budget is Shs 137,624,348,468 billion. 

For Vote 132, Educational Service Commission, Shs 3,120,990,000 billion is recurrent, and for the development budget they need 63,060,501,000 billion.

Then for Vote 136, Makerere University, recurrent is Shs 43,629,284,000 and the development is Shs 16,585,022,018 billion. 

And for Vote 137, Mbarara University of Science and Technology, Shs 7,055,072,000 and then development budget is Shs 498,768,714,000 billion. For vote – 138, Makerere University Business School, the recurrent budget is Shs 5,047,832,000 and then the development budget is Shs 1 billion. 

Vote 139, Kyambogo University is Shs 15,411,347,000 and then development is Shs222,845,106; while Busitema University, Vote 111 is Shs2,522,479,000 and the development budget is Shs 6,807,520,811; while Vote 140, Uganda Management Institute is Shs 425,499,000.

For the Ministry of Health the budget estimates for 2008/2009: Vote 014, Ministry of Health Headquarters, the recurrent budget is Shs 102,306,922,000 and the development budget is Shs 271,940,606,758. Vote 134, Health Service Commission is Shs 1,691,511,000; while the development budget is Shs 430,799,362,000.  

The Uganda Blood Transfusion Service, which is Vote 151 its Shs 1,960,000,000 while the development budget is Shs 330,842,808,000.

Vote 161, Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital: the recurrent budget is Shs 4,368,401,000 while the development budget is Shs 8,815,803,681.  

Madam Speaker, for Vote 162, Mulago National Referral Hospital, the recurrent budget is Shs 35,361,592,000 while the development budget is Shs 8,916,924,661.

Votes 163 to 173, Regional Referral Hospitals as they are indicated, the recurrent budget is Shs 28,425,245,440 while development budget is Shs 17,320,000,000. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the committee for a very detailed and interesting report. I also notice that the House is fuller than usual. (Laughter) I do not know what that says but I am glad to see the Members here. 

Before I hand over to the Opposition, I just have a question for the Minister of Finance: when we were considering the budget of the ICT Committee we saved some Shs 7 billion, I do not know whether that money cannot be applied to this VAT and we pay this money and get rid of that problem? You will let me know if that is not possible because we saved that money; we ended up only spending Shs 400 million. Can you provide that money and put it here for the ADB so that our structures are built?  

Then for the Chairperson, I did not hear you talk about the special needs instructors in the hospitals. The disabled have been complaining that they cannot understand what is said in the hospital and the nurses cannot communicate with them. I did not hear anything about that. But maybe it is not you; maybe it is the minister; not now but you can think about it. So, can I hear from the Opposition?

5.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, two of my Shadow ministers were supposed to respond to this committee report. Unfortunately the Shadow Minister for Education and Sports had to travel to Arua on some emergency, and I would like to convey our apology that she will not be able to respond personally.  

The Shadow Minister for Health, hon. Dr Epetait, has limited copies of his response, which he will pass on and also do respond. But allow me just to highlight a few issues on behalf of the Opposition in respect of the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

To start it, I would like to sincerely thank the Chairperson of the Social Services Committee, hon. Rosemary Seninde and her committee -(Applause)- for speaking in very plain language about the issues concerning the two sectors under their watch. We congratulate you for the content of your report.  

When you hear the chairperson of the committee talk about education, the underlying message is the question of under funding. Every activity is being under funded and therefore it becomes a challenge as to whether we should try to do everything with under funding or we should re-think how we can best use the funds that we have.  

The illustration that the chairperson gave on Health was so telling that we are providing less than Shs 200 per meal for patients in hospital. Sometimes if you get very arrogant to beggars in the streets of Kampala and you give them Shs 200, they actually even reject the money. So it really becomes a serious problem.  

In Education we were also thinking about the under funding that goes with our programme, UPE for example. The money that we give per pupil for UPE is I think about 1,000 per year per pupil and yet we call it free primary education. It becomes really free because somehow they have to manage. 

I just looked at the proposed budget to fund secondary education, which is about Shs 65 billion. That is everything. I divided it against student population in government schools of I think about 400,000. It gives you a figure of Shs 52,000 per student per term. All of us who have children going to secondary schools know how much we fork out per term. All of us, I know you are retired but –(Laughter)- Okay, I made an assumption. What then happens is because we called it “free” the parents then assume that government is actually doing everything. 

And you go to rural school; this is the mindset because the message we gave that we are doing everything is causing real problems to education in our country. 

When you go to tertiary institutions, I remember since the last Parliament that we have been arguing that for a country that wants to industrialise, it must invest heavily in technical training. You look at the technical training budget and you ask yourself, “What do you want to achieve with that budget”? And when will we recognise that without technical training you will always get the complaints that we have kept hearing from Members, particularly when they talk about immigration where Kenyans have taken over technical jobs; whether you are talking about floriculture, whether you are talking about the banks, whether you are talking about the hotels because they have trained Kenyans who are competent to handle these things. And with privatisation, the business person wants to employ the best person. And they will always employ these foreigners. 

But we seat here every year, we pass the Education Budget and we do not reflect on the real need to support technical training. Even on universities, we are very lucky that self-sponsorship has helped the sector. But the situation Makerere is facing is a very simple challenge. It has over expanded against very limited resources. And there is no way that changing leadership in Makerere will resolve this problem unless we decide that we must match what we demand of Makerere with appropriate investment in the university. 

As I speak now, you know I was a professor in the university before politics drew me out of academics. We had something called in-house contribution pension schemes. When they finally calculated my benefits last year, it was just over Shs 4 million. (Laughter) They have made promises to pay me for that money for the last one year. Sometimes I do not even know what to do. When they look at me, you just see embarrassment on their faces. I would donate it if they could give me. In fact one time I wrote to suggest that they should deduct that money so that I could pay university fees for some students from my area but they did not accept it. So the only way I can do it is to demand for it. 

Makerere will not function without money. If government cannot provide then Government must accept that Makerere increases tuition to address its financial needs. 

I still do a little bit of work with Makerere sometimes. One time I went for a viva for a PhD thesis, and it is not long since I was last in Makerere; I was surprised at the standards that I saw there. And the problem is that the student population is too big, the lecturers do not have time for individuals; I do not know what we shall do. And then we decide to create more universities, which is a very good thing. We have created Busitema University. But my concern is that the need to get that university established and running is being subverted by sentimental demands by various communities to have that same university with a leg or a tail or hand in their communities. Uganda is such a small country, to drive from here to Kabale for university education takes no time. But if we now have like 10 campuses for a university that has not even settled down, first the management overheads are going to drive the university down! 

Secondly, it will not define itself on what it should really be because those colleges out there will also want to establish their own identity. At the end of the day, there will be no Busitema University that you can clearly define with a clear objective. I know what I am saying hurts many people but I am speaking as somebody who has been a teacher in the university and who knows what the university must really be: a centre to transform people. 

Therefore, when I say this, what do we need to do? As a country, we need to review our investment in the education sector to clearly prioritise. For example with UPE, the phase that we should now be entering is the phase of consolidation to correct the consequence of rapid expansion that UPE generated. Many rural schools stopped getting first grades and if this UPE came in our time, I do not think Latigo, coming from a rural school, would be speaking on the Floor here. So, we need to consolidate particularly with UPE, make the corrections to ensure that primary education has meaning as much in private schools, in urban schools as they should have meaning in rural schools. 

The next is really to contextualise our education. It is very important – we talked about labour and employment the other day, I thought I would raise the issue then but I think it is appropriate to raise it under education. You know, our education should be measured against a very clearly set out national human resources development policy because as of now, even when we shift from arts to science, to funding girls and all these, a policy framework that captures our aspiration for human resources development is not there. 

Therefore, we have no means of evaluating whether we are going appropriately in the direction we set ourselves to. So, we need that and we also need an institutional organ for implementation. I am not ashamed to mention the example of Rwanda, which I did before, where they have a human resources development agency -(Interjection)- I did not want to use manpower in this instance. So, if we can do that, we prioritise and contextualise, then we can put our money where the real needs are and we can demand of those we have entrusted with these responsibilities, outputs that we clearly know we had set for ourselves. 

Lastly, this is something that again I should have raised with the Minister of Foreign Affairs in the morning. It skipped my mind but it is something that may be relevant to education. 

Last week I met a family member of a young man who got a scholarship at that time through the NRM Secretariat, to go to study in Cuba. About a month and a half ago, the young man called Charles Komakech fell in a bathtub and hit his head and died. The body has been in Cuba for one month because the ambassador who covers that area says he does not have money. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs says, “We did not send that person.” Education says, “We did not send that person.” The NRM Secretariat no longer exists. It is a terrible embarrassment to our country but a horrible pain to the family of this young man who came from Gulu. I wish –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): It is true what the honourable Leader of the Opposition has said, that we lost that young man. Cabinet decided that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is to handle this and it was decided about a week ago. So, that was decided. It is true that we have had many of our students in this situation. Good enough, for this one we had a way of tracing him to the secretariat, but there are those who go and actually we do not know. We have encouraged them to be reporting where we have embassies so that we can keep track of them; but that situation happened. It is unfortunate, but the decision was taken to bring the body back and who is to bring? It is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, honourable minister, and I thank the government for their decision on this matter. This is all from me, Madam Speaker.  

6.05
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Francis Epetait): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg the indulgence of the members; copies have not been enough for everybody so you will bear with me, but the report is quite brief.

The Ministry of Health is seeking for Parliament to approve a sum of Shs 628.459 billion for the Financial Year 2008/09 for both recurrent and development expenditure including donor projects. This is as per the policy statement. Quickly, I want to add that towards the end of our interface with the Ministry of Health over the policy statement, some amendment was brought in by the Ministry of Finance which now brought the figure to Shs 643 billion as stated by the committee chairperson. However, the Ministry of Finance explained that this additional money is not physical cash. So, I am presenting a report as per the policy statement because I am not sure of how to appropriate something which is not cash. 

The policy statement attempted to account for the activities undertaken during the last financial year and highlighted planned activities for this year. However, the statement was wanting in terms of quality. Some of the activities and resources committed to them were ineligible in the statement. This made critical analysis rather difficult and resulted into a lot of time wasting as the ministry had to clarify a lot of questions raised by the committee. In the future, the ministry should endeavour to present a clear and succinct policy statement lest they risk it being thrown out. Stand warned. 

In the policy statement, the ministry reported improvement in the provision of drugs and other medical supplies to hospitals and health units throughout the country. However, on interacting with the directors and heads of various health facilities, they argued that stock-outs of drugs and medical supplies still persist. In addition, all the referral hospitals reported that there is a chronic problem of congestion of patients at the hospitals caused partly by understaffing and low work morale due to poor terms of working service. 

Madam Speaker, whereas the august House approved a sum of Shs 8 billion for capital development for all the 10 regional referral hospitals in the country last financial year, the money was not passed on to the hospitals as Parliament had been made to believe. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I have risen on a point of procedure. For purposes of us benefiting from the Shadow Minister for Health’s contribution, could we have his text circulated so that we can follow? -(Interjection)- No, it is not there; I do not have it. I have a document circulated by hon. Nandala-Mafabi but I do not have the one for the Shadow Minister of Health. I thought that this was the one that we are following. 

DR EPETAIT: I did beg for your indulgence at the beginning. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is somebody producing some additional copies?

DR EPETAIT: Yes, we sent somebody. Can you follow up? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think that document is a ghost document. He is the Shadow Minister for Health; I do not know any other person. (Laughter)

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, while we wait for more copies to be circulated, I beg to report that the problems for which Parliament appropriated the Shs 8 billion to the referral hospitals for capital development still remained unattended to. 

Furthermore, this very august House appropriated an additional Shs 1 billion specifically for the Uganda Cancer Institute in Mulago but that too was not passed on as expected by Parliament.  

The explanations by the ministry regarding those monies were not convincing either. The Opposition notes that there is a growing tendency by the ministry to ignore the intentions of Parliament once appropriations have been done. We demand that someone must take political responsibility for such anomalies. 

We recommend for that purpose that the Uganda Cancer Institute and Uganda Heart Institute at Mulago should now operate different accounts. There was a report of a mix up when the money was remitted to the Mulago Hospital’s general account and that is what caused a bit of mix up in the remittance. 

We observe that the Ministry of Health has always attributed its dismal performance to inadequate funding. Clearly, all of us agree that the tight MTEF ceiling for the Ministry of Health tantamounts to passing a death sentence on the sick population in Uganda. The country’s per capita expenditure on health is so low; it is just about US $6 per annum against a minimum recommended expenditure of about US $35. It is also extremely disturbing that even the little that the Ministry of Health is given is not fully absorbed. Most of the programmes and projects absorbed less than 60 percent as per the policy statement.

The Opposition is concerned that the health sector is either under utilising funds or utilising them badly. I have indicated a table which shows some of the amounts approved for the various Vote functions and what the ministry was able to spend as at 30th of May. We were extremely astonished to realise that for most of the programmes, the ministry was not able to absorb up to 60 percent of the monies approved. I think this goes back to Ministry of Finance. There is a general problem of delayed remittances of approved funds to the various sectors thus causing some balances to be realised at the end of a financial year even when the planned activities have not been undertaken. 

Given the above picture of a low absorption capacity of the ministry, one gets the impression that there is something fundamentally wrong in the management of the health sector in this country. We are compelled to ask pertinent questions. Does the ministry have any justification for its dismal performance in light of such a scenario? How does the ministry hope to justify its demand for increased funding to the sector when they even have a lot of balances to be sent back to the Treasury at the end of the financial year? 

Madam Speaker, let me go to the issue of the hospitals. We have two national referral hospitals and 11 regional referral hospitals in the country to date. Generally, all the hospitals have common problems, as earlier mentioned, including understaffing, poor working conditions, lack of or inadequacy of essential medical equipment, drug stock-outs and financial constraints. The hospitals experienced persistent overcrowding in all departments. This was worse for the two national referral hospitals - Mulago and Butabika - since they also serve as health units for first call besides receiving referred patients from all other parts of the country. All around, many patients instead of going to a lower health unit report directly to a national referral hospital.  

We recommend that the demand of the Health Service Commission to undertake massive recruitment of health workers throughout the country be promptly made in order to enable it recruit personnel to fill up the vacant posts in the various hospitals and health units.  

We also noted with concern that except for Lira Hospital, the rest of the regional hospitals have no substantive medical superintendents. The available medical superintendents are only operating in acting position.  It is demoralising for an employee to work for several years in acting position without being confirmed.  

The Opposition strongly recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should liaise with the Health Service Commission to confirm or formalise the appointment of substantive medical superintendents for the referral hospitals.  

In the last two financial years, Parliament has consistently recommended that Mubende and Moroto hospitals be upgraded to regional referral status but the ministry has not implemented the recommendation to date. There is need for the ministry to implement recommendations of Parliament. We demand appropriate action to immediately upgrade those two hospitals to regional referral status.  

Generally, most health facilities in the country are in dire need of repair. We observe that government should urgently undertake major rehabilitation and expansion of the health facilities as one way to mitigate congestion in such facilities. The Opposition demands that the Ministry of Health should never retain or divert funds meant for capital development to regional referral hospitals at the centre. We strongly demand that they should never be retained. The regional referral hospitals are semi-autonomous bodies and I think they have the capacity to handle the development budgets as it were.  

In addition, basic medical equipment is either lacking or obsolete in many hospitals. On a sad note, we observed that there is very little attention paid to maintenance of medical equipment at the hospital. Such practice often leads to faster depreciation of the hitherto expensive equipment and also greatly affects the accuracy of performance of such equipment.  

We strongly recommend that maintenance costs should not be ignored in budgeting if quality output from such equipment is to be achieved. We should remember that poorly maintained equipment poses a danger not only to the user but also to the beneficiaries of such equipment.  

Madam Speaker, I want to talk briefly on the human resource for health.  There is a general problem of understaffing in the sector. The terms of service of health workers and their support staff are generally poor. Some of the departmental heads and medical superintendents have also reported that they have had a lot of stress following internal squabbles among some of the top managers of the sector at the ministry. 

The Opposition, therefore, recommends that government should honour its commitment to enhance remuneration of health workers and give them incentives such as tax holidays, access to personal housing and transport that should be considered to motivate them. I want this to be taken note of very seriously. Once the cooks start fighting in the kitchen, the broth can easily go bad. It must be appreciated that internal squabbles at the top management in the ministry can trickle back to poor service delivery in the country and I think there must be a remedial action in that line.  

We also want to appreciate the contribution of other development partners towards the health sector in this country; this year alone, their total contribution amounts to about 35 percent of the total budget to the Ministry of Health. I am not going into details but I think it is important to appreciate their contribution. However, whereas the resources may be available for health, the Opposition remains perturbed by injudicious manner of implementation especially in terms of accountability. This has often discouraged a number of partners from extending a hand of help to the sector. Commissions of inquiry, for example, have been set up to investigate impropriety in various programmes but the implementation of those recommendations also remains a challenge.

Recovery of money misappropriated from the Global Fund is still reported to be poor. To date, only Shs 699,034,550 has been recovered from 16 institutions. There are still over 350 civil and criminal recoveries pending. So, the recovery of the misappropriated monies is poor. On that note, it is feared that our expectations for more allocations from the Global Fund for this year will only be met if the outstanding queries are convincingly answered. The queries include progress in the recovery of the Global Fund money, progress on the implementation of the recommendations of the Ogola Commission report and answers to the audit queries raised by the Auditor-General right from the year 2004 up to date. These have to be answered before we get the next allocation from Global Fund.  

We are also concerned that the trial of suspects for GAVI funds which were misappropriated is also taking a slow pace. It is our considered opinion that such delays will dent both the image of the suspects and that of the country. We should dispose of those matters on time. We, therefore, recommend that expeditious implementation of commission reports and legal action on those who have failed to refund the Global Fund money should be taken without any further delay.  

On Uganda AIDS Commission, I just beg to add that whereas the commission is housed under President’s Office, it is drawing funds through Ministry of Health. You can call Ministry of Health a conduit for funds to the commission under President’s Office. It is our strong conviction that the Ministry of Health, being the lead agency in the fight against HIV/AIDS in this country, should receive due facilitation to do its work. It is unethical for us to use the Ministry of Health as a conduit for funds that end up in another office.  In that way, it will be very difficult for the Ministry of Health to provide accountability, for example.  The current arrangement is unnecessarily chocking the MTEF ceiling of the Ministry of Health. We therefore recommend that the above commission should be best placed under Ministry of Health.  

I think I am going to jump a few things because of time and go to the issue of maternal and reproductive health briefly. Women in this country are going through a very nasty experience due to inadequate maternal health care. Many health facilities lack the basic requirements for attending to mothers. This has often led to many mothers even shying away from health facilities. Government should have affirmative action for maternal health in budgeting. (Applause) We demand that the women in this country should be given the glory and respect they deserve. It is the mother who bears the nation. (Applause)

Let me make some observations in regard to procurement and disposal of assets. Whereas the ministry boasts of having developed and implemented a three year procurement plan, drug procurement and distribution in this country still remains an embarrassing challenge for government. Ugandans will not appreciate the availability of a procurement plan but rather the reliable availability of drugs and other medical supplies at all health facilities. Doesn’t government realise that the frequent stock-outs of drugs at health facilities across the country are an indicator of inability to deliver for her people? It is sacrilegious to leave drugs to expire in stores while people die because of lack of drugs across the country. 

The ministry should, therefore, do more in coordination and procurement and disbursement of drugs. We suggest that all third party programmes should channel their monies through the ministry so that there is a centralised procurement of all drugs and medical supplies. In this way, even control of the quality of drugs imported to the country will be made easy. You are aware that when every organisation is allowed to bring what they want, we can end up with counterfeit and fake things.

We also propose that the capacity of NDA to do its job should be improved because NDA is supposed to follow up quality matters from procurement up to the final beneficiary.

Another activity at the Ministry of Health towards the end of this financial year is government boarding off 60 vehicles of the Ministry of Health for non tax revenue of Shs 129,441,950,000, which is an average of Shs 2.5 million per vehicle. The majority of the vehicles were moreover four-wheel drive land cruisers and pick-ups, some of them in immaculate condition. The haste in the disposal of the said vehicles is suspect. We demand that an investigation be carried out on this matter to inter alia verify compliance with the PPDA and value for money, and to rule out any possible conflicts of interest. 

Just to repeat what the committee has said, the Opposition is further dismayed by the manner in which government proceeded to pass out vast chunks of land for Butabika Hospital to private developers. Such a move stifles future expansion plans or opportunities for the institution. One wonders whether government is in a hurry to go somewhere that it is quickly disposing of its assets. (Laughter) I would like to concur with my committee that there is need for us to investigate this matter to the last dot. We also need to know who bought the land because there could be some possible conflict of interest in that.

The health system in Uganda has continued to suffer from poor service delivery and inefficiency. The health centres and hospitals continue to have drug stock-outs while drugs expire at the medical stores. Attendance by many health workers at their duty stations is irregular and their attitude towards patients sometimes is very unfriendly. The inefficiency, corruption, poor service delivery and stock-outs in health facilities must be dealt with decisively. 

Labeling of drugs meant for the public health system must be done to prevent diversion of drugs for sale in private clinics. The inspectorate division of the Ministry of Health must be strengthened to deal with the inefficiency and the mismanagement and consequent poor service delivery in the sector. Additional resources must be provided for basic health infrastructure, recruitment and retention of health workers, provision of drugs and basic equipment. 

Improving quality of service in public health units is critical for enhanced health status of household incomes. Recent surveys indicate that women are more likely to fall sick compared to men. On the other hand, most household members are consulting private health service providers and in most cases, the private health service providers are quite expensive. This means that women spend a disproportionately higher share of their income on health and yet the majority of them have limited control over household incomes. Budgetary allocations for health should therefore be gender responsive. Madam Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think there was something the chair left out on Gulu University and then we shall address the numbers. (Laughter)

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, there is a small correction that we would like to make on page 32. There is one thing that was left out on table 7. Vote 149, Gulu University, was missed out but I think it was a typographical error or printing problem. The recurrent budget is Shs 5,210,000,000 and the development budget is Shs 1,720,000,000. I beg to make that correction.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The first rule is that if you are among these 20 members of the committee, I will not see you. Allow the other members to comment on your collective report. Last evening there were members who were here and they wanted to contribute but were not able to. I will start with them.

6.33
MRS WINFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. After last evening when I was not able to contribute, I am very happy that you kept your promise that I would contribute today. 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Committee of Social Services for the report well written and most especially, I would like to thank the chair of the committee for presenting the report in such a good manner. A report that was huge was summarised in a way that we were able to follow and the important issues were raised. I would like to thank her for that and the committee as well.

The issue I would like to dwell on today regards staffing levels. Staffing levels in health units in this country are still very low especially in rural areas. In rural health units, the numbers of staff that work there and are retained are very few. This report has talked about it but I think that the budget should really focus on this issue more than anything else. 

As women Members of Parliament, we have had programmes of visiting different health units in different parts of this country. One of the issues that has come out prominently in the reports is the fact that we have in many cases very good structures, reasonable equipment and many times some health units have drugs but people do not go there mainly because the staff is lacking, especially midwives. So you find that most of these centres are white elephants with hardly any activity taking place. We visited several health units in Mukono and discovered that they are good, well built and well equipped but with very few patients coming over to such health units. Therefore, I think the issue of staffing needs to be looked at. 

People who work in hard-to-reach areas should be given more money so that they are attracted to live and work there. This should be worked on by us through the budget process. 

One of the issues that came up in the report on page 30 was that there should be a national forum to find out how they can best get people to work in such areas. Personally, I think that it is a waste of resources for such an activity to be raised at this point in time. This is because research has been done; we have been visiting our constituencies and the reasons why people do not work in these health units is the poor remuneration and it is known. Since it is known, I do not see why a forum should be called upon to address such issues that are already known. Therefore, I am strongly opposed to such an activity in any budget, especially in the Ministry of Health, because the issue is known. Workers have to be paid adequately so that they are attracted to work in these health units.

I am very glad that the issue of the road map on maternal health has been mentioned on page 29. This is something that as women and as Members of Parliament, we have been clamouring for. I would like to know to what extent the road map has been budgeted for. How many of the activities that we have discussed intensively within that road map have been budgeted for? I imagine that this statement is not clear, and if it is put out it is just window dressing something. I doubt whether this budget is catering for a road map of maternal health, which we think fits us as a country and which will be effective as far as reproductive health issues are concerned. 

One of the issues that we realised when we were visiting these health units is that patients tend to come at specific periods when they see vehicles bringing drugs -(Member timed out)

6.38
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the sharp eye. I have one concern, which I will dwell on, and it is about the Ministry of Health. 

When you look at the health sector budget of last financial year, the percentage was about 9.3. When you analyse the percentage of this financial year, it went down to about 8.5. We have all been hearing about the Abuja Declaration, which requires at least 15 percent of our national budget to go to health. It is interesting that every time the Minister of Health speaks, he says, “It is true the ministry recognises a shortfall in expected service delivery”. When you check your Budget Speech, the Minister of Finance went on to say that the health system in Uganda has continued to suffer from poor service delivery and inefficiency. Should we continue talking and lamenting, and when it comes to the budget we put nothing for health? Don’t we think a healthy population is the way forward for national development? Talk about any development; if we do not have a healthy population we will do nothing and we will never develop. Can’t we think of health as a priority amongst priorities? 

When the State of the Nation Address was delivered here by His Excellency, health did not come out specifically as a priority. When it comes to maternal health, it is really annoying. I would like to thank my shadow minister; he is a shadow but today it seemed like there is light. As the chairperson of UWOPA said, we went to Mulago Hospital, and the director is here and he took us around. Dr Dumba, you are here with us in this House though you cannot speak on this microphone. He is seated there. You stand! 

We have said it many times here that we need urgent expansion for the maternity wing at Mulago Hospital but it is not coming. When it comes to the road map, it is a good document. Hon. Nsibambi should not engage my Speaker when I am putting a point across. We had a roadmap and you were our chief guest when we were going through that. It is a good document so name it. However, the President - maybe this is a whisper - has not approved. He is telling us that there are no funds and when it comes here - to agree with hon. Masiko - it is window dressing. (Prof. Nsibambi rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him stand up.

MRS NYOMBI: Yes, let him stand up and clarify if it is clarification.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Is the hon. Member of Parliament in order to actually demand a person who is not a Member of our Parliament to stand up? Is she in order? Can she be in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the technical officers are represented by their ministers. Leave them alone. They cannot do anything here.

MRS NYOMBI: I withdraw that statement. I am sorry, Madam Speaker. In conclusion, we should not lose the point: maternal health, maternal health; maternal health. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiyingi, followed by hon. Boona, hon. Najjemba has not spoken and hon. Okurut has not spoken. Hon. Members, I am trying to be democratic about shortages so that Members can speak at least once or twice on a committee report. 

6.44
MR ASUMAN KIYINGI (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three issues to raise but the first is a question of procedure. The shadow ministers are members of our committees of Parliament. We get policy statements from the Executive and ideally, the Shadow Executive should also have responses formerly to these policy statements. Why don’t they submit these statements to the committees of Parliament for scrutiny so that we have an informed opinion about both the Government side and the Opposition side? I do recognise –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Kiyingi, I do not know why you are wasting your time. I wrote to you as the chairperson of the committee on rules to address that matter and bring it back. You address your other issues; that is in your committee.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The second question I wanted to raise is on the government policy regarding a government-aided secondary school in every sub-county. This policy has been on for a very long time but we are not seeing much going on, on the ground. 

I do represent four sub-counties in Bugabula South with a fairly big population. In fact, I have 65 government primary schools with a pupil population of 46,518. Every year, about 6,600 pupils sit their primary seven. This is a big number by any standard, but this number is served by only one government-aided school, which recruits only about 200 pupils every year. One wonders where the rest are expected to go. 

Of course, I appreciate that the policy has been set that every sub-county will get a government-aided school; but when? Whenever I go back, my people ask me, “We know the policy is there, is there a plan?” Can we have a plan from the Executive which we can take to our people and say “Look, you people in Kitayundha, Namwendwa, Bulopa and Butansi, your schools are coming in 2009, 2010 and 2011.” It is not very easy to explain to people when we do not have any clear position as to the programme of implementation.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I want to find out the policy of government with respect to disaster in some government facilities. I have schools which have got unroofed as a result of rains but they have remained so for the last one and a half years. There is also a health centre which was unroofed about one year ago. I wrote to the minister, I wrote to the district and nothing has been done. I am referring to Kinawampere health unit and also Kasaka Primary school. Can it be clarified as to whether actually there is a programme for intervention when such disasters occur? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, very seriously, I know who spoke yesterday and I know who spoke on which day. I am looking for Members who have really not had an opportunity first. 

6.48
MRS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for the well and properly presented report, but I have a few observations to make. 

First and foremost, on the UPE funds on the recommendation that was made on page 11; it is true that when this money gets to the district, some districts abuse these funds. Sometimes some districts decide on what the money should do instead of the management committees. Some headmasters and management committees have complained that money for sports, music, dance and drama or exams is determined by the districts and you find that the parents and the teachers have not been involved in deciding on what should be done. 

While I support the idea that this money should be sent directly to the primary school accounts, I also would like to add that the ministry should pay extra attention to what the headmasters do with this money. It is not only the districts that are ready to abuse this money; some headmasters are waiting to get direct control of these funds and decide to use them for their personal gain. Some schools do not have school management committees and their finance committees are not working so this would jeopardise the proper use of these funds. 

Indeed when we say that the standards in our primary schools are going down, much of it has to do with this funding. There is a permanent itch by the headmasters and the teachers to demand money from the parents because they wait a long time for this money to come to the schools and this money delays so much. I would also like to ask the Ministry of Education to do its part. The money does not only delay at the district, it also delays from the centre. School get to the end of the term without receiving these UPE funds and the districts will say they are waiting for this money from the centre. So, may I ask the minister to look at all these stages that cause delays so that our schools perform better than they are doing?

Secondly, I would like to say something about health. There is information on an embarrassing revelation that we have received today on page 25 about funding of the Uganda Cancer Institute; that the money that was allocated for this institute was diverted to other programmes. This is on page 25. It is a very shocking revelation that money meant for the Uganda Cancer Institute, whose performance all of us are very anxious to see improve, should be diverted to other programmes!

Secondly, when I visited our hospital in Mbarara with other Members of Parliament recently, the doctors were very disappointed about the fact that they diagnose women with cancer but simply tell them to go back to the villages because the women cannot afford to come to Kampala -(Dr Mallinga rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot wait until she has finished?

DR MALLINGA: I think this issue about the diversion of the money to the Cancer Institute is burning and is recurring. It is not true. At that time the Cancer Institute did not have an account and their budgeting was through Mulago Hospital. The money was given to Mulago Hospital; Shs 700 million was forwarded to Mulago Hospital. At the centre, we had a problem of ARVs and Shs 300 million was retained for ARVs. So to say that the money was diverted is not correct. Now -(Interjections)– can I be protected, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, there was no account but that -(Interruption)  

MS KIZZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The chairperson of the committee did elaborate that some money was misallocated but the minister is saying it is not true and yet he is accepting that some money was taken for the purchase of ARVs. Is he in order to deny a fact which is clear, and which he is actually also accepting? Is he in order?                         

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, if this House voted the Shs 700 million for the Cancer Institute and you unilaterally took it away to do other things, that is diversion.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I find it very strange that the Minister of Health should stand here and tell us that Shs 700 million for the cancer patients was diverted to buy ARVs when actually ARVs were expiring in the National Medical Stores. What exactly is happening? Can the minister tell us what the problem is? Is it money, is it utilisation or is it capacity?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think you will answer later. Please, conclude.

MRS BOONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for re-emphasising the statement that the money was diverted to other programmes. That was just why I was reading here. However, when all that is said, my point was that if it is possible, Mr Minister, cancer treatment should also be decentralised to our regional hospitals. This is because many people cannot afford to come to Mulago to spend months and months, having to carry people to look after them; it is simply not affordable by many patients.

Thirdly, I wish to thank the ministry for the programme of wishing to brand government drugs so that we reduce the leakages -(Member timed out)

6.56
MS ROSE NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I want to thank the chairperson and the committee members for the report well presented. 

On Education, I know that education is a key factor in the development of any nation and I want to appreciate government for putting in place UPE and USE. However, I also want to inform the House that whereas UPE is universal as it is, it should be compulsory as well. In most cases when you go to these schools, the children are not there especially during this rainy season. Most of the children are now in the gardens. When you go to areas like my area where there are pastoralists, most of them are in the field looking after cattle. You find a school, which is supposed to have 500 children with only 30 or 40 and yet the register has about 400 or 500 children. So, it should be compulsory.

The other issue on education is feeding. It has been very controversial. The parents think that because government put in place UPE which is free, they are not supposed to pay anything, even if it is food for the children. I know the ministry now has a policy on feeding but it is not clear. The ministry says children should bring their packed food from home but I think it is not healthy. Also, some of these families prepare food for three or four days, for example cassava, especially in the green leaves and baskets; do you then expect these children to carry this food to school? 

In this country, we have always had Cholera outbreaks, Dysentery and all those outbreaks that are due to poor sanitation. So, what is the ministry telling us? Why don’t we have a clear policy on whether parents should contribute at least Shs 1,000 or Shs 500 and we put money together and have some food for the children? You cannot talk of improved education for our children when they are hungry. They cannot understand what they are being taught on empty stomachs. On this one, I am really serious. Government should come out with a clear position on school feeding. Our children should not go hungry to schools. 

The other issue is on sanitation. Madam Speaker, it is so appalling. When I visit most of the schools in my constituency, they lack pit latrines worth the name. Some of them do not have any while others have filled-up latrines and the whole place is stinking and the children have nowhere to go. The boys, the girls and the teachers are using the same pit latrine. It is so sad. So, as we talk about improving education and as we build classroom blocks; let us also think about latrines and toilet facilities for these schools.

Still on education, my area is a hard-to-reach -(Interjections)– Yes, Gomba is hard to reach and that is why we are coming here for a district sometime soon. If it is hard-to-reach and there is a policy about such areas, let us have some facilities, some motivation for the teachers to go there. Affirmative action is not there. You go to these places and the teachers are getting paid salaries, but they are never in those schools. So, something should be done for the hard-to-reach areas.

On the health sector, I would like to thank the ministry for doing well as far as improving health services in this country is concerned. However, I want to point out that you are mainly doing well in emergency outbreaks like Cholera, Hepatitis, Ebola and so on; that is where you put all the energy. All the energy you put in controlling emergencies should be put in prevention so that we avoid such outbreaks from occurring. Please, direct your energy into the right direction.

The report says that the priorities for the ministry are referral hospitals. I know that my district has a hospital at Gombe but I remember I stood in this Parliament and told you that we do not have an ambulance –(Member timed out)

7.02
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to cut out the preamble and would like to start by asking the Minister of Education how far his ministry has gone with the issue of the quota system on admissions. I am saying this because my district, Bushenyi, which has more than one million people, sends only 11 students on government sponsorship while some districts, which I do not care to mention, with only about 100,000 people, send the same number –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, it is the Committee on Social Services that received a policy regarding the quota system from the Ministry of Education before Parliament passed it. We were looking at people who live in hard-to-reach areas, like hon. Najjemba has said, and places that have fewer secondary schools. So, is hon. Mary Karooro in order to continue comparing districts that do not have better facilities to other places like –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know that the quota system is a creation of this House. It was a big struggle because the day we passed it, we sat here for six hours. We had a reason for doing it. We wanted to give affirmative action to the areas that do not have enough facilities. So, please do not encroach on that.

MRS OKURUT: Thank you, Madam Speaker, but the decision was not cast in stone. 

The vote function for higher education is to provide for, among other things, monitoring. I believe that the monitoring sector is not being done very well. I am saying this because in some of these universities - I am sure Prof. Latigo will bear me out - it is a crying scandal. If you go to some of the joints you will find adverts for students saying, “If you want machinery to do your coursework or research, call such and such a number”.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What!

MRS OKURUT: Oh! Absolutely! So, what kind of graduates are we producing? In some of these universities, the administration is pretending not to know that such scandals are going on. We cannot go on like this. No wonder we are now having what is commonly known as “sexually transmitted marks.” -(Interjection)- Absolutely! This is now a chronic disease. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) Madam Speaker, I am not taking any information. I am a seasoned educationist and I am hurt. This is a very serious issue. So, I am requesting the ministry to be serious on the issue of monitoring. If somebody does coursework or research for your child, what kind of graduate are they?

I will very briefly go to the health sector. I would like to say that Mulago has done very well. I really want to congratulate government and the ministry for setting up the Heart Institute. If you go there, you will appreciate that that is a modern place. I thank them.

However, I also want to point out that the ministry could get up and sensitise the population about some of these lifestyle diseases; we have more than 68 registered FM radio stations. I am saying this because we were told that heart disease and others are lifestyle diseases –(Interjections)– I am not taking any information. We could use some of these FM radio stations to sensitise our people.

Lastly, on the Cancer Institute, I would like to say that I took my girl to that place but I fainted after seeing the facilities. She was going to be checked for some cancer. If you looked at the facilities, you would know that the patients will contract another disease from there. We must move on with this Cancer Institute.

7.07
MR MOSES MUKOSE (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for this chance. I also would like to thank the committee members and the chairperson for this report.

On the issue of Universal Primary Education (UPE), I would like to say that we do appreciate that the enrolment has increased as indicated in this report. However, although the enrolment is increasing, the infrastructure is not. As far as my district, Namutumba, is concerned, there are no classrooms. I do not know which officer in the Ministry of Education recommended the phasing out of SFG? This was one of the things that was assisting some us who come from those under privileged districts –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I am just giving hon. Mutabaali information that the SFG was not phased out; it was maybe scaled down. The percentages were given to the effect that those who had a classroom ratio of more than 70 would receive it. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR MUKOSE: It is unfortunate that the former chairperson of this committee is not sure whether it was phased out or just scaled down. I will not accept information, Mr Minister; let me continue.

Since the institution of the UPE programme, the enrolment is increasing but the amount of money that goes to primary schools has never been increased for the last six years. Each child is paying something like Shs 700 per term yet as far as the standard of terms is concerned –(Interjections)– I am refusing your information. 

My request to the Ministry of Education is to increase the money that goes to primary schools. I am saying this because money for a particular pupil is scaled in terms of percentages. Hon. Rose Muyinda told us that at least money goes to sports and other activities, but each activity is scaled down in terms of percentage of the money that goes into those particular schools.  

Some of the UPE funds which are sent to schools take at least three months before reaching there, especially in Namutumba District. Last term most of the students did not sit for exams simply because the money was not there in those particular districts. Some other schools did not participate in co-curricular activities like sports, music and others still because there was no money sent by the ministry. So, my request is that the Ministry of Education should work hand in hand with the Ministry of Finance to send that particular money in time to facilitate education and to cater for quality education in our areas.

The other issue that I have with the Ministry of Education is about the many policies that are coming up and at the same time not being implemented, for example, there is what we call the scheme of service. This is a new policy in the Ministry of Education, like the Kajubi Commission, the Phillip Store Commission, the Senteza Commission and the Education Review Commission, which has not been implemented. 

There is also a policy on technical education. Sometime ago, we were told that there would be a technical school per sub-county, but as we talk now, that system has failed.  We request the Ministry of Education at least to put a technical school in every constituency to cater for those particular individuals in those constituencies. There is no technical school in my constituency.

Let me say something about health. Look at annex (c), Namutumba, where there is Nsinze. Besides most of these annexes, there is either “completed”, “not completed” or at least “yet to be completed”, but as far as Namutumba is concerned, there is nothing written besides it, only Nsinze. We do not know whether it is an operational theatre or it is yet to be completed. We do not know what is there.  

Lastly, a policy should be put in place for teachers in schools - for example, head teachers in my area always come to schools either on Mondays and Fridays –(Member timed out)  

7.13
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Rosemary Seninde and the entire committee for the report. When we discuss budgeting at a sectoral level, I want to insist that the substantive minister of finance must be here.  I am saying this because the planning function in the country is housed in the Ministry of Finance.  

I am aware that hon. Chekamondo Rukia is here, but sometime ago I raised an issue here while she was present - you were not the one in the Chair; the Speaker was chairing - but I will tell you that I was told to keep quiet. This is not a secondary school debating club. Given the fact that we are debating national issues concerning resource allocation in this country, the Minister of Finance should be here. We want to be understood as being here in a serious capacity. This business of delegation when we are discussing such issues is extremely not acceptable. We want this message to be taken to hon. Dr Ezra Suruma. I am saying this because we know his method of work. Sometimes he does not listen to his deputies. Therefore, he must be here when we are discussing sectoral budgetary resource allocations.

Madam Speaker, -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister wants to inform you.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank honourable members. I want to thank all the members and the committee for the report and I appreciate your concerns. I think this morning the same issue was raised, and I remember saying that all the issues that have been raised would be answered at the end. I want to inform the House that I am recording everything and I am not alone; there are other technocrats. There are issues I will answer and those I feel I cannot answer, I will present them to him and I promise that the minister will come here to respond to those questions adequately. Thank you.

CAPT. (RTD) GUMA: Madam Speaker, at the advent of colonialism, the education system in this country was tailored and initiated to produce clerks, interpreters, cooks, drivers and that caliber of people. From 1962, our education system has not radically and fundamentally changed to be tailored to the needs of our country; it has not substantially changed. It is, therefore, not surprising that our education system is churning out people who are irrelevant to the needs of our economic development. 

I want to ask the Minister of State for Education, hon. Gabriel Opio, who is looking at me seriously, to tell us the specific curriculum changes he is making to produce Ugandans that can really address our society’s needs? This business of teaching European history, Napoleon Bonaparte, French Revolution of 1789, etakwama wapi?

You will hear that so many millions of children are in P.1 but after seven years, you will be told that only 400,000 sat for PLE with no one repeating. So, what happens to the 0.6 million children? Where do they disappear to?  

Madam Speaker, I feel hurt. The Prime Minister, who is also a former Chancellor of Makerere, is here. I know for sure that you studied at Makerere and you will bear me witness that the majority of graduates in this country studied at that university, but we have sat here and supervised the decadence of Makerere. The university is surrounded by academic bureaus in Kikoni, Wandegeya, Katanga and all the other places. 

One time we were somewhere at a big meeting with the Rt hon. Prime Minister and the Vice President and we were discussing Makerere Medical School because I have relatives who have children in the medical school in Mulago. When they were studying anatomy in the olden days, around 1980 when I was in Makerere, there used to be an average of about five to ten students –(Member timed out)

7.20
MR ANTHONY YIGA (NRM, Kalungu West, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report, which is full of praises for the ministries under her supervision. However, I have the following observations: 

One, I would like to bring it to the attention of the committee and the chairperson that it is high time that we came up with standards of constructing schools in this country. When you look at the unit cost for constructing a primary school classroom, the ministry provides about Shs 7 million for a primary school. However, when the ministry is constructing seed schools, we are told that the cost goes to about Shs 50 million. So, such distortion is giving us a lot of problems. I think it is high time we set standards so that whatever we construct can last. No wonder many of the schools that we put up under SFG are really shoddy and are not going to last for a long time because of such distortions. I would like to ask the committee to take up this issue very seriously. 

Secondly, the committee recommended that the Ministry of Education should send money directly from Kampala here to the respective primary school accounts for UPE funds. That is dangerous. I would like the chairperson – I know she is a professional teacher – to reflect on this and cause the committee to review this recommendation. We have over 10,000 schools in this country and I do not think that it is humanly possible for the Ministry of Education in Kampala to directly supervise over 10,000 schools. We would rather review the problems in –(Interjections)– I am informed, I do not need any information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you made your report as a committee and he is making his comment on your report. So, let him do so.

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, we would rather look at the problems in the primary schools sub-sector and address them holistically, otherwise these innovations even counter the law. I know that you sat in the CA and we said that primary education is a decentralised activity, now you are bringing it back under the central government. This is actually wrong. I would like the committee to review that recommendation. 

I would like to thank the Minister of Health for responding to my call and the plight of my people. Ever since I came to this Parliament in 2001, I have been consistently requesting the Ministry of Health to construct a health centre IV in Kalungu West Constituency and I have written several letters to the ministers who were there but none of them ever responded. Now I am informed that there is a health IV called Kyamulibwa in Kalungu West. So I would like to thank the minister for responding to my call. However, I would like to inform him that that health centre IV is not operational and is not even there. He should only provide money to set it up so that it becomes operational. He says that he provided the theatre equipment. I would like to say that this equipment is not anywhere in my constituency. So let the minister come out clearly on that issue.

I would also like to touch on infrastructure development in the health sector and there is also a problem of lack of standards in our constructions. When you look at the report, we are told that many health centre IVs were constructed based on faulty architectural designs –(Member timed out)

7.25
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to observe that in the statement, there is still no funding for secondary schools at sub-county level. I would like to note that up to now, there are still sub-counties that do not have a government aided secondary school and this is of concern. By now, we should at least have this facility.

Concerning technical education, I would also have loved government to put more money in this area. We have so many youth out there who do not have any skills. It would help these youths to have a skill by giving them some kind of technical education. 

I would like to raise a concern about the children with disabilities. I have been receiving some communication from my constituency requesting for specific support for students with disabilities. Those who are going to the universities do not have the facilities that they need. Our government should be able to give support to students with disabilities so that they pursue their education fairly and not have to look around to NGOs and so on. 

Our policy is that most of the students that have not raised the points needed must cater for their university education. I am sure my colleagues, the Members of Parliament representing people with disabilities and also other Members of Parliament will agree with me that we can afford to look after students with disabilities who go to university so that they do not have to grapple around for help. As I talk now, I have a request at my desk that requires me to dig into my personal pocket to help these children attend university education.

On page 15, there is something concerning Makerere University bank accounts, which are so many and need to be closed. I imagine that Makerere as an institution has a lot of funds that flow into their system. According to the policy statement, it seems like they were defending these bank accounts, which means that they actually need them. I would suggest that other than the committee recommending that they should close their accounts, which they seem to need, maybe they should employ more bursars to be able to cater for their funds. It would be better that way, if they actually need these bank accounts, because it looks like they need the bank accounts.

Concerning Busitema University, I would like to commend the leadership in that university because the report says the university is set to take off. However, I also noticed that the budget allocated to them was very small. I would like to call upon government to increase the budget allocation to Busitema University so that it can take off. As we are all aware, it would be able to help us move away from some of the problems that we have here at the centre. There are so many students here; Makerere is collapsing with so many students. If we facilitated some of these universities that are on the periphery, then we would be able to cater for our future generation to give them a decent education other than students struggling at Makerere University. 

Still under Busitema University, I would like to commend government for having taken on Namasagali as another constituent college. This is very good because Namasagali has the facilities. I am sure it has the land because I went to that school and as a secondary school it has produced many Ugandans of high caliber who are serving this country. I think it deserves it. I can see my colleague across there, hon. Akena, smiling because he also went there. 

Reverting to health, I have one observation that I would like to make. The Minister of Health had started a programme to rehabilitate health centre IIIs, which my district benefited from by obtaining money for three health centre IIIs. I am grateful for that.  

7.31
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start off by thanking the committee as well for the good report. 

I want to start by describing briefly the health situation in Nakifuma County, which has a population of 200,000 people. We have a health centre IV without a doctor, and of course without a theatre and an ambulance. We have been promised an ambulance several times. The whole population is not served by an ambulance. I will go to the minister as a follow-up on earlier requests in the other Parliament.

In the committee’s report on page 6, on higher education they mentioned the report on the Visitation Committee to Public Universities, which has been finalised. I hope that it will soon come here to Parliament. What I want to point out is that even in these public universities, you find private students; actually, they are more compared to public funded students. What we noticed when the Committee of Science and Technology visited these universities is that because science courses are very expensive, private students tend to drop out. The completion rate for these students is very low. That means we need a better method of funding. 

We should, first of all, come up with a better budgeting model so that science students receive more funding than the arts students because these courses are very expensive. We went to Makerere University Faculty of Technology; they have got obsolete equipment, which cannot produce good students. Maybe it is also not fair to give operational funds, which are far less than the administrative costs, for example. It will be like giving someone a salary of Shs 80,000 to run a shop of Shs 20,000. That means the output will be a mismatch. 

Research is not funded. I think we need more funding for research so that these universities can be better funded. When you look at the administration of these universities, the representation in the councils is based on interests other than expected output from the members of the council. In some countries, you find that the members of these councils contribute not only to the funding but also to the university’s running; they do not represent their own interests. 

On page 6 of the report we have the issue of ICT. I think ICT in education cannot be overemphasized. The modern way of teaching, where there is e-learning, where you need research, should be encouraged. We should not think that ICT is for only sciences. It should be for both sciences and arts. This is an issue that should be encouraged. 

On page 5, the committee tells us that 13 community private secondary schools were grant-aided, which is very good. So in ten years, 130 schools will be grant-aided if it is 13 per year. You might need 100 years to grant aid a thousand schools. That means there should be a strategy to ensure that government picks up a faster pace of grant aiding schools. To the parent, the difference between a private school and a grant-aided school is not very clear; you will find that the school fees in most cases are the same. That means there could be a problem because even now, government has come up with regulations in private schools on how they should set up boards of governors.

7.36
MRS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the committee for the report. In the master plan mentioned in the report, there were three hospitals and Tororo Hospital was one of the three to be upgraded together with Mubende and Moroto. The criterion used in the master plan was that the three hospitals were the only ones in existence during the time of independence. But in this report, Tororo is missing and yet Tororo Hospital is catering for many patients from even the neighbouring country of Kenya. And we have people coming from Manafwa and even Tororo town itself. So, we need to have this hospital upgraded to a referral. 

On education and teaching of science, I would like to thank government for having given us Universal Secondary Education in almost all the sub-counties in our constituencies. However, teaching of science requires equipment and chemicals. Most of these head teachers go on the open market to get chemicals because the Ministry of Education does not provide them with chemicals and when students take a test, they get wrong results. That is why our students cannot pass because the head teachers get wrong chemicals, which are on the market. Can the Ministry of Education get some centre to standardise the chemicals used by these schools? 

Regarding laboratories in the teaching of science, you find these schools do not have laboratories and yet they need them to keep and store these chemicals.  We need Bunsen burners; we do not have gas for these schools. Has the Ministry of Education in its development budget catered for these items because that is how we can have these things standardised for all of us? 

Regarding DDT, if there are other districts, which do not have court cases, and they want to grow organic crops, can the Ministry of Health give us these sprays because people are dying of Malaria because of lack of sprays; can the Ministry of Health go to these areas and have them done?

Regarding PPP, which is Public Private Partnership; the motive of this was to reduce the cost of health treatment. But these hospitals are still over charging patients. Is it the ministry or did government enter into a MoU with these hospitals to ensure that they charge something that is minimal and can be afforded by patients?  Thank you. 

7.41
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I commend the Minister of Education on grant aiding schools; at least in Kasilo County all the sub-counties are having grant-aided schools.  Thank you. 

Madam Speaker, two years ago we passed a resolution here regarding the use of asbestos sheets and we indeed informed the Minister of Education that, please can you start removing these asbestos sheets because as we got it from the scientists that it is one of the causes of cancer. When is this starting because two years down the road nothing is happening?

Two, the programme of providing bursaries to students per sub-county by the government –(Laughter)– was going on well but I must report here that the students from Kasilo and Teso as a region for the last two years their money has not been remitted yet we have been passing the money. I have been to your ministry a number of times; I have written; the Commissioner in Charge of Finance has promised me that they were going to remit the money but to date nothing has happened. What are you keeping this money for?

Apapai health centre IV; the theatre; the health centre I as seen in the report here, it was built by an ADB loan, which is true but neither the theatre nor the health centre IV are in Kasilo County. But the theatre was built under the district although to date it is not operational. When hon. Jim Muhwezi came over three years ago when he was still a minister with the technocrats, this theatre was condemned. Up to today it is not operational; we are not seeing any equipment; you are reporting here that the equipment has been provided; there is nothing. 

Hon. Minister, I want to invite you to that health centre IV and the District Medical Officer must be held responsible for the shoddy work; for the money government has lost; for the people who have died due to lack of these facilities in this hospital. Hon. Minister, I will invite you with your technical team to come to that health centre IV.

When the chairperson was reading the report, she talked about moving the budget of the Uganda AIDS Commission from the Ministry of Health to the Presidency. But as I was looking at the policy statement, there is Shs 5.294 billion allocated; are we mixing the AIDS Control Programme with the Uganda AIDS Commission? I need some clarification because if you are now asking for money to be moved from Ministry of Health to the Presidency in this policy statement, that will be double budgeting for this AIDS Commission. I need some clarification, Madam Speaker.

On the issue of salaries of the teachers, last week when I was in Kasilo the teachers from Kasilo are complaining that they are not receiving their salaries on time; salaries come mid the following month yet the Prime Minister had assured us that by 28th of every month, the salaries would be there. So, Minister of Education, can I get an explanation? 

Finally, when you move around this town- for us who dare to walk on the streets of Kampala; go to Wandegeya; go to Ntinda; go to Nateete, there are posters on the trees reading about some treatment for the enlargement of people’s private organs; the enlargement of bums; I know there is a proportion – the size of a person is proportional to the volume of blood. And to Ugandans having a health problem with these quack doctors that are masquerading around that they can be able to enlarge people’s bums; reduce people’s bums and yet the quantity of blood in a human being the way it is made, increases proportionally to the amount of blood in a human body - what are you doing, are we safe hon. Minister of Health? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.46
MR BENSON OBUA OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and make some remarks about the report that they have given us. I want to take off from where hon. Okupa has stopped. One day, I was driving along Speke Road and this particular poster was advertising a kidney for sale by a student and the telephone number was there. Unfortunately, because I was driving I could not read or jot down the telephone number. I think this is a result of poverty.

Madam Speaker, let me now go to my substantive contribution which I would like to make to this debate. In my constituency all the sub-counties have secondary schools but Amugo sub-county does not. And we are not talking of a new sub-county; this is a very old sub-county. So, I would like to urge the Minister of Education to take this as one of the schools that should be aided because we already have a school by the community. They are ready to give the land that the school is sitting on, but they do not have teachers; they do not have facilities; they do not have so many things. They have classrooms nevertheless.

Nobody has said anything about sports and I think sports is very important and this country seems not to realise that. The late Akii-bua of blessed memory hailed from my constituency and what made him was the fact that he used to run from home to school so many kilometres away, leaving a nearby school because of religious bigotry and parochialism; he left a catholic church nearby so that he could run to a protestant school so far away. That is how he became an athlete. It was not a deliberate move or training, which he was given. 

In this country, we are just discovering people by accident. Even Inzikuru was discovered by accident. We need a deliberate policy, which helps us to identify young people and develop them. We have very many Olympians in my county. For instance, I have so many people who could break Olympic records, but because we do not take time to discover them, they are rotting in the villages.

I will give you an example. Recently, I conducted a football tournament in my constituency and I have a cup called Obua Ogwal cup. Do you know that we have produced a goalkeeper for the Cranes? The Cranes identified one recently and I am about to present him over to the Cranes. That is not by accident.

Whenever I pass Yusuf Lule Road, I see so many vehicles in the Ministry of Health, which are grounded. I wonder why they cannot board off those vehicles. And also in the report, it was said that the Ministry of Health had to return to the tune of Shs 589 billion, which to me seems to be absurd. The ministry needs more money than this. So if they are refunding money, it does not make sense to me.

Lastly, Lira Hospital was turned into a referral hospital, so we do not have a district hospital. Health centre IV in Moroto County called Alebtong is a perfect setting for a district hospital. The Minister of State for Health visited it and he highly appreciated the physical infrastructure there. Madam Speaker, I wish Alebtong health centre IV could be turned into a district hospital to replace Lira hospital which has become a referral hospital. It is highly refurbished by an organisation called -(Member timed out)

7.51
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for this report and it is a very fair and objective report. I have three or so comments in the area of health. I want to state this: this country is very interesting. It is quick to act to make demands, but slow to respond to challenges. The country registered itself to meet the requirements of Europe Gap as a member exporting organic products to European markets and their conditionalities and I am sure Uganda committed itself to doing that. A few districts were identified as export villages in the west and central. These were areas which were fairly secured.

DDT was one of those chemicals which were not supposed to be applied under agricultural sector. I was chairman and I know all the chemicals, which the inspectors from Europe would come and test. Apac and Oyam have become the spotlight for trying DDT; if it was something good there would be no resistance. Some Dutch company is there busy exporting organic products, why didn’t government roll out the application of DDT first in other districts as recommended here by the committee? But the committee is saying there must be intensive sensitisation and education of new areas that will demand it. Does it mean these two districts, which had been sprayed with DDT had hitherto been the only districts sensitised intensively to receive DDT? I want an explanation.

No. 2, under health, we invested the status of drugs and their supplies to health units and we recommended to the ministry that the National Medical Stores should start delivering drugs not to the districts but to health centre IVs, which are nearer to the communities. I do not know to what extent the ministry has complied with this recommendation, which was adopted in totality by Parliament. The reasons were clear: there was a lot of corruption in districts; doctors were establishing their own clinics; and major hospitals were empty but the clinics were stocked with drugs. And so the minister should explain to us why there was no clear policy response to the recommendation of Parliament.

No. 3, I want to know the level of supervision by the Ministry of Health to the health centres which are constructed by NUSAF programmes. Some of them are empty and the ministry claims they are too many, which are not approved and so they do not get votes to receive drugs. I do not know what policy is there in the ministry. 

I must thank the ministry and government for identifying two key and very old schools in Lango which happen to be in my constituency. One is a girl’s school and the other is a mixed school - St Catherine Girls’ Secondary School and Dr Obote College. These are the schools to benefit from African Development Bank facilities. In fact they were the first beneficiaries in the 60s for the same ADB construction. Most of us are not young and we benefited from the school expansion. They constructed all these schools with very good standards and quality -(Member timed out) 

7.58
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 5, the committee tells us that the enrolment in primary schools in Uganda went so high but they did not go ahead to tell us the challenges that go with this high enrolment. For instance, dropouts in schools, when you go to my district - I took a walk with some three Members one of whom is hon. Aol - we went to one school and took an interest to find out the dropout rate. In one school alone, we realised that of every 200 children that are enrolled in schools since the UPE was launched, only 50 sit for P.7. If you went down to think about how many girl children complete in that lot, the matter is even worse. About three or four complete. And you do not go ahead to really establish reasons why there are high dropouts in this despite the UPE programmes? Some of them could be because there are no facilities in these schools. 

For instance, Pader District alone has 50 schools studying under trees. My children are studying under trees and if it is raining they have nowhere to go except stand under trees. This is very absurd. How do they do exams and how do you expect them to sit for the same examinations that their counterparts sit from central and other parts of the country? The ministry has got to look into this issue very seriously because this also questions the quality of education we have. 

On page 5, the committee says to further address issues of quality, the sub-sector has also embarked on an important programme to enhance quality in primary education. Which programme is this that you have embarked on to reduce the poor quality in the 12 worst schools? In any case how did you arrive at these 12 schools that are worst performing? Because, for instance, Pader District yearly gets less than 100 children that get first grade and it is not appearing among the worst performing schools. I am trying to emphasise that almost all hard-to-reach schools –(Interjections)- hon. Minister, spare my time. I really highly respect you but you will have time to respond to our concerns.

About USE, how can Shs 47,000 really sustain a student in a secondary school and you tell the schools not to charge anything extra? And you think that money can – this is very absurd! I am losing words because when you see the trend, Pader District alone has very few schools that benefit from the USE programme and we have only one A’ Level school in the whole district. Considering the population, do we have to send our children to study in central Uganda? And there is no single school in my district that has a laboratory, how do you expect them to do sciences? Ministry of Education, I know you are overwhelmed but please improve through the Ministry of Finance.

Let me comment on the health sector. My biggest concern is that in my district, we have no hospital and only one health centre IV and yet I have two counties and the policy says we are supposed to have at least one health centre IV by -(Member timed out)

8.03
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This morning, Members of Parliament were wondering why Uganda is not effectively known in many countries and they were blaming the embassies. I wanted to tell them that right now so many children in Bunyole know about Ethiopia and Kenya because of the overwhelming performance of the Olympic teams of those countries in the recently concluded Olympics. Those countries are known as such because there has been deliberate effort to ensure that they promote talent and that they secure an effective budget for the respective sectors. That is not happening in Uganda. 

What happens is that recently the ministers and the entire delegation must have been the biggest shoppers from Beijing when Uganda came out with zero medals. And when the teams are going, you find the Minister of Education effectively handing over a flag well knowing that the teams have not been funded. Giving them a flag to go and do what? 

When you look at the USE labs, we are talking about laboratories but there are many schools, which do not have even a single science teacher. And what makes it worse is that UNEB uses sciences as a condition for grading students who will get first grade. Is this fair to judge a school or a student for conditions that have not been facilitated and availed to him? This is very unfortunate and we are doing a disservice to those schools and the government should come up deliberately to ensure that we get enough science teachers and the facilities that are required.

I come to this confusing policy of food in schools. There has never been any challenging situation for the head teachers like knowing how to deal with students in their schools who must eat food. Right now there are head teachers who have appeared before disciplinary committees in the Ministry of Education because parents voluntarily contributed money to feed children. It is as if for us we have succeeded and we are creating a situation where those siblings behind us should not succeed because of some unfolded policies. The only thing we should do as a government is to ensure that there no student who is excluded from school because he has not paid but to prevent teachers from collecting money from willing parents is very unfortunate and must be discouraged.

To make matters worse, I was recently with one head teacher who was told by the Ministry of Education that they should privatise the provision of meals in the schools. Can you imagine that happening? That the private sector should be brought in a school to administer the side of food so that the school is not seen to contribute money? Let us give policy guidelines and ensure that the USE students are not excluded because of inability to pay. Even when I was in school, during my school days that is what happened. Those who had money contributed for porridge and those who did not went home for food and others carried their food to school and that would be a clear policy.

On the health sector, I want to find out from the minister whether we should continue to decentralise recruitment of doctors in Uganda. We have decentralised but there are so many districts that cannot attract even a single doctor in their respective areas. If the recruitment of all doctors was the preserve of the Health Service Commission and they recruited somebody to be posted to Butaleja when he knows at one time he will get an opportunity to go back to Mulago, that would enable –(Interruption)

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, hon. Dombo, for giving me way. I would like to inform you that in 2005, the Ministry of Health changed the recruitment exercise of health workers. They re-centralised the recruitment and actually asked all the districts to submit their vacant positions to the ministry and it did advertise for all the districts.

I was the secretary for health in Mpiji but I want to inform you that even when they did that, many districts and many health centres did not attract the health workers. The issues of not attracting and retaining health workers are well known by the Ministry of Health but they do not want to bring them out.

MR DOMBO: I thank the Member for the information. But I want to tell you that that even when the Ministry of Health advertised for positions of doctors, the recruitment was supposed to be done by the respective districts –(Member timed out)

8.09
MR IBRAHIM MUWULIZE (INDEPENDENT, Buikwe County West, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the committee for a good report. The committee has touched many areas that concern us but I will go to the area of those health units and hospitals that are placed in unique areas. Kawolo is one of them as mentioned among others like Iganga and Kilyandongo. But I pray that the ministry puts much emphasis to bring these hospitals on board especially in the area of handling such cases of emergency like accidents. 

Surely, a hospital like Kawolo has the greatest number of accidents in Uganda, leave alone Mulago because those at Mulago are referred from Kawolo and other areas. But otherwise this is a centre, which handles so many accidents. I request the ministry to think of such units to get special handling units. Either they will be trauma centres or whatever they will call them to handle accidents because without this, even if they give us as many ambulances – however, we thank the ministry because now just in my two years of term of service, they have handed me two ambulances to take to this unit. I am grateful for this but even then this hospital needs such a unit that will handle accidents right there in order to reduce on the number of people who would die in the process of being transported from such places to Mulago. 

And these units, which were put up long time ago, have lost most of their systems. I will give the example of Kawolo that I visit every other time. When you look at the plumbing system in this hospital, you really shudder. The pipelines are all blocked and you find that every ward has sanitary units attached with what would be the WC systems but they are not functional. These hospitals are not only for the peasants down there but because of their location, even a person who is a diplomat can be there and they see what is in place is not catered for. I hope the ministry will pick this and it considers funding these hospitals. 

On the other hand those ambulances that are taken to such hospitals, which are over generalized, like general hospitals can only serve one week or two with the fuel that is given. They do not have fuel at all that can suffice the purpose for which they are placed. The districts are saying they are desperate and that they do not have money for this kind of purpose. 

About cost sharing, is it really the ministry’s position that cost sharing must continue? If not then these units face a problem. They should not over generalise and we should take special and keen interest in catering for such units. 

The area of SFG was also alluded to. Now that according to Parliament and the government Universal Primary Education is compulsory, measures should be taken to ensure that every school going child is actually at school. However, the structures are not in place. If a place like my constituency, which is only 30 miles from Kampala lacks schools, how about those other distant areas? So the Ministry of Education should think of putting structures and facilities in place. Again as regards SFG, I do not think it should be scaled at all because we are very wanting in this area. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is it okay if we reduce the time to three minutes? Also, you can stop thanking and go straight to the major issues. 

8.14
MS JANET OKORIMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me the opportunity. I just have a few comments to make and strictly on the health sector. 

On page 23, salaries of health workers, the committee noted the urgency with which these salaries for the health workers should be handled but that the Ministry of Health was to find Shs 18 billion from within the sector budget ceiling for this financial year to enhance salaries.  

I think the issue of facilitation for the health staff should be taken as a matter of urgency. This is because once they are not facilitated, even those health structures become useless. You are aware of the very many strikes that have been taking place in many health units across the country. I think the country needs to take this very seriously if we want to save the lives of our people.  

We have talked about recruitment and retention of health workers, but how are they living? What structures or houses are they living in? In some places, health workers share just a small room and yet they are expected to perform excellently. I think Minister of Health; you need to do a lot more concerning this sector.  

The other issue is that of upgrading Mubende and Moroto hospitals, which is on page 27. I am grateful for this but I hope it will not just remain on paper because sometimes Karamoja is left “to whom it may concern”. You can see that the nearest referral hospital now is Mbale or Lira, which are both very far away. Also, if these funds are got, I would like the ministry to tell us exactly what is going to happen in upgrading these hospitals to regional referral status because I would not expect you to just paint houses and you tell us Karamoja, you also have a regional referral hospital.

8.17
MRS MARGARET MUGISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will be brief because most of the issues have already been raised by colleagues. At the beginning of this year I raised a matter of national importance in this House. This was about Uganda’s fourth oldest school, Nyakasura School. The school was on the list of schools to benefit from the ADB loan to be rehabilitated but it was removed on sectarian grounds and it is unconstitutional. If you look at the paper, the reason that is given by the Ministry of Education is religious and Article 21(2) of the Constitution says no one shall be discriminated on the grounds of sex, race, religion et cetera.  

I asked the ministry here in this House the criterion that was used then and they said it was gender. Today you have come up with a paper, which says it is religion. You have listed Church of Uganda and Catholic schools, which is really unconstitutional. To pick schools on religious grounds is very unconstitutional. If it was gender I would accept because this is constitutional. 

This school is the fourth oldest school in Uganda with the most dilapidated structures and its geographical location does not attract teachers as it is far away from town. It has educated the cream of this country and it was struck off the list for the wrong reasons. It was there at the beginning but they struck it off.  

Madam Speaker, we want to seek redress. This is the oldest school in Western Uganda from Masindi to Kisoro before Ntare School. It is the oldest after Gayaza, Buddo and Kisubi; it is the fourth. Why was it struck off the list? Madam Speaker -(Interruption)- I have very little time because the time has been cut short.

Lastly, I want to appeal to the Ministry of Education to support hon. Guma’s suggestion that forcing people to learn subjects that they cannot pass will not help us. We will only end up getting people who are cramming. If I am going to be a lawyer, why should I study subjects like biology, physics and chemistry? At what point are they going to help? I know teachers are going to boo and jeer me but it is not important at all. If you do it up to senior two, it is okay but after senior four, it only reflects a nine on some people’s slips but it does not help me in my future. If I am going to be a doctor like Dr Mallinga, why be forced to study geography and literature?  

8.20
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I appreciate the quantitative increase in enrolment of education but all is not well. We have high level of juvenile delinquency, promiscuity, students have become arsonists, we have moral decadence and in these schools there is a problem of parenting. Foundation bodies seem to have delegated their responsibility in parenting and as you are aware, most of the secondary schools we have in this country are private and have loans from banks and now that schools are being burnt, this sector has a very big problem and I would like to hear what the ministry has for those who have invested in this sector.

Secondly, I would like to seek your indulgence for us to request the Minister of Education to bring to Parliament before the next budget a comprehensive plan to revisit the curriculum and education system. All is not well; our education system is not meeting the needs out there of the informal sector, entrepreneurship and even the public sector because if we do not do this, I can promise you that next year, I will be among those to mobilise against the education budget. 

On health, I would like to request that we invest more in primary health care. I think we cannot afford conventional medical treatment. Accessibility and affordability are not there; most people are going to private drug shops. I even hear more adverts of Mutuula ku ngo and herbalists. That is a clear testimony that people are no longer going to public health and even if you check, the Ministry of Health has more four-wheel drive vehicles than ambulances serving the community. 

So, can we also request that the Minister of Health presents a proposal before the next budget on how they intend to address the needs of this country? Other wise as per now, it is better we go preventive since we cannot afford to treat. I thank you so much. 

8.23
MS BEATRICE AMONGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report but I have looked at the annex and the BTVET schools, and I am surprised that I do not see the only community polytechnic that trains instructors for community colleges in the names of Abilonino Community Polytechnic Instructors College in Apac. It is missing and yet it is the only one in the country that trains instructors for the community polytechnics. So, what are we doing? If you see that institution, you will not believe the state in which it is because it was formally a TTC. 

About health; we have talked about payment and better salaries for health workers but I am completely put off by the attitude of the health workers, specifically in Mulago. In April this year I had the misfortune of nursing two people in Mulago. I want to inform you and the nation that I actually had to put a pint of blood under my armpit for so many minutes. I had to cover myself with a coat and towels to warm it so that it could be transfused. Why? Because the machine in which that blood would have been put before it is transfused was locked up on the ward and the person in charge of the key had disappeared for days. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to inform you that this past Friday, a student of Uganda Christian University Mukono was knocked by a boda boda in the night. This boy was rushed to Mulago. He needed transfusion urgently. He was given only one pint of blood instead of the six that he needed and the boy died. He was buried in Kabale last Sunday. 

I had a patient again in Mulago in April this year. He was admitted suffering from Meningitis. Four days later, he had not accessed the drugs. We are here reporting very proudly that on each ward there is a pharmacy but this man was not given any treatment. He was denied the drug that was prescribed for four days until I asked the medical superintendent. When they learnt that I was a Member of Parliament, the drugs appeared within ten minutes. So, what are we talking about? What is there to be proud of? I really find it painful that we sit in this Parliament and say, “pay more.” Is there a specific law in this country that enables a citizen that is aggrieved to personally sue these people who are inhumane as to enjoy people dying; people who should not be dying in this country? -(Member timed out)

8.26
DR JOHN ARAPKISSA (INDEPENDENT, Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On page 30, the Health Service Commission requests for a forum to discuss attraction and retention of health workers. I agree that even in my constituency, Kabroron health centre IV has had medical officers on and off. Well, for the reasons for poor attraction, I will restrict my explanation to medical officers. The general things that draw them away from those centres are poor housing, roads and other things. But let me build more on why they do not get retained. 

As I said, I will restrain myself to medical officers. After two to three years when these doctors have worked there, the world now being competitive as it is, they eventually want to come back for postgraduate and after qualifying maybe in anesthetics, ophthalmology or in paediatrics, they become over qualified and they cannot go back and be employed in the health centre IVs where they were. 

The districts first of all will not even want to employ them because even their pay is high. Secondly, these people are specialists. So they cannot go back again to work in that place. So, after every two to three years, the districts are forced to recruit -(Interjection)- no, when they are overqualified they get employed somewhere else. So, the district at that time is now forced to recruit new ones and they even prefer to recruit lower cadres like clinical officers or nurses. 

Another factor is that because of that high turn over, some districts are even trying to put a ban to prevent people from going for further studies. So in a way, districts are even discouraging people from getting employed at the health centre IVs because why should I go away from Mpigi here to go and work in Kabroron and then eventually I am retained and I can’t even come out? So, the possible solutions could be: we either recruit centrally as hon. Dombo was saying or we upgrade the health centre so that it can employ more than one doctor and especially if it can take on a doctor with a postgraduate qualification. 

Even so, when this doctor is alone in that place, he is not efficient because most of the time he is out either on capacity building or workshops. Actually the community does not benefit from that one doctor who is at the health centre IV generally because he is always away and after every two years you have to recruit another one. So, that is one reason why doctors cannot be retained at health centre IVs. 

On Education –(Member timed out)

8.30
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson, my sister ow’e Mmamba Nansubuga, for this wonderful report, and the committee at large for the same. I would like to make some observations on the education department especially on Makerere University. With all the problems of Makerere University, the committee did not really cover quite a lot. When you talk about the social welfare of the lecturers at Makerere, for example, nothing is mentioned here and yet these are some of the causes of the strikes in the university. 

There is also the environment around Makerere University, the hostels; I am a parent but you find some of these hostels accommodate both sexes. I think time has come that the Ministry of Education should set benchmarks for a hostel to be able to accommodate students. You do not just let any Tom, Dick and Harry do any business they want to and expose our children to these kinds of dangers. I think the Ministry of Education should start from now. We do not want what happened in Budo to come up again and then they start running to say, “This is this.” We want the ministry to come up with a policy regarding these hostels around the university.

Lastly, I would also like to talk about the Cancer Institute in Mulago. I am very happy that the Cancer Institute has been given a bit more money compared to the previous budget. However, I want to warn the Minister of Health about further diversion of money. Yesterday I had a chance to talk to the hon. Minister of Health and I did express to him my disappointment over the way the Cancer Institute in Mulago looks like. When they get this money, hon. Minister, let us avail doctors. I happen to have a patient who is suffering from cancer and I very often visit Mulago Cancer Institute. They only have one or two doctors –(Interjection)- one doctor, you can imagine! And then one nurse or two nurses. So, increasing their funding should also be proportional to the people who are working there. 

8.33
MS CAROLINE AMALI (INDEPENDENT, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the Committee of Social Services for the commendable job they have done on the report. 

I will not waste time; I just want to go on to Ministry of Health. It is good both ministers are here. I have an issue to raise on page 31 of this report on health centre IIs, IIIs and IVs. If you internalise all the issues being talked about concerning the health centres, you see that there is disaster. First of all, I would like the ministry to know that we have over 80 districts in this country but we have only 11 referral hospitals. So, I want to emphasise this to the ministers of health; you really need to work on the health centres because they are the ones that are helping out there. Amolatar District, my constituency, is served by only one health centre IV that is operational but there is nothing there. There are situations like lack of drugs, lack of medical officers; the list is endless. 

I do not know whether the ministers are aware that in Amolatar District, the only health centre that we have has an existing theatre that is fully equipped but is not operational because we do not have the medical staff that is supposed to be working there, and yet people are dying of diseases each and everyday. As I talk, the only referral hospitals that are near the district are Soroti and Lira and they are over 100 kilometres away. By the time you get a patient to those areas, you find that it is too late. So, I call upon the ministers concerned to visit this health centre IV theatre that we have. It is fully equipped by good friends of the district but is not operational. I do not know what you are thinking about that. I want you to really take this into consideration and come and help because the situation is not so good -(Member timed out) 

8.36
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just going to use this opportunity to basically inform the House on matters concerning our health services. I want to quote briefly from the second five year development plan of the UPC, 1966 to 1971. (Laughter) It is important, and I think you should hear this one: “The second plan will take the total number of beds in government hospitals to 9,000 which is more than an 80 percent increase over the 1964 figure…” and then there is a brief description. 

Another element of that is that besides these new hospitals, there is a programme of extension, modernisation and improvement at 20 existing hospitals. I initially was looking at this to see where we have reached as a country. I went to the Ministry of Health to find out how many hospital beds we have in 2008 as far as Uganda is concerned. I received a document from the Ministry of Health and the beds in government hospitals in 2008 are 9,448, meaning there is no significant increase in the number of beds available for the citizens of Uganda despite the fact that from the time of the planned programme, the population has more than trebled. 

That programme was worked out when Uganda had less than 400 doctors. Today we are generating about 200 doctors per annum but yet we still have a problem of no medical staff in health centres and the hospitals are dilapidated. I have heard talks about hospitals. Kawolo was one of the hospitals mentioned, Kiryandongo was a hospital, which was created under this planned period, Kamuli was included. Go across the country –(Interjection)- There was one in Kamuli-(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Bugiri, not Kamuli.

MR AKENA: Bugiri, yes; then it was relocated. This was before. They started with a plan for 22 hospitals and ended up with 24. The point I am making is that, what has happened to our health services? 

I also wanted to comment on education because there are some facts, which come out, that really show that there is a serious problem, which we need to address. If we thought that we are growing, we are developing and yet we cannot deliver services to our people, there is something seriously wrong. If -(Member timed out)

8.39
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too would like to thank the committee and the ministries that are involved in the report.

Let me start with unemployment in our hospitals. About two weeks ago, I brought up an idea to increase on the period of interns before they are released to go the field. I want to repeat this, especially now that the directors are here. We should increase the period of internship so that the interns work for us in our hospitals before government can let them out. 

I would like to say something about what Prof. Latigo said, that is, fragmentation. This is a national problem and government will not tremendously move on unless we tackle it. Fragmentation is too much and has caused confusion. I am saying this because the Leader of the Opposition stood up to oppose it, but his shadow minister, Dr Epetait, supported it. So, you can see the confusion. (Laughter) 

Fragmentation does not take into consideration cost effectiveness in terms of administration, management and the facilities that are available. This is what is happening in the Ministry of Health, particularly at the Heart Institute. Because of fragmentation, economies of scale are not taken into consideration. Government should take the economies of scale into consideration to reduce on what can be used in one area. Without that, we will not do much.

The other issue that has been observed by the committee appears on page 15. I want to raise a question to the Chancellor of Makerere University on how much he is paying for bank charges for the 132 bank accounts. This is part of fragmentation. Government has to look into this problem and come up with solutions. 

Fragmentation is not affecting government alone; it is also affecting Parliament. Parliament gives out a lot of authority and allows a lot of commissions to be opened. This reduces on the money that should be going to the core groups by spreading it into many departments.

8.43
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (INDEPENDENT, Female Youth Representative): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I will go to page 11 where there is the issue of the school feeding policy. When the Bill for primary education was brought, I stood here and said that it was right for the parents to feed their children as well as government. However, in the event that the parents and government cannot feed the children, I have an alternative policy. 

In brief, my alternative is about reducing on the school-going hours from the six of kindergarten to three hours and for upper primary, we reduce to six hours. This will help to solve the problem of children studying while yawning in classes. There are types of food that cannot be packed for the children to go to school with. So, if they go back home early, they can feed on things like jackfruit, sugarcane and can even have time to interact with parents on social behaviour change and other activities.

On USE and UPE in the community schools, I would like to suggest that before government takes on any community school, it should first develop the infrastructure, address the payroll issues and recruitment. This will help us to decongest schools, solve the teacher to pupil ratio and morale boost the teaching staff.

Let me now turn to the Ministry of Health. I told you that I was a secretary for health so I have quite a lot of experience on health issues. When I looked at the ministerial policy statement for Ministry of Health and especially the work plan and road map on maternal health, I realised that the Ministry of Health is losing focus. I am saying this because they are not mentioning issues to do with family planning. I do not know whether it is because the President does not support it, but they are not talking about antenatal care or reproductive health, which are key factors in the health of a human being.

The Minister of Health is even so silent about HIV/AIDS. They are mentioning the Uganda Aids Commission but not talking about the intervention.

Let me also talk about drug stock-outs. They are telling us about satellite pharmacies that will solve the problem of drug stock-outs but you know that drugs are being sold by health workers. Sometime back, I heard the minister talking about marking -(Member timed out)

8.46
MRS FLORENCE SEKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report. I want to, however, comment that there was need for the committee to address the issue of mental health. Of recent we have seen parents strangle their children and kill themselves and some have decided to slaughter them. It is also true that couples are chopping their partner’s private parts; for sure, this is a mental problem –(Laughter)– which should be addressed by the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Gender and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I am not happy that nothing has been said about this issue because this is now prevalent in the country and we may end up seeing more of these cases. We need research and information on how the ministry is going to handle this situation.

Madam Speaker, the causes of mental illness are many, like stress, psychological torture and others, but even for those that could be treated like epilepsy, people cannot find medication at health centres IIIs. We need this to be properly handled so that those who can be saved can be helped. I would like to ask the ministry to come up with a sensitisation programme to help family members, communities and children on how they can easily identify violent reactions in a home so they can run away for safety; this is very important. It is important that awareness is carried out in schools, communities and all important public places.

Lastly, let me say something on education and that is accessibility of universities to those students with disabilities, especially the facilities. You find that students are complaining that they cannot reach the library. I would like to propose that the Ministry of Education should not only look at public universities but also private institutions because they are taking on Ugandans. Those Ugandans who go to private universities should find accessible facilities, but now they are being discriminated because of the stairs and other things. So, if you are promoting children with disabilities in primary schools, they should also have access in secondary and tertiary institutions to all the facilities so as to maximise their potential. 

8.49
MS MARGARET ACHILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for this report. I just have a few comments to make, in the interest of time. 

First is the observation that has been made by the committee on the school feeding policy. It is true that the parents must be responsible for the children that they bear in terms of supporting them in feeding, education and making sure they are in good health. However, at this point in time, places that are drought prone like Karamoja are not able to give food to children to carry to schools because the parents are not able to feed the families. In Karamoja, children are attracted to schools because of the food that is supplied by the World Food Programme. So, I would like the ministry to examine the situation in the different parts of this country and the committee should ensure that parents are consulted on how to provide food for these children in schools. 

My second point is on recruitment of teachers in secondary schools. It is good for teachers to be given some incentives before they go or leave a certain area. This is not a new idea because it was provided for even in the primary schools. There is a serious scenario that has been played around at the Ministry of Finance - hardship allowance has been very difficult to get. I remember that the last time I was teaching, hardship allowance had gone up to eighteen months and this would go a long way to demotivate teachers in such areas. The ministry should make sure that they get clear criteria so that the disadvantaged areas do benefit from this, instead of the case of the district quotas where even well-to-do districts are benefiting from affirmative action. 

The other issue is that we have realised that the service delivery in the country is really lacking. Despite that, I want to commend the Ministry of Health for starting a class programme in Karamoja. Today, we have mobile clinics but I would urge the ministry to equip these mobile clinics with bush related packs. The diseases that we have in the bushes are snake bites, dog bites and Malaria. These clinics should be equipped so that we can reduce the problems of health that we have in Karamoja. Madam Speaker, I want to stop there in the interest of time. Thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, ordinarily, we allow 21 Members to contribute but today we have bent over backwards and 30 Members have contributed to this report. I think we should not push beyond that. I have noted those who want to speak and tomorrow we have the Committee of Agriculture report, I will see them. I want to invite the Minister of Education. Please, answer thematically rather than Member by Member otherwise we might have 30 questions with 30 answers.

8.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition gave us a summary of his observations, which are very pertinent, and I would like to commend him and we will take two of them and see how we can implement them. 

The first comment, which is very pertinent, is about the budget for technical institutions. I would like to inform the House that the budget for technical institutions has risen from 3.5 percent of the Ministry of Education budget to seven percent this financial year, which is substantial. So, we are spending around Shs 62 billion on technical institutions. As we speak now, there are more graduates than technicians and yet it should be the other way round. So, I have taken that point and we have already started working on it. That is why we increased the budget for technical institutions by doubling its budget.

The other area, which the Leader of the Opposition talked about, was under funding of primary education and the figure given per student per year was Shs 1,400. I want to add that apart from the variable factor, which is Shs 1,400, we have the fixed amount of Shs 100,000 per school. So the fixed plus the variable, although not enough, is more than the Shs 1,000 that was stated here. 

On USE, the figure which the Leader of the Opposition quoted was almost right, about Shs 50,000, and this figure is substantial especially in the rural areas. Some of the secondary schools are applying to partner with government because for most of those schools, you find that almost a third of their budget is never met. So if they get this assured income of Shs 47,000 per student per term, it improves on their finances. We know that the figure is still low but it is significant in the rural areas and we are working very hard to see that it goes high.

On the Makerere University problems, as we speak now, government has already passed the policy on institutions of higher learning and they are going to be very far reaching. We are going to publish them in a White Paper. These resolutions are going to have far reaching impact on higher education especially the funding which has been a problem in institutions of higher learning. We know we have had that problem and after the visitation committee, we have gone ahead and discussed this white paper in Cabinet and we have approved some of those decisions and we are going to use them for the next five or ten years to come.

The Leader of the Opposition suggested that we consolidate the gains already made under UPE, and this is true. Some of the contributors have referred to the drop-out rate which is very high. This is true, but we are aiming at ways of improving on the drop out rate. At the moment, it is about 49 or 50 percent. That is why someone said that we enroll one million and by the time they are registering for PLE, we have almost 440,000, a drop out rate of more than 50 percent. 

We have had a review of the policies. Some of you Members were in Mukono when we had a conference for two days and we resolved how to solve these issues. We are going ahead to resolve these issues, which are as per our decisions in Mukono – and I know hon. Okupa was there and he contributed quite a lot of ideas during that meeting.

Another problem that we have been having is reduction of the money for construction in primary schools. We would like to state that this amount was reduced when we increased the salaries of teachers and we did not have counter funding from the Ministry of Finance. However, we have come back and now we have decided on how to send money for construction of buildings for primary schools. We have started with the pupil-classroom ratio of 70 to one. If your district has more than 70 pupils per classroom, you are receiving money for construction. It is those who have less than 70 that we are not sending money to but as we increase the funding, those will also receive money. And we sent to every Member of Parliament this policy, where every district where you have 70 children per classroom and above receives money under SFG. We talked with her even before I came here and I showed her that in Pader you are getting over Shs 600 million. 

Madam Speaker, there was a question, do we have a policy on UPE? Yes, we know that government has its role, which includes construction of classrooms, buying books, paying teachers, et cetera. The parents have a role too; your role is to pay for a pen, exercise book, uniform, and make sure that your child carries some food when he/she is going to school. Therefore, there is a policy on what government should do and what the parent must do. 

When it comes to secondary education, we have had a problem again with regard to USE. Some Members have complained that we are not implementing the one secondary school per sub-county plan. It is true. As we speak now we have established 750 secondary schools. The total of the sub-counties so far is about 911; so we are moving. We still have a deficit but we are moving to make sure that we cover that deficit. 

When it comes to laboratories, I would like to state here that government had decided to borrow money from the World Bank to make sure that all USE schools have basic necessities: laboratories, classrooms and so forth. This year, maybe next month, we will bring to this House a loan request from the World Bank of US $150 million; and we are going to have this money and the next phase will also be US $150 million, up to three phases where we are going to make US $450 million. The phase, which should be ready for disbursement beginning next year, will build about 150 secondary schools. This is over and above the African Development Bank loan where we are going to rehabilitate 42 secondary schools. 

And I would like to inform my sister from Kabarole that among those schools that are going to be rehabilitated is Nyakasura. Although it missed under ADB, it is going to be rehabilitated under the World Bank loan. When we have about 42 schools plus 150 schools, you can see that at least every district will have one or two schools rehabilitated or built under USE. So, we are moving to make sure that we create infrastructure in secondary schools under USE. 

But under USE, what is the role of the parents and what is the role of the government? The government again has to put in place infrastructure; we have to buy text books, we have to pay teachers and even buy computers. So what is the role of parents? The parents’ role is to make sure that the son or daughter has a uniform, a pen, exercise books, and carries food to school.

These policies are new. I know we have some areas where we need to improve but we would like to state that we are going to review these policies as we go along. But as hon. Dombo said that there are some teachers who are being punished for charging fees for food, these teachers have got circulars on what to do. If they disobey the circular, they are disobeying lawful instructions. In order to change the policy, we must review it and then come up with a policy. But if you issue a policy and the employee just decides to do what he or she wants, then you must be in charge and that is why these teachers who received circulars on what to charge and what not to charge and they go and charge what is not included have to be disciplined. 

When it comes to schools, which do not have management committees, I would like to urge Members of Parliament to make sure that this is done because management committees are part of the governance system in schools; so are councils in the universities and so are governing councils in other tertiary institutions. So, we must make sure that these governing councils and management committees are in place. But they should also know their roles. We have published our policy papers specifying the role of management committees, the role of governing councils, the role of university councils, the role of PTAs and so forth. These are the guiding policies, which we require management to follow.

One Member suggested that we should make sure that primary children go to school. Yes, the law we passed here, which is awaiting assent, made going to primary school compulsory. So, that one has been addressed.

Universities:

It is true Makerere has had problems, and we read about them but the government, as I have stated, has looked into these problems. 

The welfare of lecturers:

A decision was taken about one and a half years ago, to enhance the salary of a professor, which was about Shs 1.1 million at that time to a minimum of Shs 2.8 million. This has been implemented. What happened is that while government took over one year to implement it, there was unrest in Makerere and the council decided to enhance the teachers’ pay to Shs 3.1 million from professor going downwards. They used internally generated funds to enhance their salaries. Government, after one year, calculates how much is enhancement for all the public universities and it comes out with Shs 3 billion. The Ministry of Education and Sports with that of Finance worked according to the numbers and salary and wages per university and ended up with Shs 1.64 billion for Makerere and the rest for the other universities. 

They wrote an enhancement cheque for Shs 1.64 billion but there was no covering letter and the administration there kept the money because they had already enhanced. The government had already sent the scale on how to use that money. Other universities, which did not have internally generated funds, paid according to the guidelines. Makerere University had that problem of how to use that money until we asked the Ministry of Finance to come out with a way forward because to change from one Vote to another it must be the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. So, they changed and that money has been used for other expenditures on the campus. That is the story which you hear of “our money, our Shs 1.64 billion.” Yes, the money went there as enhancement but it went when they had already enhanced themselves using the internally generated funds. And, therefore, when you get that story, this is how it came about. But we have resolved how to use that money although there are still some who would not like that money to be used that way.

I think these are the major issues, which were raised by Members of Parliament. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for doing such a good job. I would like to thank all Members of Parliament for having contributed so positively; I commended all your contribution when you were away, Leader of the Opposition, we received them very well and in good faith. And we are going to get to improve on them; whenever we get positive criticisms from every corner whether the back benchers on the NRM side or from the Opposition side we appreciate but what we request you is that when we have come to agreement and say this is the way forward and then you go back on the Floor and you begin from where we left, we get discouraged. We say but we have discussed this thing, it is again being brought here. So, this is my only   request from the other side and from my back benchers.  I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, hon. Minister of Health. Why are you going there? [Hon. Members: “The height”.] Oh, the height. (Laughter)

9.09
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like also to thank the chairperson and her committee for a very comprehensive presentation that they made of the Ministry of Health. However, the response I received from the Shadow Minister of Health was rather flawed and in many ways very strong language was used where it was not called for. He mentioned something about the format of the ministerial statement. The format was altered this year and almost all the ministries had problems with fulfilling the format. But we afterwards issued a corrigendum, which should have made it easy for the hon. Shadow Minister to follow our presentation. 

I would like to emphasise to the honourable members that I have been all over the country; stock outs are occurring because of two major reasons: One, when the district health officers do not submit their requests for drugs on time that creates problems. 

Secondly, stealing of drugs: we are dealing with that problem in many ways now; we are working with Police and quite a number of people have been arrested with government drugs. We are going to start labeling government drugs. 

We are trying to increase the salaries of doctors and nurses so that we can abolish private practices for nurses and doctors. We appreciate the role of private practice in the country but those who wish to go into private practice should not at the same time be working for the government. 

The Shs 8 billion, which was meant for the regional referral hospitals; by the time this money was released by the Ministry of Finance, we had already started projects in old referral hospitals and I distributed a small explanation. I do not know whether all the Members received it. We had already signed contracts for the works in the regional referral hospitals; therefore, we had to distribute this money according to the works which we had started in the regional referral hospitals. But from now on, the money is going to go directly to the regional referral hospitals and the same thing will not arise anymore. 

The Cancer Institute and the Heart Institute: hon. Members, we need to build a new Cancer Institute. The one we have now is dilapidated and should be condemned. I agree with you. Give me the money and we shall build a Cancer institute. We budgeted for much more money than what we are receiving now -(Interjection)- Finance should answer that. Are they willing to give us money to build a new Cancer Institute? We are willing to build a new Cancer Institute; we are willing to start tomorrow if you give us the money. For the Heart Institute as you know, we have already started heart surgery and they are going to start construction so that they have their own unit. 

They have their own account - the Cancer Institute has its own account. I tried to explain about the Shs 1 billion but some of the Members were distorting what I was saying because I said, “Shs 1 billion was sent to Mulago,” at that time the Cancer Institute had no account and their budget was within Mulago Hospital and Shs 700 million was sent to the Cancer Institute and they utilised it. As you know Cancer medicines are extremely expensive. Only 300 million – because of the construction of the factory at Luzira Quality Chemicals, which was seconded to this country from India, and as the money was not forthcoming to continue the construction, the government had an obligation to pay for the construction.  We had to find the money from somewhere. Otherwise, the government would have been in a lot of trouble because of the kind of contract we had with those people. So, Shs 300 million was used to support ARVs.

Ladies and gentlemen, let me make a clarification: Global Fund and GAVI have both been reinstated. We are getting money from the Global Fund, and we are going to start getting money soon because we have been approved from GAVI. So, both of them have been reinstated. We are going on with the problem of collecting money from those who were supposed to refund the money and the case is also going on but that is out of our ability; it is in another ministry altogether. So, please, understand us. We have tried our best to recover Global Fund and also GAVI. The hon. Members of Parliament should appreciate our efforts; it was quite difficult. 

Under funding:

The Ministry of Health, like any other ministry, is under funded. We agree with that as it is pointed out by the shadow minister. We are extremely under funded. Otherwise, this is a highly technical ministry; we know what we have to do as far as providing health care for our people is concerned. But we do not have the money. So, please, understand our situation. We are waiting for the oil; as soon as that comes -  

The hon. Shadow Minister of Health said that we absorbed only 60 percent, which is not true. Actually our absorption was more than 95 percent. Four percent of that was because of the money which was not released. But the money we could not absorb, which was returned to the Treasury, was less than one percent. That is what I would like to assure the hon. Shadow Minister and he should have consulted the corrigendum, which was released later.  

The Referral Hospitals:  

I would like to allay the fears of the hon. Member of Parliament for Tororo. Tororo is one of the hospitals, which are going to be upgraded after Moroto. So, she should not worry. Tororo is going to be upgraded.  

All referral hospitals, it is true, are congested. It is for several reasons: our people have formed habits of going to certain places for health care, like Mulago. No matter if somebody is near Nsambya or near Kalerwe where we have a health centre IV, they will bypass those places and go to Mulago, even for minor diseases. So what we are doing, especially in Mulago, is trying to plan. We are going to construct 400 bed hospitals in Nakawa area, Kalerwe and some other place. Already the Chinese are going to construct a 100 bed hospital in the Naguru area. We are signing the contract soon and they will start construction. So, it is in plan to decongest Mulago and also to strengthen the health centre IVs upcountry.  

We are borrowing money to repair 100 bed hospitals. In most of them the plumbing is gone, the windows are broken, the iron sheets are too old; they need replacing. His Excellency allowed us to borrow about US $400 to US $500 million and this year we shall be borrowing US $100 million. This is going to be around the period of about four to five years. So, we are seriously working to repair the 100 bed hospitals; we are also going to use the same money or work out with the Ministry of Finance to make sure that we functionalize the health centre IVs and health centre IIIs in order to decongest the general hospitals. We are also going to decongest regional referral hospitals.

We are training doctors, but I hope the honourable member knows that the responsibility of recruiting doctors for the districts and recruiting nurses for the districts is the function of the districts.  I have often complained here. It was passed in this House, I used to sit there. I told you then that decentralisation of health services was wrong. Now you are beginning to feel it –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wind up, please.

DR MALLINGA: I speak so clearly, everybody should be able to understand.  

District Service Commissions:

I am afraid hon. Nalubega informed the House wrongly. The district service commission can carry out interviews for the districts. We can advertise for them that Gombe Hospital has so many positions and then we interview for them. But we do it on the understanding that those people are going to go to Gombe Hospital. But we are not taking over and there was no time when we posted people from the centre to the district hospitals. We did not do that.

I am going to come here, there is resistance from LC Vs. but I am preparing a paper for Cabinet to re-centralise. I hope you will support us. That is all I wanted to say.  Now I go to the queries by the Members of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maternal health is most important.  

DR MALLINGA: Okay. We have a plan regarding maternal child health. The plan is already on paper and we know how much money we need [Hon. Members: “How much?”] US $81 million. We are in the process, we are discussing it with donors and we are also going to initiate discussions with the Ministry of Finance to fund that plan so that we seriously start working on maternal child health. We have to reduce maternal mortality, we have to reduce infant mortality, we have to reduce the under 5 mortality. (Applause) We have had a pilot in the district of Soroti where we started off with maternal mortality which was 700 per 100,000 live deliveries. We were able to reduce it from 700 to less than 200 by making sure that almost all the women delivered at health centres, had had antenatal care, by having prompt transfers from health centre IIIs to health centre IVs or to Soroti hospital - for those who needed further skilled care, whether they needed caesarean sections we made sure that they were transferred to health centre IVs where that could be done or to the regional hospital or to the nearest hospital where these surgeries could be performed.

Therefore, the road map for reduction maternal and natal mortality will cost US $81 million. We are mobilising donors and government through the ministry. 

Decongestion of Mulago hospital, I have already talked about that.

Hon. Najjemba, we are actually emphasising prevention, health education and personal hygiene. 

Gombe hospital, I told you the other day, I do not know how many times I will tell you. Gombe hospital is going to get an ambulance very soon. 

Hon. Karooro Okurut, programmes have already started for both print and electronic media using FM stations to sensitise the population on non infectious diseases like Hypertension, Diabetes, and others, which are not due to infections but are diseases of behaviour. We are going to start sensitising our people on diet and on how to exercise and in order to prevent these diseases. I think I have most of what the Members wanted to know –(interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The adverts on the streets-

DR MALLINGA: I think some of these things are better handled by the Police under our advice. The National Drug Authority I am sure has not approved some of these drugs as they claim. So, I think we are going to emphasise that, we are going to follow up and make sure that we deal this situation.

Hon. Yiga - let me explain to honourable members. When you have a health centre IV in your constituency, whether it is government or it is a missionary hospital, we cannot build another health centre IV. When you have a hospital, be it a general hospital or district hospital, or a regional referral hospital in your constituency, we cannot again build a health centre IV there. We can build health centre IIIs. Hon. Yiga has a missionary hospital, health centre IV, in his constituency. We are not going to build a Health Centre for there.

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable minister that that arrangement he is talking about does not exist. In fact, I would wish that he could spare time and I take him there so that you show us that facility you are talking about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is better. Please, arrange to go with him.

DR MALLINGA: I shall talk to him and we shall go to his constituency and see. (Laughter)

Hon. Okupa, take us to your place, we would like to see your theatre. 

About the AIDS Commission, you know this Commission was the brain child of the President. He does not want it to be very far from him and that is why he keeps it within the Ministry of the Presidency. However, the field work has got to be done by technical people in the Ministry of Health. Therefore, it has got to be budgeted, or at least, it has got to have some relationship with the Ministry of Health. We are providing health care, so it was decided that it should be budgeted for in the Ministry of Health. However, if the honourable members want to completely remove it from the ministry of Health, it is your decision. We would be willing to follow what you say.

Hon. Odit -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not need to go Member by Member, unless it is really different from the issues you have raised in the earlier clarifications. 

DR MALLINGA: Hon. Odit, DDT as you know, you are an agriculture man, was not meant to have any bad intentions to be sprayed in Apac or Oyam. It was good intentions. We have trained our people to such an extent that there is no spillage. We have not had any reports in the areas which we have sprayed with Icon that there has been contamination outside the houses. The spraying is carried out inside the houses. There has never been any evidence of spillage outside because of the high training we have carried out of the people.  Actually, there are people who are interested in malaria. There are drug manufacturers who see that their business is going to collapse if we eradicate malaria in this country. They are coming up with this reason of saying we shall not buy your crops. But the crops are not contaminated, and we are –(Prof. Anokbonggo rose_) Do I give way?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed. No, hon. Member!

DR MALLINGA: The clinics constructed by NUSAF in areas which go along with the Ministry of Health plan, we shall take them over. 

Kawolo hospital, you have two ambulances and yet you keep on complaining -(Laughter)

Amolatar, I have already answered, recruitment is up to the district. 

Hon. Akena, we built those 100 bed hospitals, but you should understand that this country went through a very difficult period. We are just recovering. But more, there has been construction at the health centre IIIs and IVs that has increased the number of beds but we have to functionalise. That is the only responsibility we have now.

Hon. Nalubega, family planning is very active; HIV/AIDS sensitisation is being carried out. Hon. Sekabila, the supply of medicines is according to the requests from the district health officers. If they request for certain drugs which we can supply, for example, you mentioned epilepsy, we can supply the drugs for that within our budget ability. I advise the members of parliament to work with the district health officers to make sure that drugs reach your districts and also you have a responsibility as MPs to oversee the distribution of drugs in your constituencies. 

By now we should not have stock outs. I have been all over the country; there are no stock outs of the necessary drugs. If you have a stock out in your hospital, come and tell me. I am willing to go there with you and we find out why there is a stock out. Thank you very much for listening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, one small thing; this road map on maternal mortality and the US $81 million - I do not know whether it is a loan or a grant but if it is a loan, I hope you have taken into account the skirmishes that have been going on in this House on the structure of the loans you get. How much is for consultancy and how much is for capacity building etcetera. Please assure us on that one.

DR MALLINGA: I would like to assure you that the road map is already established. We know what to do but what we are lacking is money. This money will be properly used according to the plan.  

MR DOMBO: When the minister was still on the Back Bench, he lambasted the Ministry of Health as to why the Iranian man who was masquerading around that he could treat AIDS could not be arrested. Members have raised these issues which have been pinned around the whole country about enlargement of gadgets, doing this and that. You haven’t responded as a Ministry of Health. Is it healthy and are you going to deal with it?

DR MALLINGA: I cannot reveal all our plans on how to deal with that but we are working with the police to try and arrest and we have arrested some people. But I cannot reveal everything otherwise it will not be a plan.

9.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Ms Rukiya Chekamondo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I want to thank the committee and everybody for the contributions. I am just going to give a few answers and one of them is on the challenges on page 2 where the committee said that the Ministry of Finance deliberately failed to attend or honour their invitation. I wish to inform the House that the minister did not deliberately refuse to honour the invitation by the Committee of Social Services. He had made a written response to the clerk informing them of his other commitments. I want to inform the House that sometimes the minister really loves –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I am one of the few members who rarely rise on points of order especially to ministers. I am the vice-chairperson of this committee. We did invite the minister several times and even at one point, we compiled issues and invited the minister to come and nobody surfaced. Yet there are five ministers in that ministry. My chairperson even got the phone and called Dr Suruma and he in a very unfriendly response said, “Leave me alone; I do not have time to come for your committees.” That is why we put it in this report that we could not get cooperation. Is the minister in order to come here and claim that the minister wrote to us giving reasons for not coming when actually we were disappointed as a committee? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think you answer the policy issues which you know but if you do not know what transpired in the committee do not talk about it. (Laughter) 

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have said it because I got a communication of this later and I think more on this will be answered by the minister himself. 

Otherwise, on the issue of releases as the Members said that there are delays in releases in the Ministry of Finance; I want to inform the House that Ministry of Finance follows quarterly reports and when ministries delay to submit reports on the previous releases, Ministry of Finance has to wait for these reports to come before it releases money. It is not intentional. It is sometimes delayed because individual ministries delay to submit their quarterly reports. 

The other one is the issue on page 9 where the committee was requesting the Ministry of Finance to offset the VAT component. I wish to inform the House that this is under review for consideration during the budget execution. I think we are yet to consider this one.

The issue of Ministry of Finance waiving taxes on utilities as water and electricity for the Ministry of Health, I wish to inform the House that Ministry of Finance adequately provides for the required funds to meet utilities under the health sector and so there is no need for the waiver in this case. 

Madam Speaker, there was an issue where you said that Ministry of Finance should provide the Shs 7 billion saved from ICT. I think this is to be communicated after consultations in the ministry. I wish to inform Members that I have taken your concerns and noted them and especially the serious concern on the cancer institute, heart institute, maternal health and others. And I wish to inform you that I will report this because I am equally touched by this. 

Ministry of Finance would have loved to support all the ministries but all of you are aware that our envelope is small. The only issue I request Members is that just as we prioritised roads this financial year, come next financial year, we should look at areas that we feel again should be prioritised. Because of our small envelope, if we move prioritising serious areas slowly, we may end up solving our problems. I thank you.

9.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Rosemary Seninde): Madam Speaker, allow me to use this opportunity to thank you so much for supporting our report. Allow me to make a few corrections to put the record clear. There was something interchanged in our report - Mulago Hospital is Vote 161 and not 162 and Butabika is 162. Another thing is that Vote 139 of Kyambogo University is Shs 15,411,347,000 for the recurrent budget and the development budget is Shs 222,845,106. I want to make that clear.

Another thing that I want to clarify on is that Busitema University is Vote 111. Also, Vote 140 of the Uganda Management Institute is for Shs 425,499,000. I just want to make that clarification for the sake of the Hansard. 

For Vote 014 that is Ministry of Health headquarters, the recurrent budget is Shs 102,306,922,000. 

Hon. Members, I would like to thank the two ministries of Health and of Education for their cooperation. However, I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Finance and in particular the Minister of Finance; he should be cooperative because what we are doing is not for the sake of the committee or for the sake of Parliament. It is for our country, our people. If he does not cooperate, he is making our work very difficult. 

On the issue of VAT, my committee was almost throwing out the budget of the Ministry of Education simply because of the VAT queries that we could not answer. The minister was not in place to give us clarification. In fact I was even perturbed and I thank my Vice for having raised it as a point of order. 

The Ministry of Finance refused to respond despite our constant invitations. We invited both ministries and the Ministry of Finance but surprisingly we were with only the Ministries of Education and Health. We sat there without even an apology from the Ministry of Finance as to why he was not coming to attend the meeting. At the end of it, we wrote him a letter and we also attached the queries at least expecting a written response but he did not respond. So we made our report minus the contribution of the Ministry of Finance. 

By this, I would like to appeal to this honourable House that before we pass the budget for the ministry, the Minister of Finance must make clarifications before this House of all the queries that all the different sectors and committees have expressed or else we shall not pass the budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do adopt the report of the Committee of Social Services.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank the chair and her committee, the ministers and their teams, the clerks-at-table, the Leader of the Opposition, the Sergeant and all of you for being here. Tomorrow the plenary will meet in the afternoon. Reason: in the morning we are meeting to discuss the designs and the location of the Chamber for which Members were really pressing us that we should do it quickly. The House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 9.48 p.m. and adjourned until, Thursday, 28 August 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)

