Friday, 26 August 2011

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are welcome to this sitting. In my communication, I would like to reiterate what I said yesterday about the situation we are dealing with. The budget law certainly imposes on us some benchmarks and timeframes within which to do certain things. For the record, let me state Section 5 of the Budget Act on policy statements of ministries on estimates. Sub-section (1): “Each minister shall cause to be prepared and submitted to Parliament a policy statement of the relevant ministry on the preliminary statement submitted under Sections 2 and 3 by the 30th day of June in each year.”

Mr Chief Whip, this has caused us some delays because some of the ministerial policy statements did not come in time and this is causing us a really bad situation.
Section 8: “There shall be presented to Parliament by the sessional committees the reports on the budget estimates that fall within their respective jurisdictions by the 31st day of August in each financial year.” 

Today is the 26th day of August, tomorrow is a Saturday and the following day will be Sunday. By the time we come to Monday, it will be 29th. Tuesday might be a public holiday or it might not or it might be on Wednesday. So the 31st is around the corner. As of yesterday, we had only covered two reports of the sessional committees because of these delays I have talked about. I am, therefore, going to request that all the chairpersons of the committees should have their reports ready for publication by Monday morning. (Applause) All the chairpersons of the committees should do this. And I am directing the clerk to ensure that the staff are on standby over the weekend to reproduce whatever report will be available so that by Monday, we are ready to proceed. We are going to modify the proceedings of presenting the reports in a way that facilitates quicker and faster dealing with this situation. 31st August is too close and we want to do whatever it will take so that by that day, we have at least fulfilled our statutory responsibility to do what is necessary. Thank you.

2.37
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have absorbed your communication. The chairpersons had also been given that deadline of Monday - initially it was Friday - to see that their reports are in. We will try to make sure that these reports are in by Monday. However, for the record, I want you, Mr Speaker and Parliament, to appreciate the circumstances of this year, given that first ministers were sworn in on the 5th June and thereafter, they have been trying to take their offices and also be part of and own the policy statements that they found in their ministries, which were under preparation. I expect better timing and delivery of these policy statements and dealing with them next year where we are not likely to face the same situation. As you know, we came from elections, then swearing in of Parliament, appointment of ministers, vetting and swearing them in and people were trying to fit into their offices.

Secondly, also the committees were fairly new and there were cases of one or two issues which they could have asked the ministers to clarify afterwards. The ministers were sent back on one or two issues and again that caused a delay. But I want to assure you, Mr Speaker that the committees are doing their best and we have taken your communication and directive and we will work together with the chairpersons of the committees. Thank you.

2.39
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much. I expected the Government Chief Whip to come up with a proposal because as the Speaker said yesterday, I know he has power but sometimes he does not want to exercise his power. He wants to move by the House.

Two years ago we had a meeting with the accounting officers and the Secretary to the Treasury on a similar challenge. We did agree on a format of presentation of policy statements and the challenge that most committees have had is that - whereas I appreciate that the ministers were new, the technical people have always been there - most ministries did not comply with the Government standard; the format of presentation of policy statements which was adopted by this House and issued by the Secretary to the Treasury. 

Your technical staff, Mr Speaker, have acclimatised this format. So, whereas most MPs are new; they say no because they have the record. They say, “This is not the standard,” and that caused several committees to send back ministers. In fact last year it was even worse. There was a ministry, which just reproduced the report of the year before thinking that MPs do not read. So, I would like to request the Chief Whip that you have given us a standard; let ministries stick to the standard and the format. Once that is done, we shall not have a problem. 

Finally, last year we were in campaigns and most policy statements were not ready. So, I would like to request that you use your prerogative within the Budget Act to create more space. But I think your directive should stand; we should work. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yesterday, 36 Members contributed and that is a huge number by any standard. Let us roll up this issue and then see if there are other issues –(Interjections)- just hold on. I think it is still on the same matter. 

2.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): I just wanted to make one point. I want to propose that we meet mornings and afternoons starting with Monday. It seems even today the information did not trickle down to the Members and that is why being a Friday afternoon, we have few Members here. Is it possible for Parliament to meet next week, mornings and afternoons, so that we clear these statements?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is even possible to meet tomorrow, Saturday, so that we deal with this situation but we do not have any reports that are ready for us to handle tomorrow. So, Monday morning is now almost obvious. Yes, hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, I wanted to seek clarification from you because you said all reports are coming in on Monday. Do you mean we are going to deal with all of them on Monday? And if it comes on Monday, when are we beginning because even the Government Whip was talking of Monday, do we begin at 8, 9 or 10 because we are in a crisis and I know it is going to affect all of us? How do we move? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will come when I am adjourning the House. 

2.43
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to bring a matter of grave emergence in my district of Masaka to you, hon. Speaker and Members of the House. Yesterday the district of Masaka specifically the parishes of Kitanga, Fero and Bukoto in the sub-county of Kabonera had a very heavy rain storm with a lot of hailstones that really destroyed a lot of houses, crops and some animals died as well. So, the people of Kabonera are really in dire need of assistance. 

The people of Kitanga, for instance Mr Kasumba lost his two cows in the rainstorm; Madam Naluswata lost her house; the roof was blown off and in some of the rooms, Naluswata was raising some chickens and she had 150 chicks which she lost; Mr Dick Kakooza also of Kitanga lost all his crops -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, could you just state the bigger problem instead of the specific issues because if you are to list, there might be hundreds of people and it could take us a lot of time? Could you just state the problem that occurred and then what you are requesting? That might be simpler. 

MS KASE-MUBANDA: Mr Speaker, I am speaking about the destruction of crops, people’s gardens of beans, maize, and cassava in the hailstorm. And some of these people had received seeds from the NAADS Programme. So, there is a situation where people are desperate and they don’t know how they are going to repay their portions of these crops to NAADS as is expected of them. (Maj. Gen. Oketa rose_) I don’t need information, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member that information might be good since he is the Commissioner in charge of Disaster Management. So, you might want to take his information. 

MS KASE-MUBANDA:  Well, then I change my mind; I accept your information. (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. OKETA: Thank you, hon. Member and thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Member of Parliament, I wanted to help you by giving you information. What you have said is pertinent but there are procedures to be followed. There is a district disaster management committee chaired by the district chief administrative officer of your district. Under him is a disaster management technical team who, one, once the disaster occurs, make a quick assessment and report to the CAO who in turn writes a letter to the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister based on the assessment of the damage and indicating what is required to be supplied immediately.  

So, I would like to humbly request you to communicate back to the chief administrative officer to do that assessment, write the letter and pass it over to you and you present it to the Commissioner for Disaster, Office of the Prime Minister so that they give you the fast relief and action to be taken by other relevant ministries. That will pre-empt the problem in the beginning while we follow up with other matters. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MS KASE-MUBANDA: Thank you, hon. Member for that information. The people of Masaka asked me to take care of this immediate problem by bringing it to the House and to the attention of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness so that they can get immediate help. I will definitely take note of your advice and I believe that something is being done at the district level. But I, as the representative of the people of Kabonera, who are suffering and need immediate attention, I felt I should bring this matter to the House and plead with the Prime Minister and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to help us in this matter. 

Mr Speaker, the people who have experienced all this destruction are in dire need of food immediately. They have asked me to ask if they could be helped with bags of maize flour for immediate consumption. But also, the people are requesting that they would like to get maize and bean seeds, and cassava stems, so that they can replant and be able to stem off this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, do we have to go into the details? The point has been made. Can I ask somebody from the Government to make a comment on this so that your situation can be dealt with quickly? The details will come in the report that you are going to present to the authorities. 

MS KASE-MUBANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The people of Masaka, Kabonera, who have suffered all this disaster, think that they will need at least 500 bags of maize flour for food while they await the replanted crops to come. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am sure they will need beans; I am sure they will need so many other things, possibly blankets. So, you might be limiting what the ministry is going to do. 

THE MINSTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Matia Kasaija): Rt Hon. Speaker and dear colleagues, while I appreciate the agony the people of Masaka and particularly what the people in that sub-county are going through, I don’t know whether we are procedurally right that she continues labouring a point that she has made and has been understood very well. The Chairman of the Committee on Disaster Preparedness has given assurances, the Chief Whip is here and we are also here. The message has been delivered. Is it still necessary that she should still continue labouring on this point? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the hon. Member has finished so Government Chief Whip -

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Mr Speaker, first of all I want to express, on behalf of Government, sympathy to the people of Masaka who are faced with this disaster. We want to share the pain with you; but as I said yesterday, it is okay if hon. Members can inform the House, in my opinion, of the disasters that befall them in their constituencies or districts but the first point of call when you get a disaster is where you are going to get the solution from. As I said yesterday, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness is ready and my colleague from the Prime Minister’s Office explained the procedure.

So as Government, we take note and I am sure her CAO must by now have informed the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and the minister will take the necessary action to see what they can do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sebuliba-Mutumba, you had requested for an opportunity to make a statement. Do you want to keep this going on like this?

2.54
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I just wanted to weave it in with this clarification since it is almost similar. This one also happened last night; those of you who witnessed the storm last night around Kampala, it affected the area I represent in Parliament and part of the problem emanated from the Ministry of Works especially when hon. Nasasira was there, by allowing the Northern Bypass to be put in a swamp.

As if that were not enough, Government has come back again on the same swamp to put another project to treat water and they have dumped Lorries full of murram affecting the whole drainage system of Lubigi and it is affecting the surrounding areas. A 16 year old girl died last night; many motorists were stranded; business came to a standstill and there was no movement. 

Mr Speaker, whenever they bring such projects, I think they should involve people such that they can also have an input. Right now, I do not know what the Government side especially hon. Nasasira- he was talking about the solutions but I do not know which solutions they are going to put in place when they have already clogged the swamps because the people need assistance. This is Lubigi swamp as you are following the Northern Bypass. The area has been affected yet we are talking about conserving the environment. The water in the wetlands has nowhere to go and it is spreading all over.

I beseech Government to come out with a solution for the people down there. It is not the people now, it is Government doing this and they should come out and help the people. I am also appealing for assistance such that people are helped.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, hon. Mutumba brought the issue of flooding around Kawempe region in the Eighth Parliament and that matter was investigated by the relevant Committee on Infrastructure. The report, which is the property of this House, clearly found that the Northern Bypass hardly caused the flooding because I came on the Floor of this House and proved that flooding and people dying in Kawempe was happening long before the Northern Bypass was constructed.

The Northern Bypass itself was constructed after the environmental impact assessment was done. The main problem of Kawempe is how people settled in that swamp and blocked all the drains when hon. Mutumba was the chairperson of Kawempe Division. I remember when we toured that place together. We asked whether 99 percent of the settlements in that area had settled with plans approved by the City Council, of which hon. Mutumba was the chairman of the division. They all admitted that there was no plan. I remember hon. Mutumba trying to say that some of them came from Luweero during the war but he was the chairman LC III allowing those settlements. (Hon. Alaso rose_) Let me finish this point so that I do not forget it. 

The second point he is talking about is the new dumping. Again, we have a city with an authority, nothing should be dumped. All that dumping is actually outside the road reserve of the Northern Bypass and it is within the Kampala City Council Authority. Hon. Mutumba is the MP for the area. Maybe he should tell us how that dumping is done or whether it is being done with any approval by the Kampala City Council Authority -(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know we are pressed by time but there are some issues, which cannot be overtaken by the priorities that we have because there are emergencies dealing with lives.

On the issue of floods in the city, I expected the minister to say that much as this problem was an old problem, with the coming into existence of a road, these problems should no longer be there. The Northern Bypass should have worked, created a road and solved all the problems of flooding. 

We cannot run away from the fact that the Government has a responsibility here. You cannot say that the existence of that problem is the responsibility of my honourable colleague who was once a leader at that level of local government. What we need is for action to be taken now to remove the problem of flooding and prevent people from dying in the floods. There is a huge problem of poor physical planning in this country. It is the entire country and not just KCCA alone. You cannot say that we should not raise such issues in this House once they arise.

Lastly, it is good for hon. Oketta, from the perspective of disaster management committee, to refer the hon. Member of Parliament for Masaka back to the district. But I would like to inform you that most of these disaster committees being referred to here at the district level exist only in name. Some of them are neither aware of nor concerned about the disasters and therefore they do not put anything on the budget. A case in point is Moyo.

I attended a recent district council meeting of Moyo where they passed their budget. I looked at their priorities and there was nothing put for disaster. Suppose such a thing arises in Moyo District, can you confidently at the centre, count on the efficiency of your counterparts at the local level? So you need to check each other. How ready are your people at the local level to handle disasters as and when they arise? Please let us accept responsibility and avoid dodging things. Thank you.

THE DEPUITY SPEAKER: I am not going to extend debate on this matter so please wind up and then we move forward.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know disasters are going to hit this country, not only Kawempe but they are going to spread because of changes in weather patterns. What Government should do now is prepare for this.

For the other matter of Kawempe, the hon. Minister knows better. The floods were there, yes but not at the magnitude at which they are now -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleague. I would like to seek clarification because what seems to be going on, on the Floor is a ping pong of sorts. The minister blames hon. Mutumba, hon. Mutumba says it was hon. Nasasira. I somewhat find myself in the middle of this ping pong and would like to ask, since the flooding started, whether it started before the Northern Bypass or it started with the bypass? For us as Ugandans, that is not the big issue. The big issue is to stop the ongoing flooding in Bwaise and Kawempe, which has repeatedly come to this House and Government appears so helpless before the flooding that it watches children being washed away every time Kawempe and Bwaise floods. That is the most important thing.

We acknowledge the mistakes, whether you own up or not is inconsequential. What is important is; does the Government think it is important to rescue the people who swim in the floods of Kawempe; children who are washed away; people who are sickly? Is it important to rescue them and what is the plan? That is the clarification I want. I no longer want to hear about hon. Mutumba and hon. Nasasira. That for me does not help the women who slept in the flooded houses yesterday.

MR NASASIRA: You know there is what they say: “Now you are talking.” (Laughter) Now, hon. Alaso, you are also talking and that is where hon. Mutumba should have started from. Disasters should be collectively owned in order to be solved. As I talk now, Hurricane Irene – apologies to my colleague, hon. Muloni – is hitting New York but the mayor there and other leaders are all mobilising people regardless of whether you are a Democrat or a Republican and those who have to move out do it and those who can stay take the necessary precautions. 

The problem of Kawempe is that people – and that is the case not only for Kawempe – historically for many years and even now settled in wrong places and drainage systems were blocked. The Government now has - and hon. Mutumba knows this – a drainage master plan for Kampala, some of it has already been acted on. 

As I talk now there is a big drain that was dug all the way along the Northern Bypass. We are not yet there but until the whole thing is totally corrected, whenever there is a flood we are going to have this problem. But I also suggest that local leaders together with the city council, knowing that these are natural disasters, should shift people during the flooding season. This should be a joint effort which should involve hon. Mutumba who is the area MP. Thank you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I. THE REVISED REVENUE/EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012

II. THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE/EXPENDITURE FOR FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

3.06
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Alex Byarugaba): Mr Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues on the Foreign Affairs Committee, I would like to take this opportunity to present a report emanating from the analysis we made on the policy statements of the two ministries under this docket: the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, missions abroad and the Ministry of East African Affairs.

Due to time constraint, I have been advised to present an executive summary of this report and later go through the observations and recommendations. Otherwise, I would have loved to go through the entire report. I request you to allow me to lay on the Table this detailed report of the Foreign Affairs Committee regarding the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of East African Affairs and missions abroad.

The executive summary of this report is as follows: 

In accordance with the provisions of Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and in line with rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Foreign Affairs is mandated, inter alia, to critically examine Government recurrent and capital estimates and make recommendations there from. 

The Committee on Foreign Affairs considered Vote 006- Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Vote 021 - Ministry of East African Community Affairs and Votes 201 to 232 - Missions Abroad. It critically examined the policy statements from both ministries, and raised issues for response by the respective ministers. 

The committee proceeded to hold meetings with the ministers to discuss the respective ministerial policy statements and other matters incidental thereto and now reports to the House.

On Vote 006- Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Votes 201 to 233 - Missions Abroad, we discovered that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in the Financial Year 2010/2011 was allocated Shs 10.541 billion out of which Shs 3.17 billion was for wage recurrent and Shs 6.79 billion was for non-wage recurrent while Shs 669 million was for capital development. 

The ministry reported several achievements in the last Financial Year 2010/2011. Most notably, the ministry continued with its work of promoting regional and international peace and security, promoting Uganda’s export, inward investment, tourism and technology transfer and mobilising bilateral and multilateral resources for development. 

The committee in this report observes, among others, that the majority of heads of missions are political appointees. Of course with sadness, it notes that only two out of the 31 heads of missions are career diplomats and that 30 percent of all Foreign Service officers in other lower ranks are also political appointees. In line with this, the committee recommends that the appointing authority should address this imbalance. 

As for Vote 021- Ministry of East African Community Affairs, we found out that this ministry in the Financial Year 2010/2011 was initially allocated Shs 15.6 billion and received a supplementary appropriation of Shs 1.284 billion. The total amount received was Shs 16.884 billion. Out of the total budget, Shs 511 million was for wage recurrent; Shs 16.093 billion was for non-wage recurrent while Shs 280 million was for capital development. 

The ministry reported some achievements made in the Financial Year 2010/2011 such as conducting of studies like impact assessment of the Common Market in Uganda; remittance of Uganda’s annual contribution to the EAC Secretariat; launching of the EAC Common Market Protocol in Uganda and development of the Common Market Implementation Plan.

The committee in its report notes that every year, the ministry continues to budget for the office of the minister of state and yet the wait for that minister to be appointed continues. It goes on to recommend that the appointing authority should appoint a Minister of State for East African Community Affairs as approved by Parliament to cover the gap of political supervision in Arusha, just like other sister states in the region have done.

Mr Speaker, that was the executive summary of what is contained in the report. However, as I had earlier on indicated, I will go through – the other details are within the report. You can now turn to page 12 of the main report so that I take you through our observations as a committee, and the recommendations. 

Observations and Recommendations

1.	Categorisation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

The committee has consistently recommended that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Missions Abroad should be moved from the Public Administration Sector to the Economic Sector but it is still reflected under the former despite its substantial contribution of Non-Tax Revenue of over Shs 9 billion annually to the Consolidated Fund on top of negotiations for loans, grants and attraction of Foreign Direct Investment from abroad. 

The committee is concerned that the ministry and foreign missions consistently suffer due to low budget ceilings and budget cuts, which should not be the case given the importance of the ministry to protection and marketing of the image of Uganda abroad and attracting investors and of course luring or convincing tourists to visit our country.

The committee, therefore, reiterates as a recommendation that the ministry should be categorised under the Economic Sector. It should be taken on board once again as a recommendation.

2.	Properties of Uganda Abroad

The committee is aware that efforts are being made to streamline the policy on acquisition, maintenance and management of Uganda’s properties abroad. Despite this, the Government of Uganda continues to incur heavy costs every year in rent of mission premises and official residences.

The committee recommends that rather than pay rent for the foreign missions, given that missions are not a temporary venture, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should use rent funds to pay mortgages as the properties will eventually become properties of Uganda.

The committee noted that the issue of management of Uganda’s properties abroad has been going on for too long. The debate of whether the properties currently managed by Uganda Property Holdings Limited (UPHL) should revert to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or stay under UPHL has been going on for a long time now.

The committee therefore recommends that a study on the matter be conducted to streamline and explore the legal implications of the transfer of properties from UPHL to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs so that the matter can be concluded and this should be expedited.

3.	Foreign Policy of Uganda

The committee is aware that the ministry has been operating without a documented foreign policy. The committee was further informed that the ministry will receive Shs 86 million this financial year towards hiring of consultancy services to produce a foreign policy document. The ministry reported that the funds already allocated are not enough and that it requires another Shs 350 million for the same purpose.

The committee recommends that rather than hire consultants, a team comprised of technical people within the ministry should be constituted to draft and produce the foreign policy document. It is this document which may then be reviewed in future.

4.	Contracts of Service

The committee noted that for about a year, the Permanent Secretary/Accounting Officer of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs continued to serve in the ministry without a valid contract. It was not until after the committee’s insistence that the contract was pursued and received from the appointing authority.  

The committee further noted that the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development went ahead and appointed him the Accounting Officer even when he knew that his contract at that time had expired.

The committee also observed that 17 heads of foreign missions were and are still serving on expired contracts. They continue to remain in office as they await renewal or termination of their contracts by the appointing authority.

The committee therefore recommends that in future, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that only duly appointed ministry and government department/agency officials are appointed as accounting officers in their respective ministries and government departments/agencies – those with valid contracts in the future.

The committee further recommends that the appointing authority should expedite the renewal or termination of services of those who have no valid contracts in order to streamline the activities of embassies and missions abroad as it is long overdue.

5.	Imbalance in the Foreign Service

The committee is concerned that the majority of heads of missions are political appointees. It noted that only two out of the 31 heads of missions are career diplomats. In the same vein, 30 percent of all Foreign Service officers in other ranks are political appointees. The committee recommends that the appointing authority should address this imbalance immediately. 

6.	Foreign Service Allowances

a)	The committee is aware that Uganda’s Foreign Service officers continue to suffer in the missions due to the meagre Foreign Service allowances paid to them. The committee is aware that a review of the Foreign Service allowances is long overdue. The last one was way back in 2003 - if my memory serves me correctly.

The committee, therefore, recommends an urgent review of the Foreign Service allowances to rescue Uganda’s Foreign Service officers from future and further embarrassment. For those of you who have travelled, you have seen what it means and what it looks like with our Foreign Service Officers vis-à-vis those from our neighbouring countries.

b)	The committee received information that beginning next Financial Year 2012/13, Foreign Service Officers will be in position to receive between US $2,000 and US $2,500 per year per child as an education allowance for four children under the age of 18.

The committee appreciates that this is a good measure by Government to keep the families together and in turn reduce risk of HIV/AIDS but is also concerned that this is still very low given the current trend in education and other related costs.

The committee recommends that a further review of the education allowance should be conducted before the figures are incorporated in next financial year’s budget.

7.	Independence and other National Celebrations in Missions

The committee noted that there is a general concern that missions are so underfunded that they do not even have funds to celebrate important national days such as Independence Day on the 9th October every year. 

In the same vein, there are no funds to help Ugandans who approach our missions in distress and dire need of assistance. Those of you who have ever travelled – it happened to me sometime back when I travelled to China and I got stranded because they said they did have fuel.

The committee recommends that the Government should consider availing funds for every mission to receive some funds every year to cover these two aspects: consular services to the people in distress and to celebrate at least our Independence Day.

8.	Uganda’s Obligations to International Organisations

The committee is aware that according to a Cabinet extract 269 (CT 2007) dated 13 June 2007, a decision was made that contributions to international organisations including the accumulated arrears should be placed under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development budget and be made mandatory and obligatory. 

The committee regrets that despite this, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has failed to respond and remit arrears of contributions to international organisations such as the African Union, Commonwealth Foundation, Commonwealth Secretariat, IGAD and several others to the tune of 21,551,545,680. We are indebted to that tune.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should promptly act on this by clearing all these contributions to international organizations to save us further embarrassment.

9.	Border Disputes

The two Ministers of Foreign Affairs of both Kenya and Uganda signed an MOU on the border conflict of Migingo besides other boarder conflicts with Tanzania, Democratic Republic of Congo and Southern Sudan. 

In the case of Migingo, the Technical Expert Working Committee (TEWC) was tasked to mark the border and report within three weeks but the challenge faced right now is that urgent appropriation of funds is required for the TEWC to complete this on time. Money has not been released for that activity and hence the delay.

The committee, therefore, recommends that funds should be made available to the ministry to resolve all these border issues but most importantly, for the peaceful conclusion of the Migingo border problem.

10.	Somalia Famine Situation
	
The committee is concerned about the plight of the Somalis in regard to the limited contribution by African nations to fund the World Food Programme to purchase enough food to avert looming death of many starving Somalis. 

It is further aware that the UN has a deficit of US$10 billion for purchase of food because some African nations have not made any contribution towards this cause. 
	
  The committee appreciates Uganda and Burundi for the ultimate sacrifice in regards to the troops they have contributed to save millions of Somalis who were in danger of mass destruction by the Al-Shabab insurgents. 
	
The committee, therefore, recommends that Burundi and Uganda should be exempted from cash contributions towards these food purchases given the contributions they have made for purposes of security.

11.	World Food Programme Eastern African Regional Centre

The committee observed that there is an eminent threat of Uganda losing the hosting of the headquarters of World Food Programme for the Eastern African Regional Centre due to Government’s irregularity in meeting its financial obligations towards contribution to the cost of renting the centre’s headquarters. 

This is an absurdity and, therefore, we recommend that Government should take this matter up immediately and adopt corrective measures to address the irregularity in its financial obligations to the cost of renting the centre’s headquarters.

Mr Speaker, those were the recommendations and observations emanating from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Missions Abroad. 

I will now quickly tackle the Ministry of East African Community Affairs.

Observations and Recommendations

1.	Funding of the Ministry’s Budget

The committee noted that the Ministry of East African Community Affairs is one of the least funded ministries despite the important role it is playing in the process of regional integration.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should increase funding to the Ministry if Uganda is to continue providing leadership in the integration process.

2.	Ministry Mandate

The committee is concerned that the Ministry of East African Community Affairs is capable of performing much more than its current level of performance. In line with the same, the committee noted that the ministry continues to be understaffed despite the immense responsibility of co-ordinating regional integration.

The committee recommends that the ministry should pursue expanding and increasing its level of performance, as well as recruiting to fill the numerous vacant positions in the ministry’s structure. Here the Ministry of Public Service should give a hand.

3.	Minister of State

As earlier indicated, the committee notes that every year, the ministry continues to budget for the office of the minister of state and yet the wait for the minister to be appointed continues.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the appointing authority should appoint a Minister of State for East African Community Affairs as approved by Parliament.

Last but not least, immediately after that one, we identified unfunded priorities, which I would like to share with you, honourable members.

The committee was informed that the following activities which the ministry wishes to carry out remain unfunded in the Financial Year 2011/2012:

1.	Review of Uganda’s Foreign Policy; little funds to kick start the review process have been allocated in this financial year but this item still remains largely underfunded. The figures are there.

2.	Establishment of Strategic Institute for Diplomatic and International Strategic Studies: only funds for the feasibility study have been provided under UNDP programme but the ministry lacks funds for establishment of the college. The figures are there, Shs200 million.

3.	Opening of new missions and consulates in strategic locations of Mogadishu, Jeddah, The Hague and Mombasa. These are very important areas but of course we need Shs5.4 billion, which is not available.

4.	Operationalisation of the Nile Basin Initiative, Shs 1 billion.

5.	Accumulated arrears to international organisations; details are attached as Annex 3 of the main report.

6.	Co-ordination of the Diaspora and its participation in the relevant activities. This activity is largely funded by UNDP but lacks counter-funding requirements like annual subscriptions to Diaspora associations; UNNA and many others. We need about Shs230 million but it is not there.

7.	Implementing elements of Management Information Systems, Phase II. This needs about Shs 100 million.  

8.	Participate and implement the National Action Plan on Great Lakes Initiatives. This needs about Shs 120 million.

For the Ministry of East African Community Affairs, the following three activities are unfunded and yet they are very important:

1.	Common Market Implementation Plan for Uganda; about Shs 520 million not available.

2.	Implementation of the ministry communications strategy to sensitize and inform the public on the East African Community. This one is very important activity but unfortunately it is not funded. We were even asking amongst ourselves, how many of us knew what exactly is taking place in as far as East African integration is concerned - none of us knew as Members of Parliament. So even Parliament needs to be sensitised on this but they do not have money to do it.

3.	Finally, Uganda’s contribution to the East African Community Secretariat that is Shs 10.73 billion. I hope that one will be made available. Mr Speaker, I wish to report. I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Can I invite the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, hon. Wamanga-Wamai?

3.30
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Jack Wamanga-Wamai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman for presenting that report. I was a member of that committee and he has accurately put these issues forward. 

Any Government must have a Ministry of Foreign Affairs to carry out the mandate of the foreign policy of a ministry. And to be able to carry out that mandate; the ministry must have a clear policy, which the officials of the ministry must follow, which leaves no room for the sort of ills that have inflicted that sector. I wish to draw your attention to a few of these so that we can together streamline that sector.

Recruitment

I will summarise most of the issues. I have circulated my copy and the chairman talked about recruitment. We believe that for the officials to carry out this policy, they must be well-trained and carefully recruited by the Public Service Commission and grow up in that ministry from Grade 6 or assistant secretary up to the highest level of ambassador. We demand that (the appointing) authority should not interfere with the recruitment of officials in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. We agree that it is a constitutional right and a prerogative of the President to appoint ambassadors; but the issue of career diplomats must be done by the Public Service. Today there are many officials ranging from Grade 6 to Grade 2 who have been recruited in the Foreign Service and posted in missions abroad without going through the Public Service Commission. 

The Ministry of Public Service is only called upon to regionalise the entry to service after these people have already been recruited in foreign affairs and posted on to missions. This act has demoralised the diplomats in the ministry and has exposed Uganda’s inefficiency in international meetings. 

The Foreign Policy

As I mentioned earlier, a country must have a foreign policy, which must be carried out by career foreign officers, but this policy must be guided by the internal policy. If the internal policy is lacking and questionable, with abuses of human rights and full of corruption, it becomes difficult for the Foreign Service Officers to carry out this mandate of safeguarding and promoting the interests of Uganda. 

Today, Uganda’s observance of human rights is questionable and Uganda has been called upon by the Human Rights Commission in Geneva to go and explain the issue of human rights this October. We, therefore, call upon Government to observe the issue of human rights so that Foreign Service Officers abroad can carry out their mandate without hindrance. 

Appointment of Ambassadors 

I just mentioned earlier that the prerogative of the President is to appoint ambassadors and he has that constitutional right. But, hon. Members, it is the career diplomats who have been trained that can carry out the foreign policy. Uganda has been embarrassed on several occasions abroad because some of these people posted to our missions cannot even carry out the mandate of an ambassador. Therefore, we request that the appointing authority; that is the President, gives at least 50 percent to diplomats so that our foreign policy is carried abroad by professional people. 

Opening of New Missions Abroad 

It is important that the country expands and opens up missions. We know that Southern Sudan got independence recently. We demand that when missions abroad are being opened, this Parliament should know, and the country at large. It should not be done quietly. 

Mr Speaker, I rose on this Floor and raised the issue of Guangzhou – when the Minister of Finance, hon. Omach asked for Vote-on-Account for money to be given to two missions that is Guangzhou and Ankara. I want to reassure this House that we did not have a mission in Guangzhou before the 5thJuly when the Chinese wrote and accepted that Uganda can now go and open up a mission in Guangzhou. But the Ministry of Finance had earlier released funds and they brought accountability to the committee of the money, which was spent in Guangzhou. This is absurd because by the 5th of July this year there was no mission in Guangzhou and Beijing. I call this criminal and it will need to be investigated. 

Consultants for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

In their policy statement, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs with career diplomats in that ministry who have served for many years brought here a request for this Parliament to approve Shs 350 million to hire an expert to write a foreign policy. What a sad affair that a ministry with career diplomats and professionals who have served for many years should ask this Parliament to approve a sum of Shs 350 million to hire experts. Who is a better expert than the people who have been serving in the ministry for many years? There is nobody who knows the foreign policy of a country than its career diplomats. Therefore, I request this House not to approve the Shs 350 million for the ministry to hire an expert to write a foreign policy. 

Remuneration of Foreign Service Officers 

Mr Speaker, the people who serve in that ministry go through a lot of problems. You know what happened in Japan; the Tsunami and the nuclear reactor which burst. Our officers in Japan were exposed to nuclear (radiation). The people in Libya, you know what is going on there. This Government has no policy for those officers; and even other Ugandans apart from the Foreign Service Officers who are in danger. The Ugandans in Libya were left at the mercy of Kenya Airlines to rescue them. There is no policy whatsoever to rescue Ugandans who are in trouble. 

Hon. Members, I request this House to look at the remuneration for Foreign Service Officers. Those officers are the most poorly paid compared with other foreign officers in the region. We do not even have to consider their income and the 6.7 percent economic growth in this country. Our Foreign Service Officers are the worst paid in the region and in the world. We demand that Government brings up the remuneration of our Foreign Service Officers to the level of those of the countries neighbouring us. I am not talking about the countries in the first world; I am talking about the countries in the Great Lakes Region.

These people are doing a national service; they go out there to serve this country and they leave their families behind because they cannot afford to educate their children in those countries. All previous governments used to pay for four children of those officers, but for the last 25 years, this Government has not even considered those people who are serving in those terrible conditions; temperate areas. 

The chairman has alluded to the AIDS scourge which has caught up with that ministry because officers go and leave their families behind; the children remain in this country. So we demand that Government pays tuition for the children of Foreign Service Officers; and they should pay directly to the institutions of learning instead of just giving them a token of US $2,000. Moreover, the tuition fees in those countries are very high. So let this Government consider that and look at the officers who serve this country. 

MR KAKOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank the hon. Member for giving way. Hon. Wamai is the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and he is also a Member of the Foreign Affairs Commission to which I also belong. As a member of the committee, I know I am not supposed to debate, but I can give information. 

The information I have is in relation to the school dues for the children of the officers. This has been in a pathetic situation for some time but during the interaction with the minister we learnt that the Government had now initiated a policy and beginning with next financial year, Government is going to start contributing US $2,500 to enable this to go on just because the report is a bit big but it is contained in the report.

I just wanted to correct this and we must really appreciate that this is the beginning; it has not been there. We only appeal to the ministry to make it bigger and take consideration of other matters that the Foreign Service Officers may need attended to. I thank you. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I thank hon. Kakoba for that information but the chairman of the committee had talked about US $2,500. I have just talked about it. The US $2,500 cannot pay for the tuition fees of these children: four children? In China, you pay about US $15,000 per child per year. If you have got four children, the US $2,500 cannot help at all. Moreover, I hear the economy of this country has grown by 6.7 percent. Now, what is the problem? Other countries in the region pay for six children up to university level. Twenty-five years ago, the Government used to pay for four children and that is what we demand for. This is really humane to those people that at least Government pays directly to institutions of higher learning. 

The chairman alluded to the fact that ambassadors in most of the missions have no contracts or that they have expired. They have been paid money and they have been in these missions carrying out obligations without contracts. They are receiving allowances and a salary without valid contracts. This is irregular and we demand that those ambassadors who are in missions - chairman talked about them - should be asked to refund the money they received irregularly. They had no valid contracts to carry out business on behalf of Uganda.

You can see when I talked about non-career diplomats; these ambassadors who are political failures. They are even sitting there without contracts and getting money illegally. We demand that this money is refunded because they had no right to serve in those missions and get those salaries.

MR TODWONG: Whereas I respect and recognise the response from the Shadow Foreign Affairs Minister and taking reckon of the fact that ambassadors are at the highest level of political engagement on behalf of a country; is it, therefore, in order, for the shadow minister to persistently say the ambassadors are political failures when he, himself, I am told, is a former ambassador? Was he a political failure? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister should use language that is appropriate to address Foreign Service Officers. (Applause)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the ruling but I want to maintain that most of these ambassadors who have been appointed and are serving in missions lost in the last elections. Many of them lost! When I look at them as political failures; I am right because they lost in elections and have been appointed ambassadors.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members -(Interruption)

MR MULONGO: Thank you Mr Speaker and thank you my brother the honourable shadow minister. I just need clarification from the honourable Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs. When does someone become a political failure because political science and politicking are two different things? In any case, you may lose an election for different reasons. I think that does not necessarily amount to somebody being a political failure –(Interjections)- because if you are diplomat and for some reason you leave diplomacy and choose to go political; you are also aiming higher. That does not mean you have diplomatically failed unless -(Laughter)-the honourable minister wants to imply that as well. Thank you, Sir.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, those who are successful; those who are not failures are in the House including the honourable member. Those who did not make it and we are told that they keep bothering the President, “Mr President, can you appoint me ambassador?” and in my statement, I have alluded to many of those officers who are in that ministry. They are so many officials who have been recruited in Foreign Affairs without going through the Public Service.

Ambassadors who come to Uganda: there are many ambassadors who come to this country and many were here last February when we had elections to campaign for their candidates. They were doing it while irregularly receiving Foreign Service allowances. This money was paid to them irregularly and we ask that these officials who were here during elections when they were supposed to be serving Uganda in their missions abroad - they were here campaigning and were paid Foreign Service allowances; that money was paid irregularly and must be refunded.

Properties Abroad

This country, with its beauty, has been embarrassed a lot abroad because of the properties! They are in terrible conditions; some of these have even been condemned. Those countries have asked Uganda, “Can you please ... we want to sell off these properties?” We want the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Government to renovate these properties - they are so many; dotted everywhere around the world - so that we do not keep being embarrassed by these terrible properties. 

Mortgages for Purchase of Properties

This country keeps spending a lot of money, paying rent and moreover banks are now willing to give us mortgages. Even the rent we use could service the mortgages to acquire properties. There are so many countries, even poorer than Uganda who have beautiful properties abroad. We demand that we use the rent to pay accommodation for our offices abroad.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs Headquarters

The minister has a lot of burning issues at the headquarters. We demand that this state of affairs be acted upon urgently and corrected as many officers are very frustrated and cannot perform optimally. 

I tabled these matters in the committee in writing and the sector minister acknowledged that he had seen those issues. These maters we raise are fundamental for the proper functioning of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I took it upon myself to invoke my long-term experience in that sector to put across to the committee matters that would go a long way in improving service in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and missions abroad but none of these have been captured in the report.

Indeed, under paragraph 5.6 of the committee’s report; recommendations; the committee did not highlight the critical issues raised in my report and only chose to make two bullet recommendations of funding and under-staffing. Our view is that this approach will not help institutions we are meant to improve. I thank you for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, we will now open up for general debate. I will limit it to one hour. Each Member will make a contribution of three minutes and after an hour, we revert to the minister to make some comments and then we go back to the chair. 

3.53
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. I also wish to thank the Member on the Opposition side. I would like to draw our attention to page 4, bullet 9, on border disputes. The chairperson talked about the issue of borders. However, the Member of the Opposition never labored to talk about the issue and yet it is very touchy.

The issue of borders should be taken very seriously. It does not only concern Migingo Island but there are also border problems in the Congo, around Mahagi and Aruu. There are very serious border problems between South Sudan and Uganda in Moyo District. Before South Sudan became independent, the people of South Sudan would come to the Ugandan side, especially in Moyo and claim territory. They would come and say, “This land here belongs to Sudan. Therefore, we can cultivate as we want.” The following day they would wake up and say, “That other land also belongs to us.” Now that South Sudan has become independent, I wish the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in conjunction with the Ministry of Lands to expeditiously go and re-demarcate all the borders of Uganda. Let us not only limit it to Migingo but extend it to other areas as well.

His Excellency, President Museveni, and Salva Kiir, a year and a half ago went to Moyo to assess the situation on the ground. They discovered that it was a fact that South Sudanese had entered too deep, more than 10 kilometers on the Ugandan soil. So, I would wish that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs takes up the issue and re-demarcates all borders so that we do not have any conflicts in the near future. Thank you very much.

3.56
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Not so long ago, I was in this Parliament asking whether all ministries have what we would call an effective policy. It is not surprising that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs does not have a foreign policy and that means the country does not have a foreign policy. So, when we inject money into this ministry, what output do we seek? There is nothing to show! And we are talking about so many years down the road trying to procure consultancy services to try to fix a foreign policy for this country. That sounds very desperate; it is very unfortunate; it is very sarcastic and it is fundamentally disappointing.

With all the travels that the Minister of Foreign Affairs undertakes in this country, what does he report here? What did you actually indicate in your ministerial policy statement as an output that would show Ugandans that the money you are seeking for will generate outputs? It is very unfortunate. That is the definition of how this administration and regime have worked over the years. 

It is just two years since we got a policy position for the Ministry of Agriculture: what does that tell? It is an indicator of government failure. How do you run ministries without policies? So, probably the Leader of Government Business will let me know what it is in this country that we are trying to gain out of our foreign engagements. 

Secondly, what is there for the relevance of the foreign missions? That brings me to the point of the investors that come into this country, what we like to label Foreign Direct Investment. I thought our foreign missions would be negotiating the kind of investments we need in this country, and then inform the domestic ministers here that about an investor coming to Uganda that, “Premised on this amount of resources he is going to inject in the economy with this kind of output.” That is one of the primary reasons we are getting these briefcase investors who come to make chapatis, meaning the foreign missions are redundant and they are doing nothing. And yet we are pleading with them that four of their children need to be educated. What is the value they generate for this country? Is it their presence in those countries that Uganda is ably represented in Accra or Istanbul? 

So, it is prudent that we get to the bottom of this. We need to know what these missions do. They must give us their tangible output. It is unfortunate that we are still spending on those whose contracts have expired. Probably, we need to recall all of them. 

On the issue of political appointments, why do you appoint somebody who has lost an election to go to foreign missions in order to sleep comfortably in a cold country with warm blankets? 

I want to bring your attention to the borders. I was with President Museveni in Ngurdoto for the special accord and it was explicitly told to the Minister of Foreign Affairs that he should go to England and get those old maps where the stone marks for our borders were. Why? Because Uganda was clashing over Migingo, over Rukwanzi; I was there and we told him - one year for a meeting in Uganda and another meeting in Kinshasa and that it would be a comprehensive report telling Ugandans where the boundaries are. To this day, we are still talking about border conflicts. When shall we re-boundary ourselves premised on our colonial time boundary? That means there is just too much redundancy. Probably, this is one of the ministries we need to close down immediately. It is very unfortunate. 

And so, Mr Speaker, if the minister cannot act now, and if he could not act then, what is the chance that he is going to act because he is foregoing an international obligation? He was all over telling us how he was going to register this accord with the United Nations. Is that what this country calls for out of the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the entire ministry? The Leader of Government Business needs to give me an understanding of what this will come to. 

Finally, if you looked at the appointments of both the ambassadors and the staff in those missions, they are skewed to one region, Western region. It is very sad. Why do we assume that it is only people who afford to say, “she” who can sit in those missions in staff and ambassadorial positions? Doesn’t it occur to you that it is a foreign policy shame that you will choose to represent Uganda on a regional basis? Thank you.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are referring to a matter of policy. Most of the speakers have been talking about the Minister of Foreign Affairs but I am surprised to see that there is no single Minister of Foreign Affairs on the Front Bench. One time, I hear hon. Okello Oryem –(Hon. Kiyingi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Asuman Kiyingi is here.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Where are the ministers? This is their Vote and there are many issues which are being raised. They should have had the courtesy of being here rather than - I know hon. Kutesa; and even hon. Kategaya is supposed to be here for the East African affairs issue. Where are hon. Okello and hon. Kutesa? We are talking about a budget. They should have had the courtesy to come and present. 

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We learnt this morning that this report was being presented. As a matter of fact, I learnt about the presentation of this report –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the newly appointed Minister of State for Regional Affairs to come and tell this honourable House that he just learnt about the presentation of his sector statement today when in actual fact he is supposed to be perpetually present as a Member of the Front Bench when Parliament is transacting business? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, this House is for Members of Parliament, both on the Back Bench and the Front Bench. You have a responsibility to be present when House is being adjourned and you should be present to know when next we are going to meet. Please, desist from pursuing that line. 

MR KIYINGI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. All I would like to communicate to the House is that my senior minister is in Addis Ababa for an urgent meeting of the African Union. Hon. Eriya Kategaya was on his way to Mbarara when he learnt that the report is actually being presented this afternoon and he asked me to convey his apologies to the House. Hon. Okello Oryem is on his way to the United Nations to represent this country over these very matters that we are discussing. I thank you. 

4.05
MR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Our image outside Uganda is very important and it is not a matter to be disputed by anyone in this House. I want to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs for the elaborate presentation he has made. I have two very important issues that I want to bring to the attention of this House. Page 2 of his summary talks about 17 heads of foreign missions of this country that do not have contracts; their contracts have expired and on page 6, we talk about not having a Minister of State for East African Affairs.

The Foreign Affairs Ministry has had the longest serving senior minister of this country and this man is a lawyer and he knows what a contract is all about and he knows what happens when a contract expires - you cease to exist. We read in the papers that even the contract of the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs also expired. This is a clear indication that there is neglect of duty in this ministry. 

The issue of contracts is very important and it is not something to joke about. This shows that monitoring in this ministry has been a problem and this is one of the problems we have had in this country as far as service delivery is concerned. We know that this year, we are aiming at service delivery and that is why we are pinning everyone to ensure that we bring everybody to order. 

It should have been prudent for these people to be here and while somewhere, I was an advocate of 76 ministers including the Minister of State for East African Affairs. That is why we do not have anybody from the East African Affairs just because we have only one minister. If the minister was not necessary, then why was he requested for? I kindly beg this House to request the appointing authority to appoint a Minister of State for East African Affairs as soon as possible. 

The other issue is, why should you put a mission in Guangzhou or in Ankara yet you are failing to have a minister in Arusha? The East African Community is more important than anything else as far as we are concerned as East African Community members, that we should not disregard the issue of the East African Community. We need the Minister for East African Affairs, urgently. I beg to rest my case and I hope people have listened. I thank you very much. 

4.09
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. I have a few issues and I will go by the summary report. On the first issue of categorisation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, I take note and concern over the budget ceilings and budget cuts regarding the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Mr Speaker, if you travel out of this country and you have meetings of diplomats, you will find that it is the Ugandan diplomat that exhibits poverty. Their vehicles are usually the ones that breakdown on the way, they are the ones who cannot even host meetings and they are the ones who cannot meet bills of either heating or paying for gas. It is extremely serious that if we are going to have a robust foreign policy activity out there, we really need to step up funding for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It is very important. 

On foreign policy, it is true that we do not have a Consolidated Fund policy in place but there are foreign policy guidelines in place. Also, as has been observed, it is important that we have a coherent, well-articulated written foreign policy. I take a little exception to the committee’s recommendation that we do not need consultants because we have technical teams, which consist of diplomats and experts. These experts and staff are already loaded with routine work. These very people may not have enough time to accord in-depth study and provide good quality reports for us to evolve a foreign policy document. I would like to urge my colleagues to reconsider this. Hiring a consultancy that will go in-depth to avail us with the necessary material that will give us a quality product is paramount. It is normal practice that we get a consultancy that breeds a document in which we can make additives or re-orient to what we need. So, I beg that perhaps the committee reconsiders this. 

The imbalance in Foreign Service, to me, is a point of training; unless these appointees are not trainable material. How long does it take to train diplomats? I know the average time would be about nine to 12 months and some additional short courses here and there. It is not good to say that we should not have these politically appointed diplomats simply because they are failures in politics. That is not a crime. I think what is important is to train, orient and prepare them for diplomatic practice and I think we can achieve this. But I agree that the low quality of appointees lowers the nature of representation of Uganda abroad.

I will be quick on the issue of border disputes and I take exception to the matter of Migingo Island. The Government of Uganda has not taken the issue of Migingo serious enough and I have been told that even in terms of prior preparation to such meetings, Ugandan delegations exhibit the poorest information. 

The teams are usually ill prepared, inadequately equipped with information, uncoordinated and incoherent in their presentations. This is unacceptable of a country that has an institution of higher learning like Makerere, which is said to be the most respected perhaps on the continent. Uganda is respected abroad but the matters of handling border disputes, particularly Migingo, are unacceptable. And as you know, issues of war have been sparked, according to history, by very small things. We may take it to be a very small thing but I can assure you that Migingo has sparked off defence reconstitution in the neighbouring states. They think that it is actually possible that you can go to war and because of that, the order of battle is changing upwards. So, we need to take this matter of Migingo seriously. Kenya is taking it more seriously than we are doing here. 

Finally, on the question of the mandate of the Ministry of East African Community Affairs, I am first of all surprised that a small budget of Shs 15 billion, which is almost a budget of a very small district in Uganda, is accorded a top ministry of serious strategic importance to Uganda. In addition to the issue of understaffing and increasing their mandate, this budget provision is extremely small. The ministry requires more staff and more funding so that we can have adequate activities that are commensurate with our strategic interests in the East African Community.  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. 

4.14
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a background in diplomatic studies; on page 14 (iv) and (v) “Imbalance in foreign service” where the committee reported that out of 31 heads of mission, two are career diplomats and the rest are what they prefer to call political appointees.” Diplomatic functions are political functions. Diplomatic functions are representation of a regime and government. 

If you study the history of diplomacy, you will know that in Ancient Greece when diplomacy was being introduced, kings, chiefs and queens used to send their next of kin to represent them. In modern times, we have modern conflicts that are externally generated; most of the conflicts that we have in the world are externally generated. We, therefore, need representation that does not only represent government but regimes in leadership as well. 

I know that representations in foreign missions are public service jobs, but I think we need to do a little more; it is not only about representing government but also representing the interests of the people of Uganda and marketing the country abroad. 

Our colleagues on the opposite side were of the view that we do not have foreign policies. And I wonder what the committee was doing with members of the Opposition discussing ministerial policy statements if we did not have a foreign policy? I find it unfortunate, sorry to say, for the Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs to say in his remarks that our officers in foreign missions have gone without their families and, therefore, the spread of HIV is increasing. I did not understand that. Is he saying that the officers are spreading HIV/AIDS in Uganda? Is he saying their families are spreading it? He did not qualify his statement. We need to give some respect to people and their families. 

My last point is on increasing the remuneration of our foreign staff. We know our foreign staff are public servants and we have standard measures of paying them. Maybe the committee would have helped the House if they had come up with rates and guidelines on allowances that are supposed to be increased because different countries have different costs of living and different requirements. But to say that we increase their salaries then we shall have to declassify them from being public servants to something else - because public scales are standard whether in Parliament or the Foreign Service. Thank you. 

4.18
MR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for a very well done job. I have a few issues to raise. I would like to take exception to the recommendation that the categorisation of Foreign Affairs be put under the economic sector. The mission and goal of Foreign Affairs is to do with image building and diplomacy, and the raising of funds is a secondary issue. So, I would like to maintain that we keep the foreign sector where it is and do not put it in the economic sector. 

About salary, for the last one year or so, we have experienced very many incidences of salary related strikes and riots in this country. When I analyse the root cause, it seems to come from two issues. One, we are underpaid compared to our counterparts in East Africa and other parts of Africa but also our salaries are so grossly distorted, which does not make sense for one to analyse job evaluation. 

So, I would like to back the suggestion that has been made before that a salary agency be formed to harmonise salary management in this country. But I would also like to suggest that if it is possible, an ad hoc committee of this Parliament should be formed to develop a framework for salary harmonisation for the whole country. 

In addition to that, I would like to raise the issue on contracts. I notice that there are no contracts for a number of officers both in foreign and domestic services here. It is not sufficient for the PS and Secretary to the Treasury to appoint somebody who has a contract. It is also important for the Ministry of Public Service to ensure that all people who are serving have contracts. So, it is a wider issue than what concerns the Ministry of Foreign Affairs only. 

Lastly, in relation to this, I would like to say that there are many recommendations that have come from this committee. There are also very many recommendations that have been recurring over the years. I would like to suggest that we need to develop a framework perhaps to be followed by Government that all recommendations that have been made in the House should be followed and we should be updated about their implementation from time to time. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.23
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for this well presented paper and I also thank the shadow minister.

I want to comment on the issue of border disputes on page 4. I have an experience, and indeed a bad one, on the problems we are talking about here like Migingo and others: I was the district administrator in charge of Iganga South and that time, it was not Migingo but Wayas. Our brothers on the other side said that their line takes even Wayas coming near Lolwe. That time we had a lot of problems and almost went to war with Kenya. 

The biggest problem is that since then, our people have been living in fear and doubt as they think any time their brothers and sisters will turn against them. When these issues happen, the people on the other side, even the civilians, almost go to war. They start attacking our people using pangas and other weapons. 

So, it is not a small matter and I think the chairman should improve the recommendation so that serious action is taken to ensure that border lines are clearly re-drawn because those days I think they were using manual tools to survey but now we have modern equipment. So, it should be easy for us to get the borders drawn.

Mr Speaker, we are the ones who lose in all this. That part of the lake, near our friends in Kenya, does not have fish although there are many fish processing factories on that side - about ten of them and very big ones - but all the fish comes from our side. So, we stand to lose but people know and even the elders know if you ask them. They know where the Ugandan border passes.

The Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries is here. I do not think he even knows the tonnage of fish that goes to the other side every day from our side because of lack of knowledge of these borders. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.27
MR WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to thank the committee for a very good report and my colleague, the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs. I would like to speak on a few issues. 

One is on the issue of the image of Uganda. I think the job of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is to market the country and make sure that it has a good image. But it must be guided by a policy. Like any marketing, you need to know what you are marketing, for who you are marketing and where you are marketing.

However, to learn today that our Ministry of Foreign Affairs or our country lacks a policy on foreign affairs and that the Government even wants to hire experts, maybe even foreigners, to write a policy for foreign affairs, is despicable and definitely unacceptable. What, therefore, guides the Ugandan people and diplomats when they go out? When we go to negotiate to join the East African Community or even the UN, what guides our people?

Therefore, this would explain why we always have a very ad hoc approach to our policies. We have sometimes taken decisions, which are even against the interest of Uganda or Africa in various fora because we lack a concrete national policy to guide the officials.

Mr Speaker, I have known about the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and missions for a long time since the 1970s. This thing of image is very important but one time - I was then a student in China and I was talking to a Chinese clerk. He was complaining and wondering how a country can send people abroad and they cannot pay them. That was a Chinese clerk working in our embassy there.

In the 1990s, I went to our Washington office and at the front I saw torn chairs in our embassy. I was so scandalised to learn that an ambassador could sit in such an office and see torn chairs everyday and he is representing the country. Mr Speaker, I think the image of the country is important to us and we should make sure that our country has a good image. For instance, you have this Shs 20 billion in arrears. You spend Shs 500 billion and you cannot pay even arrears, which are for the image of the country out there? In our embassies, you do not see anything representing Uganda. If it is to do with trade, you see crafts. This country has remained with crafts and making mikeeka and small baskets. There is nothing to show that we are a country that is developing and one that needs to be recognised as a country in the family of countries of the world.

There are vacancies in the ministry - ambassadors whose contracts have expired. I know that in my district, there is no one in Foreign Affairs. I have never seen advertisements for people to join Foreign Affairs as I used to see in the 1970s and 1980s. We would like to see how people go to Foreign Affairs and whether you advertise so that we can advise our children who have studied international relations at the universities. They are in Bugiri and want to join Foreign Affairs. How do they join? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.33
MRS NABULYA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My point is about the image of Uganda outside our borders vis-à-vis Uganda’s obligation to the international organisations. Firstly, Uganda is known to be the “Pearl of Africa” but I think this is just an empty slogan because in practice, it is quite the opposite. We are a member state to various organisations but charity begins at home. 

Unfortunately, it is embarrassing when Ugandans travel abroad to represent the country and you find that we are in big arrears of payment of membership fees. This has gone on and on for several years. Why doesn’t the ministry take its obligation to fulfill this - because it keeps embarrassing those who go to represent us out there?

Secondly, some of the buildings that house our missions are in very sorry state; some of them have leaking roofs. It is shameful. My colleague has just mentioned the furniture issue. It is true because some of our embassies have very awkward furniture; tables are obsolete. On top of that, the personnel in these embassies are really suffering. They get salaries very late and are not allowed to use the money collected as visa fees. I am told that money has to first be sent here, according to the information I gathered. 

These people stay empty-handed without even allowances; they cannot even host their fellow ambassadors at home because they are embarrassed. It is important that with effect from this financial year, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs takes this matter seriously. Otherwise, it will be awkward even for someone representing Uganda to market Uganda as a tourist destination if where the ambassador or high commissioner lives is obsolete. Thank you.

4.36
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give a few examples and experiences because I was a Member of the Foreign Affairs Committee for three years in the last Parliament. The committee moved to some of our embassies. In 2009, we went to the DR Congo and found that the mission staff was eating one meal a day and yet we in Uganda were still eating three meals a day because the situation then was still okay. At that time, they were buying a kilogramme of meat for Shs 30,000; and a plate of food, which is not even a buffet, was at Shs 10,000. I am now wondering how their situation is since in Uganda the situation is bad. 

Therefore, I support the committee report because we must do something for these people. Here in Uganda, if I am hungry and broke, I can talk to one of the Members here but for them, there is none to ask for help. For example, if there are five employees in the embassy, they will be the only ones known to each other. So, we should help them. 

I fully support the committee recommendation to the Government to go for mortgages. There is a time we went to Dar-es-Salaam and our ambassador there had a very good discussion with those people. There was a company, which wanted to put up for us a very good building, and the agreement would be for 49 years. But our ministers here refused and yet our embassy building there is dilapidated. 

If we are unable to raise our own money and there are companies that want to help us in putting up buildings, then we should acquire a mortgage of 49 years. Therefore, I suggest that we make use of that opportunity and we allow those ambassadors to take up mortgages so that we get buildings that will make Uganda proud. Like when we went to Ethiopia, land was provided for us; moreover other countries from West Africa like Mali and Ghana had acquired theirs except us. And yet when we consider our revenue and compare with that of those other countries, we are not doing badly. Why are we then not taking the foreign policy seriously? Why are we reluctant?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I think we should take it as key, the consulate in Juba – I do not know whether it is a mission or consulate – because there are very many Ugandans there. I think that should be the mission we should be taking seriously at the moment because there are many Ugandans who are suffering in South Sudan – some of them innocently – but have nowhere to go for help. There are five people from my district who were arrested for taking mairungi and are now imprisoned in Juba. Moreover, in Uganda, there is no law against eating mairungi. (Laughter) How can these two embassies liaise to see to it that such issues are solved? Therefore, I feel that we should do something especially regarding the Juba mission because there are very many Ugandans there. Some people from Yumbe usually ride bicycles to Juba because it is nearer for them than Kampala and -(Member timed out_)

4.42
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. However, when I look at page 2 of their report on Uganda’s foreign policy, I am saddened. This is because Uganda does not have a documented foreign policy and this one can explain why there are a number of conflicts wherever we have gone.  

If a country does not have a written foreign policy and we have employed non-career diplomats, what are they talking there? [MR KIYINGI: “Information.”] I am well informed –(Laughter)- I have also been a foreign officer and also a Presidential Assistant in Charge of 11 countries in the Great Lakes and so I am talking from the point of know. The problems in the ministry were not even addressed properly by the committee. I do not see why we would even approve the budget for the ministry when they do not have an accounting officer. Under Article 164 of our Constitution, we are supposed to appropriate funds to a permanent secretary and if you can allow me to read –(Interjections)- I know hon. Kiyingi is a lawyer but he should listen. 

Article 164 says, “A permanent secretary or accounting officer in charge of a ministry or department shall be accountable to Parliament in that ministry or department.” So, if we do not have an Accounting Officer legally appointed, why should we give them all the money? 

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): I have heard it said by the Shadow Minister that the country does not have a foreign policy and it has been reiterated again and again. Mr Speaker, foreign policy covers a number of subjects that you can never at any one time cover every aspect of life which may have to be handled by the foreign policy.  

The Constitution is very clear and it provides broad parameters of the foreign policy of this country, except that the Shadow Minister did not bother to read the Constitution. If you read paragraph 28 of the preamble, it lays down the broad parameters of the foreign policy –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it the preamble to the Constitution?

MR PETER NYOMBI: Yes, it is part of the Constitution -(Interjections)- I am going to read it to you. I am going to read the preamble –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: I thank you very much. I have a lot of respect for the guidance that the Attorney-General’s Office gives to the Government of Uganda and indeed to Parliament and indeed that is the authority that guides the House on matters of the law.

I would like to know whether it is in order for hon. Nyombi to come here to explain away a statement in regard to foreign policy when the Government in which he serves in is seeking an allocation of funds through the committee of Shs 350 million and they have already provided Shs 86 million to formulate and review this foreign policy. 

Is it in order for hon. Nyombi to deny the Government this advice in Cabinet and then come to the House to try to blame the House for a misdoing of the Government which he serves? If the government knows there is no need for a foreign policy, why didn’t hon. Nyombi first of all dissuade the government from asking for this money? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what the learned Attorney-General was trying to do is to provide a genesis of what would be premise for our foreign policy –(Laughter)- in the circumstances, the Attorney-General may actually be confirming some of the statements that have been made. I was trying to guide the Attorney-General that the one he is talking about is not the preamble of the Constitution but the National Objectives and Principles of State Policy. (Applause)

If I may guide –(Laughter)- the amendments of 2005 became part of the Constitution by Article 8; please Attorney-General, you can proceed.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, I am proud of you. I was trying to say that it would be wrong for one to say that there is no foreign policy at all because the Constitution makes it clear that the foreign policy of Uganda shall be based on certain principles and it goes ahead to provide those principles. The money that is being requested for is for review and not that there is nothing –(Interjections)- it is for review. If you read the Constitution, it lays down the broad -(Interruption)

MR KWEZIRA: Mr Speaker, a preamble to the Constitution does not form part of the Constitution and the Attorney-General should know. When you even talk of foreign policy objectives, these ones are not foreign policy. (Laughter) According to my experience, foreign policy in a number of countries is mainly either driven by economics, security or politics. 

So, the Government should know why we are in Sudan, Congo or Somalia. Are we there for military adventurism or there is something we get there? Lack of a written foreign policy means that after some time, you will have institutions, which are going to clash with you. So, Government should expedite that. When you look at how much money is going to be spent on the foreign policy, it seems like we do not have people in the ministry or that we are undermining our own staff at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters.

MR KAKOBA: I thank you. The issue of foreign policy has come up each and every time. I am a scholar of international relations and I know that foreign policy objectives are quite different from the foreign policy. It is from the foreign policy objectives that we derive our foreign policy. So, the ministry has to formulate the foreign policy and should not divert us because we need a foreign policy as a country if we are to conduct international relations. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it clarification or information from the chair or from [Hon. Members: “Point of Information.”] Information? There is nobody holding the Floor. Are you still holding the Floor? I think your time is out. [Ms Alaso: “Guidance.”] Guidance? We said that we would debate this for one hour and my time is showing that it is one hour now. Please, Madam!

MS ALASO: I thank you very much. Some of us take the Government very seriously and I take the statements made by hon. Nyombi very seriously, Mr Speaker, because of the role over which you preside the passing of the budget in this House. I would not like to be associated with giving Shs 86 million to an activity that is already accomplished. I would like hon. Nyombi, the Attorney-General, to lay on the Table a copy of the foreign policy of the Government of Uganda to justify whether we should give or not give this money because we want to be serious with Government, the way we do things. It is not casual - you say, you have it when you do not have it and we are now at odds with our own committee. Who is telling this House the truth? Is it our committee lying to us that there is no policy and therefore, wishing to take money or is it Government saying that there is a policy? Let Government bring a copy and lay it on the Table then we will proceed.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether the hon. Member understood me very well. I tried to be very clear that the statements that have been made here give the impression that there is nothing in place and -(Interjections)- yes, the money is for the review. But the impression that is being created here is that there is nothing in place and I was saying it may be difficult [Hon. Members: “Lay it on the Table.”] No, it is not - I read the provisions of the Constitution and what I am disputing is the statement that there is absolutely nothing in place.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have exhausted our one hour and we should play by the rules. I am now going to move to the minister. That is what we agreed on at the beginning. We agreed we would do it for one hour. 

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL COOPERATION (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Chairperson of the Committee for the very good report and positive comments that have come from the House. I also want to thank the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs for his elaborate statement. I am not going into details of all the issues that have been raised on the Floor. I will just make general observations and then the chairperson will take it up from there.

Foreign Policy

We actually have a document, which we find inadequate and it is the document, which we are trying to review and that document is actually here. I can lay it on the Table but it is not in the form that I would have wanted this House to look at. There are many issues we are reviewing but there is a document which formulates or forms the basis of the review itself. In addition to that, I want to dispel the wrong impression created that actually if there is nothing written in one document, then a country does not have a foreign policy; definitely no. 

A country can even have a foreign policy, which is not documented anywhere and many countries are in that state for sure -(Interjections)- even a constitution may not be written; so, Uganda has a foreign policy. That is why I thank the chairman for those observations. If you look at part IV of the report, the committee chairperson says, “The ministry reported several achievements in the last financial year. Most notably, it continued with its work of promoting regional and international peace and security, promoting Uganda’s exports, inward investment, tourism and technology, transfer and mobilising bilateral and multilateral resources for development.” Those are the core aspects that inform our foreign policy.

Having made that general comment, I will also make a general comment on contracts. We do not employ people who man the Foreign Service. This is the mandate of the Public Service Commission and when contracts expire, the Public Service Commission is informed accordingly. The people who are serving on the alleged invalid contracts are actually so, in their positions on explicit written communication from the public service that, “Continue serving as your contract is being regularised”. So, there is a mandate for sure, it is not just an arbitrary thing from the Public Service Commission -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I will move an amendment when we are supposed to adopt this report with your permission that all heads of foreign missions whose contracts have expired immediately return home because there is an issue of diplomatic immunity and there is an issue of accreditation to heads of state. 

If you are today appointed head of mission in China, there are special days on which you go for accreditation and in the record of the Government of China, it is known that Ekanya will be in China for three years and you are entitled to all diplomatic immunity. The day your contract expires, you are expected to leave that country and if you engage in any activity, you can be arrested and that has caused in the past, a very serious embarrassment. 

Therefore, hon. Members, with your permission, Mr Speaker, I will move a motion that all the staff who are serving when their contracts have expired, should immediately return to the country to avoid embarrassment.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is the hon. Minister in order to come and confuse this House that it is the public service that writes and tells ambassadors that they continue until their contract is renewed? It is not true, it is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that informs the appointing authority that a contract of such and such an ambassador has expired not public service at all. This clearly shows the inefficiency in that ministry -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it a point of order?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Yes, it was an order. Was the minister right to confuse the House? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I rule, can I ask the Minister to guide us, who authors these contracts between the two? 

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, depending on the level of service, ambassadors are appointed by the President. However, when the decision to appoint is taken, the public service is informed because the documents of terms of service and so on. So, when a contract of a serving officer expires, we inform the appointing authority and copy to the public service and the public service guides us on what to do under such situations. Then the public service writes advising us on how to handle the issue. 

When the Public Service Commission report is presented, those issues can be raised, but as far as the minister is concerned, we are guided by the relevant organisation and we act accordingly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think you should help the House so that we can take proper decisions. For now, I do not think you are giving us the actual information that we should be taking –(Applause)– please, help us with the information on which I can validly guide the House.

MR KIYINGI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I will investigate and report back to the House. 

The other issue which was raised repeatedly was the question – before I go there, I can make a general comment on what the shadow minister said. I thank the Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs. He served in the Foreign Service for a very long time and I think he is speaking from first-hand experience about all of this problems. 

In fact, when we talk about engaging a consultant; we are talking about people like him. He could assist us in drawing an informed policy document to inform the country. 

Having said that, I will focus on some few issues raised by the Members. The border districts’ issue is not a unique situation to Uganda. Our neighbours of Ethiopia and Eretria fought a two-year war and 100,000 people were killed because of a border dispute. I think it is a compliment to our foreign policy management that although the border disputes exist, we have not had such a crisis where we fight with neighbours. The bottom line is that we have not been given adequate resources to decisively resolve these border disputes. They involve resurveying, re-demarcation and marking and this involved quite a bit of money which has not been forthcoming. 

Hon. Abia raised a question on why we take political failures to our foreign offices. Of course, these are not political failures otherwise, one would even question what Najjanankumbi is there for. We have “political failures” there manning the lead Opposition party. If that is not the case, then not succeeding in an election does not mean you are a political failure. Hon. Oguttu knows that. 

Furthermore, on our foreign policy, there are many aspects, which we want to incorporate in that foreign policy document. There are skills within the ministry that we can take advantage of, but there are others which are missing. We need to take into account issues of globalisation, terrorism, new trends in commercial diplomacy, global warming and others. All these demand some brains to work with our in-house capacity and come up with a clearer and more informative policy document to inform our foreign missions. 

The hon. Member for Mbarara Municipality raised the question of the Ministry for East Africa. The East African Community is governed by a treaty and we have regional frameworks and a legal regime. There is no provision in the treaty or the regional framework stating that we should have a minister residing in Arusha. As a matter of fact, there is no partner state that has a minister resident in Arusha. It is only Uganda, based on the wisdom of the appointing authority that felt that there should be a minister of state. He may be based in Arusha or Uganda. And we leave that to the appointing authority and in due course, that minister will be appointed. 

I thank hon. Mulongo for his observations about the dilapidated state of our missions abroad; the vehicles –(Interjections)

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Minister for giving way. I do not know if I understand you clearly; do you mean that there is no minister of state and we should not budget for one?

MR KIYINGI: I did not indicate so. I was just talking about the insistence that the minister should be in Arusha. The minister is required, but whether he should be based in Arusha or Kampala is the issue I am talking about. Definitely, there is need for the minister, we have justified that and the appointing authority is aware and in due course, the appointment will be made -(Mr Kakoba rose_)– I am informed; I do not what to lose my train of thought and I have a right to accept or refuse information. 

It is true that some of our properties abroad are in dilapidated state and it is also true that at times we fail to meet –(Interruption)

MR KAKOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to get from the minister is that to the best of my knowledge, the East African heads of state sat and agreed that each country should have a minister of state for East African Affairs. But the minister is presenting the issue as if it is a Ugandan issue. 

Therefore, I would like to know from the hon. Minister whether he is not aware that that decision was taken.

MR KIYINGI: Well, I was talking about the treaty and the frameworks and it is not provided for anywhere in our treaty. 

On the state of the dilapidated vehicles and the poor state of maintenance of our properties abroad, we agree with the recommendations of the committee. Definitely, there have been budgetary constraints and we appreciate the concerns of the Members. We need more money. 

Hon. Oleru Huda also raised the question of not utilising the land we have been allocated in different areas for construction of missions. Again, this is because of budgetary constraints and we appeal to this committee to favourably consider increasing the allocation to the ministry. 

Regarding the objection by the Member that the ministry should not be moved to the productive sector - I think the committee report is quite elaborate. All that you see in terms of foreign investments, in terms of the positive image Uganda is registering locally, regionally and abroad is a result of our foreign policy management. There is a point and a case to be made that we are a productive sector; we are not just administrative. I wish to strongly support the committee’s recommendation that the ministry be moved accordingly.

Otherwise, I thank Members for their deliberations, their support and I beg this House to approve the budget as recommended by the committee. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Alex Byarugaba): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the hon. Members for the wonderful support, the wonderful deductions, the great additions and advice given to the committee plus the comments made. Generally, they were all very good, very constructive and I want to take them in very good heart and spirit and I hope that my Members do the same.

I will, however, make a few clarifications on a few issues that were raised during the course of the debate. Maybe I should start with the last one? Hon. Kwizera was suggesting that if we do not have an accounting officer, why should we pass this budget? Yes, we also looked at that possibility. I was actually the one trying to have that one and every other Member was convinced about it; but at the end of the day, we realised it would not serve us any good, the ministry and the country as a whole. It was during that debate, when we were wondering what to do, that the appointing authority found time to make a very quick input by making the appointment. So, we have a fully-fledged accounting officer. There is no need to put aside this budget. We needed it even yesterday. 

Hon. Ssentongo talked about the embarrassing situation Ugandan delegations face whenever they are asked to leave conferences because of non-payment of funds. We made a very concrete recommendation that the Ministry of Finance, whose duty is to ensure that it is done, should do it. I will be making sure that when we have the Budget Committee meeting, this issue is further emphasised and I want to thank you for that kind of support.

Hon. Oleru also talked about the same thing. The embarrassing situations for our staff, especially the Foreign Service staff; it is so bad! All of you have travelled and you know how good you would feel if your mission abroad is well-equipped. You would like to be picked from the airport in a good car and whenever you have a problem, they quickly run to you. This is something that would make you and I very proud of our country. We should be working hard to ensure that we get more money to this ministry, and make sure this money is put to proper use. That is the most important point I observed from all of you, and I want to thank you all. Let us make sure we give these people money; follow it up and make sure it is put to the right use. Otherwise, it is very embarrassing when you go to an embassy, you cannot even be –(Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Thank you so much for giving way, Mr Chairman. The chairman is talking about people feeling very happy when they are picked, when they travel abroad. The information I have for you is that when people travel, they have per diem. They are not supposed to be picked up by the missions spending the mission money. So, all of you, when you travel, know that you have to spend your money, not the money of the missions.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much for that. I will tell the missions abroad not to bother picking any one of you; but it is just courtesy. Those are what they call consular services. It does nothing wrong to you. Whenever you travel with other delegations, they are met by their embassy staff. After all, it is very little money involved – but you know the etiquette involved. That is what we are talking about.
 
MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: What the colleague said is not true. I led a delegation to Algeria. There were about seven cars receiving me with my team, including the clerk there. I am soon going to lead a Ugandan delegation to Lebanon next week. There are four cars waiting for me but I am paid my allowance. That is an issue of foreign policy. We must be clear. We should not shy away, hon. Minister. Let us have a very clear policy that guides our economic security and foreign interests. That is the national security interest of Uganda. It must be deliberated well -(Interjections)– kindly, please. Thank you.

MR BYARUGABA: That is very good information; I want to thank you. This is the way to go. 

Hon. Todwong talked about the same issue regarding how we should be remunerating our staff, motivating our staff and making them love their work but also their country to serve it better.

Hon. Okuonzi talked about categorisation. The justification is simple and in two sentences; one: if it is categorised under the production sector, because we are all looking at these issues, agree that this ministry needs some protection. That means, in case of a problem and there is a cut-across, the production sector is ring-fenced. They do not touch their budget. Automatically, the feeling will go up and all these things you are talking about will be catered for, hence, the need for putting it under that other category of the economic sector.

Hon. Mulongo was also talking about budget ceilings to ensure that our staff are motivated to do their work. He talked about the consultancy. Yes, I agree and sympathise with that recommendation you are putting across but we are saying we only have an outline. Actually, the document you have been debating, we also got the same document on foreign policy. It is not a foreign policy document; it is just an outline of the foreign policy. This is something they are going to work on, coin out a foreign policy which will be put to test and maybe reviewed later. The committee is saying this is something we can do using our technical staff; even you and I. This is why we have very little money as a start-up fund; the Shs 86 million. Eventually, they will get Shs 350 million but to start, we have only Shs 86 million. That is what we are talking about.

Migingo Island has a problem. For your information, Migingo Island is a very small piece of rock, less than an acre. Imagine an acre! Maybe like where we park our vehicles. It is almost half of where we park our vehicles with a population of more than 600,000 people. They say it is the most densely populated part in the African continent. We are being told that the problem is not exactly about that rock but what is contained around that rock, in terms of fish. So, this is something that is going to be sorted out. 

We should emphasise the aspect of facilitating the border expert technical working group. The expert technical working group is already in place. They were given a deadline but during the course of the deadline, the ministry of finance never released the money. This is very absurd. This is the only problem we have as far as Migingo Island is concerned. 

Some Members talked about the other borders of the country. We made a concrete recommendation - and I want to agree with those of you who have suggested that it is not only Northern Uganda, around Southern Sudan, DR Congo but all the borderlines of the country should be re-demarcated so that we avoid problems in future. 

The other issues were explained properly by the honourable minister and I would not like to engage myself in them. I have not, however, talked about my colleagues’ comments. Hon. Abia talked about regionalisation of representation in our missions abroad. I also thought so at first until I had a second look at the policy statement where the names of all those who head our missions were listed. We may not have time to go through it but I want to assure you, hon. Members - and I am sure you all have copies of this book. Just go to page 136; you will find there all the names of the Foreign Service staff, especially the heads of missions. From what I saw, it might not be 1:1 regional representation but every region is represented. I might say my region Isingiro is not there – like hon. Oguttu was saying. I don’t have any, not even an RDC from Isingiro District! But that does not mean there are no people from Western Uganda. This is something we should consider and look at like patriotic Ugandans. The list is there and you can all check. 

Hon. Wamai talked about recruitment. Recruitment has been ably explained. When you look at Articles 166 and 122 of the Constitution, they are very explicit on who does what. As to when they do recruit, we were also interested in knowing that. We also thought they were the ones doing it but we found out that it is public service, which does the recruitment. Actually, at one time one of the ministers, I wish he were here, tried to make an intervention to bring about some affirmative action but it was already too late. However, we do appreciate your concerns.

On foreign policy; of course, it is not there. We only have an outline. The shadow minister is very correct but the ministry has promised to work on it if they are given this little money.                                                     

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the chairman is something that you nearly made a ruling on. The issue of whether or not we have a foreign policy in this country. The chairman has just said - if I heard him correctly - that we do not have a foreign policy in this country and that what we have is merely an outline. It is a coursework paper. The clarification I am seeking is, of the two, who is telling the truth? Is it the chairman of the committee, the minister or the Attorney-General? (Laughter)

MR BYARUGABA: What the committee found out, Mr Speaker, was that the foreign policy might be there but it is in bits and pieces. There is no one document called a foreign policy document. (Applause) What we have is an outline of the foreign policy of the Republic of Uganda. And they all agreed that we need to kick-start the process with Shs 86 million and this is what we are talking about. We also appreciate that it is little money. We are going to work on this and they agreed that within a week’s time, we should be able to meet them and we kick-start the process through a retreat. I want to beg that we keep things at that. Let us agree that the honourable minister might also not have been in the know just like I was. He is just about a week old in the ministry. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, for the purposes of the Hansard, you might need to be clear. Is it the absence of a foreign policy document or the absence of a foreign policy? 

MR BYARUGABA: It is a foreign policy document that is not there. 

On Guangzhou, there were justifications made by the ministry and Members agreed that it was very necessary. By the way, Uganda and Ethiopia are the only African countries that were allowed to open consulates in Guangzhou. Guangzhou is a very competitive city; the only city in China that manufactures goods for the African market. Every country in Africa wanted to have a consulate there but only Uganda and Ethiopia were allowed to open consulates. So, I think we should applaud and congratulate ourselves upon this. 

Honorary consuls in Mombasa:

Last financial year, a number of us went there and we were given the justification; we brought it to the ministry and I think the ministry is finding out whether it is necessary. I think it is necessary and the committee also found it necessary but the money is not available so it will be put forward to next financial year. It is not an issue for this financial year but it is an important area for us to have a consulate.

Otherwise, I want to thank our shadow minister for the wonderful experience we have shared with him and we will continue to share with him. Those few issues that he feels were not captured can always be captured later. This is not the end of the committee; it is just the beginning. And I want to promise him before you, Mr Speaker, that we will be capturing the issues from the Opposition because we need one good Uganda that incorporates all of us. Even minority views will be taken care of. I assure you, and all Members, of this! 

In conclusion and in accordance with rule 177(2), I now move that Parliament approves the following estimates for the respective ministries and missions for the Financial Year 2011/12 as follows with amendments:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what you are asking the House to do is to adopt the report so please, restrict yourself to the report. That rule you are reading, 177(2), is about adoption of the reports of the committee. 

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much for that guidance, Mr Speaker. In conclusion, therefore, and in accordance with rule 177(2), I now move that Parliament do adopt the report of the committee as provided and also the votes of the respective ministries. I beg to move.

5.33
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to move a motion under rule 46 and I want to invite Members to page 14 of the main report regarding contracts. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which rule are you citing, hon. Ekanya?

MR EKANYA: Rule 46.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When citing, you have to be specific so that we can look at it. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move under rule 46, which is about motions without notice:
(1)	The following motions maybe moved without notice: -
a)	Any motion by way of amendment to a question already proposed by the Speaker.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not proposed the question yet! 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I thought you had already proposed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the question was proposed but the motion has been moved for adoption. Are you proposing an amendment to the motion? 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to move an amendment to the motion regarding contracts that this Parliament resolves that all heads of foreign missions, whose contracts have expired, return to Uganda immediately. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

HON.MEMBERS: Seconded.

MR EKANYA: The justification is that it is very well articulated in foreign policy etiquette of the Commonwealth - and, Mr Speaker, I do remember very well that this is one of the subjects in which you excelled while at Makerere University. The procedure of handling foreign missions is that once a head of mission is appointed, he or she must seek for accreditation from the respective heads of state of those countries and during accreditation, the head of a mission or representative to a country presents credentials from the country where he is coming from for certification. For example, if hon. John Nasasira is appointed head of mission to the United States, there are given days when he will have to be accredited by the President of the United States or the Secretary of State depending on the Constitution of that country, presenting a message from the head of state of Uganda that he is in charge of all foreign issues of this country and it is recorded in that country for a given a timeframe. The day your contract expires in the record of that country is the day you cease to represent that country at that level. And normally heads of missions have periodic meetings where ambassadors are called for meetings - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, for purposes of guidance, if a person has presented his credentials and has been accredited for a particular period of time, is it the accreditation that expires or is it a contract that they have not seen, because what the other head of state sees is the accreditation? If it provides for a period, then it will be in the accreditation request. So, if it expires, it will not be up to us or anybody; it will be up to those people to say, “Well, your time is up, leave.” 

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, the Member has proceeded on a motion, which I am not very sure of. The report does not say that heads of missions or any head of mission abroad has an expired contract. All ambassadors are properly accredited with valid contracts and are properly representing this country. So, there is no crisis whatsoever. Are you saying that an officer in a mission under an accredited ambassador with a due valid contract is affected by expiry of the contract? I think the motion is ill-conceived. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, let me justify. I invited my honourable colleagues to look at page 14 of the report. The committee observed that 17 heads of foreign missions were serving on expired contracts. It is not coming from me; and the rule is very clear. When presenting yourself for accreditation, you present your contract. We have some missions where the heads of the missions and deputy heads of missions don’t even hold meetings. For example, I went as a Member of this Parliament to the UK and hon. Rwabyomere and the second in command do not even meet and, therefore, if the contract of hon. Rwabyomere has expired, the second in command should automatically take over in such a situation, if the contract of the second in command is still valid. But if you have two - the head of mission and the deputy - and one has expired and one has been recalled, who is in charge? So, it is just proper that if one contract has expired, for example, if you are the Attorney-General of Uganda and have been a Member of Parliament for five years and the five years end, you cease being a Member of Parliament and when elections are held, you have new people. These heads of missions should return to Uganda, get fresh appointments and go back and serve because – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, we need to understand this properly because the accreditation is the linkage between the President of one country and the other President and it provides a period. Are you saying that their accreditation has expired? The contract is not known to the other country; it is the accreditation that provides for a period, if it does. So, are you saying that the period for the accreditation letters provided has expired? 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: The information I want to give is that after the head of state has nominated, for example, hon. Nasasira to go to Washington -(Laughter)- hon. Nasasira would be given a letter accrediting him as the Ambassador of Uganda to the United States of America for the next 36 months. They are usually given three-year contracts. But some of these countries do not point out this because of diplomatic relations; otherwise, some countries will tell you – Britain told Uganda that, “You do not have a High Commissioner in London” moreover we had somebody there and that meant that Uganda had to remove that ambassador. Britain then told Uganda that they could not accept that officer and he had to be transferred elsewhere. So, when you are accredited to a country, you are given credentials which you present to the head of state and in those credentials the period of stay is indicated.  

The issue which the honourable member is raising means that we are cheating ourselves. It is clearly expressed that the contracts of those ambassadors expired. Mr Speaker, I don’t see the problem of the ministry. And this is the issue that I referred to earlier. It is the minister who advises the President - actually the permanent secretary informs the minister that the contracts of the ambassadors have expired so that he can inform the appointing authority, who is the President. 

It is not the Chairperson of the Public Service Commission who says, “We are renewing the contract.”  No, even the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs had a letter from public service but we said, “No, he has no prerogative to appoint permanent secretaries, it is the head of state who appoints them.” And they ran back to the head of state who gave him a letter. So, it is the head of state to appoint and give letters. 

THE ATTORNEY–GENERAL: Mr Speaker, the honourable member was moving a motion under rule 46, that is, a motion without notice. It appears to me that debate is being pursued before you rule on whether he can go ahead and bring the motion without notice - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, my guidance was that a proposal had been made for adoption of the report and the only thing he could do was to propose an amendment to that without citing the rule because that rule doesn’t apply. But because a motion has been moved for adoption of the report by the House that is when he came to propose an amendment. Mr Chairman, are you taking that so that we don’t take time on it? Are you conceding to that amendment? 

MR BYARUGABA: Certainly no because we made a very elaborate recommendation giving the appointing authority time and opportunity to immediately take note of this and make or unmake them; and I think that is really being very civil. I would like to thank you.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Basing on that information, hon. Member, do you still want to pursue the matter? The matter has been communicated but if you still want to pursue it further, you can state so.

MR EKANYA: No, Mr Speaker, I am going to withdraw. But I would like to put it on record that we are allowing those officers to draw salaries, which means that tomorrow when the Auditor-General brings a query, this Parliament is fully responsible. So, I want to withdraw based on that and those officers shall not be held liable by this Parliament. Based on that, I withdraw my amendment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I put the question that the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs be adopted.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I said earlier, we need this work completed urgently and as of now I haven’t received any confirmation that any other report is ready. But we shall proceed on Monday. Parliament is adjourned to Monday, 10.00 O’clock. Please, keep time so that we can start on time. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.47 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 29 August 2011 at 10.00 a.m.)

