Tuesday, 24 August 2004

Parliament met at 10.46 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will adjust the arrangement a bit so that we receive and debate all the reports before we go to the figures.  So, when we finish the Ministry of Education we shall not vote on that report, we shall proceed to the Ministry of Finance and then works and we shall have a one-day session to deal with all the figures. I think it will simplify our lives.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Sorry to interrupt you, Madam Speaker. I am just wondering - I have been looking at the Order Paper vis-à-vis the commitment the Leader of Business Government made here last week that we would get a ministerial statement on the appointment of the Attorney General. But I note with great concern that it is listed as business to follow, and yet there was a commitment on the part of the Government that today, Tuesday they would make a statement. I am just wondering if they have been to see you, or if they could explain why they are not ready to give us a statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They did come to me and I felt that we should deal with the financial issues first and at the end of the business today, at about 4.00 p.m. we shall receive the statement from the Office of the Prime Minister concerning that issue.  The Minister for environment, there is a small matter, which you will have to deal with on Thursday.  I hope your colleagues have briefed you.

10.49
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. First of all, I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Social Services and the entire committee for the guidance they have been giving us all these years. I also thank them for this good report, which they produced on the Education and Sports Sector. 

I also thank the honourable members, who yesterday took interest in this sector. I take these contributions as advice to the sector, and we will make some effort to study the contributions of Members and see which of them can be implemented within the limited means at our disposal.  Therefore, what I say here is provisional depending on further study and analysis, and comparing the entire framework with the resources we have.  

Several Members were interested in grant-aiding secondary schools and they were eager to get from me the criteria used for selecting these schools. I think this is a legitimate inquiry. First, there must be a school; we cannot do grant-aiding in principle, that is not possible. What we are authorized to do is to grant-aid an existing school.  

Two, it must be a school licensed by the Ministry of Education and Sports, and therefore there is no way we are going to extend the grant-aiding facility to a school, which has no license from us; and a license is the preliminary stage.  We are not saying everything should be in place, in fact, you are issued with a provisional license and then when you have fulfilled all the minimum requirements we can register you. So, a license is the easiest thing to obtain from the ministry, and there is no reason why people should operate illegally, because it is a requirement of the law.  

Thirdly, the school should have some land, at least a minimum of 10 acres, because the children must be able to have a playground where to run and play, and so on. They cannot be cloistered; it is unhealthy for them to be cloistered. Then, of course, if in that sub-county there is already a school, which is grant-aided by Government, that sub-county cannot receive a service from us, we will move to the next one where there is no grant-aided Government school. In this connection, there was the question –(Interruption)

MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister is explaining to us the criteria used in awarding licenses to schools. He has just told us that they want a school, which has big land and the like. But I just want to find out from him, what criteria do they use to license the schools that we see coming up in town where children are put in garages, and every small room is a classroom? I wonder what the Minister is trying to explain to us when he says this is what we do. What happens to those schools that already have licenses and some are even already registered? Can the Minister clarify?

PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Minister has told us the criteria for grant-aiding schools. He said the school must exist and that it must be licensed. Those two statements imply that there are schools, which are not licensed. And I am putting a question for clarification. Can a school exist without being licensed? Is that a legal institution? Can a school exist without having 10 acres of land, which is, I agree with you, necessary for students to be playing around? Can you allow it, Mr Minister, to exist?

MR PATRICK AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Minister has taken us through certain conditions that need to be fulfilled before a school can have a possibility of being grant-aided. I would like to find out from him whether these guidelines are actually documented and if they are, whether they are available to the public so that they understand what is necessary for them to fulfill before they can demand that a school be grant-aided. I am asking this, Madam Speaker, because the people we lead do not seem to know. And indeed from the questions that arose in Parliament yesterday, it appears the ministry, whereas it knows what the requirements are, has not made these requirements public.

10.59
PROF. VICTORIA MWAKA (Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to look at page 26 of the report on the Education Standards Agency to compliment what hon. Seninde has alluded to. We are looking at licensing and grant-aiding, but we also note in this report that the Education Standard Agency is supposed to provide a rational system of setting and defining standards and quality of education and sports, and to monitor the achievements of such standards and quality to ensure continually improved education in Uganda. But we note that the Education Standards Agency lacks a legal framework to establish it.  

Also we note that they do not know the status of the former Inspectorate Department of the Ministry of Education and Sports because now the two exist.  One, I do not know whether the Inspectorate is still operational because this Education Standards Agency has not taken off. In the absence of these structures, which are supposed to monitor standards, how does the ministry ensure that the licensing and the grant-aiding is done properly? Who does the setting of standard education quality indicators to measure the achievement, which can be used as a standard for say, a private school to be licensed?  

As other Members have said, you find schools in terrible conditions. There was one in Entebbe, which was knocked down by the Clerk in Entebbe, and there was a wrangle. I think it is because people start schools in the absence of a good structure, which could do the work for the Ministry of Education. May I know how it is being done in the absence of either the Inspectorate or the Education Standards Agency, because the report says that both actually are limping; and then they are saying it is grossly under funded. We are contradicting ourselves if we want standards and then infrastructure, which sets standards, is not funded, and then we say we are also bringing everybody on board because UPE is giving us a very big number of pupils who aspire to go for secondary education.

DR MAKUBUYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am becoming increasingly happy because of these interventions. First of all, it is an empirical question whether everybody who says, “I am licensed” is actually licensed. We have discovered several people who even put up signs that they are licensed when they are not licensed. Oh yes, we have discovered these and we have closed their schools. So, apart from that, I accept the homework, which hon. Senide has given me, to go back and do my cross checking to ensure that my minimum standards, which I have been outlining here, are properly enforced everywhere.

Honourable members, I would like to appeal to you that when we embark on this exercise, politics should not come into it, because I went through this exercise three years ago and the kind of reaction I was getting from the political leaders themselves – “Who does he think he is? We have seen other ministers; they have come and gone,” and so on. (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can I ask you to tone down, please?

DR MAKUBUYA: I went through this in practice because I said that by a certain deadline every operator, who had not licensed their institution, was going to be closed down, and I even called some public meetings on this matter. While the head teachers and the teachers were prepared to comply, other people told them, “Ah, you should not bother, we will fix this fellow” -(Interjection)- My friend, you know I am reporting my experience. Madam Speaker, I am reporting my experience, and I would like to thank God that I have been at the helm of the ministry for five years - Yes, because I have gone through this and I have seen it. No, I am just maturing for further service. What are you saying?  

So, there are two things; I agree that I need to address this urgently to ensure that what I have told you corresponds to what actually happens on the ground. That one I accept. You see, Madam Speaker, we are discussing this matter in the context of grant-aiding, and because we are doing it in that context, I think you have to agree that there are schools, which are not asking for grant-aiding, and they exist by the way, and there is no secret about this. 

Schools have to begin somehow; if you are not there, we cannot license space. You know, we allow you to start and then require you to come to us and report. Otherwise, there would not be schools at all. Schools have to start somehow and we are being practical; we are being down to earth. We are saying, “Well, start somehow, but if you want us to get involved with you, then you must have come to a certain level.  

So, the answer is, “Yes, Sir,” we have the minimum guidelines and I can assure you that people who try to start schools begin with us, and these minimum guidelines are distributed regularly through the District Education Officers, because again even that level is operational. But I accept one thing from this contribution; that we need to publicize them more and more; that one I accept. 

This is why, Madam Speaker, I was saying earlier that if it were not for other considerations, I would just say, I accept this advice, and go and use it. What is wrong with me re-distributing these guidelines? There is nothing wrong with it and I undertake to do this –(Interruption)

MR BAKALUBA MUKASA: I thank the hon. Minister for giving way. I just want to support him as an investor in education. Actually, the distribution cannot easily be done everywhere because not everyone is going to begin schools. Normally, we begin the procedure from LCIs where you write a letter and you move with it to LC II up to LC III whereby the letters are signed and stamped, and then they are taken to the District Education Offices. When you reach there, many of those copies displayed there guiding you on what to do if you want to begin a school. If it is a primary school, all the details are there - five acres, you have to have this, you have to have boards - Secondary Schools - everything is outlined. So, I think the Ministry of Education has done its part, and those who would like to join it have to pass through those procedures to get the requirements. Thank you.

DR MAKUBUYA: I would like to thank hon. Rev. Bakaluba Mukasa for speaking the truth to shame the devil. 

Education Standards Agency, hon. Mwaka –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I think the question I posed is not what the Minister has answered. I was actually asking whether the guidelines for conditions that should be met by schools for them to be grant-aided have been made public. What he has answered is, “Has the ministry publicized guidelines for registration of schools?” The two are different.

DR MAKUBUYA: I must repeat that I am becoming increasingly happier by these interventions. I agree that the guidelines for licensing are different from guidelines for grant-aiding, but if you want to come to be grant-aided, you must be licensed first. So, the two are extremely related; they are intimately related and people know that this is the criteria you have to fulfill in order to be grant-aided and they apply because first of all, we cannot impose grant-aiding on you. Grant-aiding is something that you take up voluntarily and people apply. We have thousands of applications of people who have applied and many of them are not returned first time they come. Why, because the criterion is known, because those who are interested find it out and those who are not interested, this criterion will not help them.  So, I agree the two are different, but they are intimately related when it comes to grant-aiding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Minister, I think you are avoiding the question. For instance, when the Ministry of Local Government publishes the releases every month, maybe there are people who are not interested, but it is public information in the newspapers of this country. So, when you say that those who are interested know, the question is, ‘In what way do they reach the public, how can they access that information in order to decide whether to apply or not to apply? That is what Members want to know.

DR MAKUBUYA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your intervention. We send out this information in regular circulars through District Education Officers and District Education Managers. We have an advocacy programme involving seminars and workshops in the districts, and we give out this information to whom it may concern; we give it out definitely.  But there is one point, which I accept from your intervention, which is that we can be more forceful in the dissemination of this criteria and I undertake to become more forceful in this matter so long as I am in the chair. 

We had an Inspectorate, which was phased out in the re-organization of Government in 1998, and it was replaced by the Education Standards Agency. The work, which had been done and that in progress at the Inspectorate was taken over by the Education Standards Agency. Consultations are going on within Government on a proper legal framework for the Education Standards Agency. The Government process takes some time and some people find it irritating, but it takes some time, yes. For example, at one time we were thinking about a general framework for regulating these agencies. There is some consideration for some of these to be allowed to move on their own. So the consultations are going on, but there is an Education Standards Agency and it is at work, it has taken over the work, which was being done by the Inspectorate.  

Of course, the under-funding affects almost every Government department. So, I think the important thing is that we have a commitment in Government to structure a strong Education Standards Agency and we use the resources which can now be allocated to the Agency to do as much as possible, and I think we have –(Interruptions)

DR FRANCIS EPETAIT: Thank you very much, hon. Minister for giving way. We are informed, on page 26, that the Education Standards Agency was established way back in July 2001, but to date there is no legal framework establishing it, and yet we are talking about perpetual under-funding to an entity which has no legal framework to establish it. Again, under challenges, it was mentioned that the status of the district inspectors of schools is not clear if the Agency is established. I want to find out from the Minister what has bogged down the establishment of the legal framework since then, three years ago! How then do we expect appropriations to an agency, which has no legal framework? I do not know really how it has really been operating. Thank you very much.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: The hon. Minister has talked about the under-funding and inspection. I also just want to chip in as far as UPE is concerned. We have a problem, UPE is a good development and it has helped a lot of our people and children in our areas. But the problem is on funding, I can see other capitation grant in billions, but actually this money continues to delay to come at our respective schools and this affects the standards and the inspection, and everything. So, since the Minister of Education is here, he needs to know that we have this problem. 

Our pupils have now gone on holidays, but it pains to see that the last UPE remittance came in June. How do you expect the headmasters to run the other months when this money has not come? They need to buy materials and whatever, to maintain standards.

Secondly, every year these funds continue to reduce whereas we have many other schools enrolling to be supported by the Government.  

Lastly, on inspection, I think we should put in place a mechanism of how we are going to support the Inspectorate.  When a lot of these funds in billions are being remitted to our schools, when the Inspectorate is not supported at all, they cannot go there to check the accountability, the transparency, how buildings are being put up, it ends in total chaos. The Movement Government has done a lot but at the end of the day we may be counted as people who didn’t do anything if there is no supervision and the inspection.  I thank you.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to supplement what the hon. Member of Parliament from Mukono has just said. There is a problem in education especially UPE and that is, drop out rate. I would like the hon. Minister to address that problem. The average classroom census in P.1 everywhere is about 100 or more.  But by the time those children reach P.7, they have dropped down to 40. So the dropout rate in some districts is about 80 percent. Has the hon. Minister realized this problem and is there a plan to address it? For example, do you plan to have a social worker to address the problem of truancy and straightforward dropout, hon. Minister? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I need your guidance.  We are holding back debates waiting for the Minister to complete his presentation. But listening to interventions from the Floor, it seems there is a debate. Do we wait until the Minister has completed his presentation? Can we interject as and when we feel a point needs, what is the procedure, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate had actually ended yesterday and it was only matters that need serious clarification that I expected you to raise today.  We had a fully-fledged debate yesterday; we also had a general debate on the Budget and on the State of the Nation Address. So this issue should not keep on recurring.  Let the Minister respond to issues, which had already been raised. Let us not have a general debate again.

MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like you to bear with the House. The reports of the Social Service Committee of last year and this year are almost the same in that many areas, which were recommended for attention, were not attended to. Therefore, you cannot rule out Members to get satisfactory answers. 

In fact my view yesterday, I was expecting sanctions on some areas of the Ministry so that recommendations made last year are implemented. It is against this background, Madam Speaker, that Members want many issues clarified. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable Members, you had some three weeks in which to have these questions answered in the Social Services Committee, what happened?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I will borrow a critical incident of two reports that I have. A report presented in April 2003 made recommendation on higher institutions of learning urging the Minister, under section 132(6) of the National Council of Higher Education to ensure that MUBS be established fully as a tertiary institution under the Act, but this has not been done. I indeed recommend that the Minister take action and comply with the law.  

This year’s report, on page 24, reads, “Therefore, the committee recommends that it will table a Private Members Bill to effect amendment of the Higher Education and Tertiary Institution Act, 2002 to solve, once and for all, this legal crisis of MUBS”.  

Madam Speaker, why I am saying so is that the recommendations made last year are the same recommendations made this year, and what I expected actually from the Committee of Social Services is to put a sanction.  

Madam Speaker, Sir Winston Churchill said that, “To the supreme authority lies the blame or credit for the results.” This Parliament is not a place for us to come here and talk and talk.  Why do people petition Parliament? It is that, as an oversight the arm of Government, we must put sanctions. We are debating the policy statement; we must put sanctions. When we recommend something, it is not story telling. What I expected actually is to put sanctions because, for instance, on this case I have highlighted, the law is very clear.  Establishing courses parallel to those of an institution affiliated to Makerere is another way of killing an institution. It is funny - (Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much, hon. Rwamirama, for giving way.  The information I want to give is that the recommendation of the committee actually leads to what he is proposing. The committee has failed to get results from the Minister.  So, now it has said, ‘Let us take it to Parliament, when it is passed a Private Members Bill will come here to solve the problem.’  

Madam Speaker, when decisions are not taken, you suffocate the operations in the organization.  Because of the Minister’s failure to take a action as recommended by Parliament, you are seeing in the papers “Makerere University, MUBS - Nothing is being done”. So, we put that recommendation in this report, after Parliament has approved it, then action must be taken because we do not expect, as a committee, any action from the Minister. That is why the Minister is expected to answer why he has not taken action that has led the committee to put in the report this recommendation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the right to move a Private Members Bill does not depend on this plenary. You do not need the sanction of this House to move a Private Members Bill; you do not need authority from my Chair or from this House.  You are demanding for time to bash the Minister of Education, but all of you are contributing, nobody was talking about the recommendation until hon. Rwamirama talked about it. You should have stated from the beginning that this ministry is an errant ministry; we shall not give it money for reason a, b, c, d and produce reports of the last two financial years.

MR OKUPA ELIJAH: Madam Speaker, hon. Bright Rwamirama has raised the issue, which is raised in the report that there is a legal problem. We have the former University Secretary, Makerere University here who is well versed with these issues. Is there a legal problem between Makerere and MUBS? You are technical in this area, can you clarify to us whether there is still a problem or it is just administrative problem, as you are raising here?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, my understanding of the recommendations of the committee is that -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, where is the Vice-Chairperson of the committee? Dr Lwanga, come down here on the hot seat.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, my understanding of the recommendations of the committee is to guide the ministry and the Minister in implementation and incorporation of recommendations after analysis.  Realistically, it is expected that when recommendations are made, the Minister is given time to look at them to carry out further technical analysis about their viability and give a feedback on whether or not these recommendations are viable or not. So, I think the point of contention is not whether or not these recommendations are implemented; the point of contention is whether indeed the House has got a feedback on why some recommendations were implemented and why some others were not. This is where our problem lies.  

If the Minister can show us, because we are not saying that you go and implement everything you have recommended, no, because they might require further analysis, which makes them possible or not possible. But surely, when we make recommendations as a committee, it is expected that the responsible Minister makes at least an attempt to give us a feedback on why some things were not done and why other things were done.  

For instance, I can raise some further comments about school feeding programme. We have raised it on this Floor of the House; it is in this report that school feeding should be part of Universal Primary Education. When you come back and you list some districts and others are left out, you are piloting on people’s intellectual development. This is a national issue; there is no explanation sufficient to convince anybody why. 

And Madam Speaker, some of us are teachers. A child in a primary school - and we observe it everyday - by 11 O’clock schools go on break, teachers go in the staff-room and have some tea. The students are left on the playground, and after that teachers, the old people, are already tired. They call kids back to class and begin to talk to them; the kids are not learning anything. In fact, some of these children have come out of their homes without breakfast. There is no learning of any kind - I can tell you; I am a teacher. There is no learning when a child is hungry. 

Therefore, hon. Minister give me any technical difficulty why the feeding programme cannot be part of Universal Primary Education – (Interjection) - I am not debating; I am seeking clarification. Thank you very much.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am also expressing concern on the direction of duty on the part of the Ministry of Education. In part, the ministry is actually committing a crime among other things – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Pardon?

MR AWORI: They are committing a serious breach of the law. On page 23 of the report, which is, repeated almost annually 7.8 - Uganda Management Institute. The status of this institute legally has never been established and yet they continue to draw money from this august House.  

Two, this institute continues to award degrees yet it has no established legal status.  Hon. Minister, do I see direction of duty here again or is it an oversight? If it is an oversight, how is the international community going to recognize degrees from an institute, which is not legally incorporated? Or for that matter, whose degrees are not locally recognized?

Madam Speaker, an institution, which has no legal status, has no authority whatsoever to issue a degree, to be legally recognized or to draw from public resources its sustenance. So, Madam Speaker, could the hon. Minister in charge of Education tell us how UMI continues to exist, draw money from public resources and continues to award degrees without legal status. Madam Speaker, are we here to sanction illegality and direction of duty?

MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to point out that the Minister is handling the most crucial sector in this country in the sense that he is handling the most important resource any nation has. So, when we talk of modernization, when we talk of development, all of them hinge on his sector.  

Madam Speaker, I was perturbed yesterday by the observation by the Health Commission when they pointed out that through their interviews they had seen that the standards of products from our institutions, and I am sure they handled the medical part, are lowering. To me, that is very serious especially in this era when we are not only producing for our own nation, but also for the global jobs.

Madam Speaker, the most important resource any nation has is its human resource and that resource must be qualitative – (Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, with the greatest respect to hon. Members, I am getting increasingly disturbed by the procedure we are adopting. This report was tabled yesterday, and Members had opportunity to debate it. General debate on the report was closed, the Minister is answering. Now honourable members have gone back to the report to raise new issues. Of course there are recommendations in this report, and if I heard the hon. Minister very well, he started by saying that he has noted the recommendations – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, it is established procedure in this august House that once the Chair has ruled on a matter, it is final. Is it in order for my hon. colleague to try to repeat your ruling and in the course of repeating it, distorting it?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I believe the Minister of Finance is worried about the constitutional deadline, I think that is what is really bothering him.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I was coming to that because what I see happening this morning is that Members have taken the occasion to reopen debate, go over the issues which they aught to have raised yesterday, yet, today is the 24th. Madam Speaker, we have about 10 sectors, we are bound to close this process by the 31st. Taking off Saturday and Sunday we have only five days. At this pace, if we adopt this procedure, I am afraid we may not be – (interruption)

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Madam Speaker, last week we did adjourn prematurely twice, and the whole week went without serious work done. The cause of all this was the Minister who is speaking. Is he in order now to raise that matter at this juncture, yet the cause of all these delays was the Minister of Finance? The mess in the figures was a result of the Minister not giving proper information. What is he talking about?  

I can move a motion that let the Member not be heard again, because the whole cause of these delays here is the Minister. He even came here without the documents, and when he was told to produce the corrigenda, he failed to produce it! Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the Minister was the cause of the delays of last week, then he is out order.  

Honourable members, on a serious note, it is true that we have a constitutional deadline and we must conclude matters of the Budget by Friday at 5 O’clock. So far we have dealt with only four ministries. But I am thinking that if we could agree, we complete the Budget process and next week we have a day to discuss some of the most salient matters of these reports which are really aching Members, and which I agree are very important. In fact, I would go so far as to ask those Members to summarize the recommendations they have been making which have been neglected and we specifically discuss them because the matters raised are very important. Is that okay honourable members? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give you time next week – two sittings.  

MR TIBARIMBASA: The issues we are discussing are pertinent and members cannot be rushed, but the Act - I think it is Article 40 of the Budget Act - empowers you to use your authority and extend the period when these budgets can be concluded. So, you have the power to extend the period. Thank you.

MRS SENINDE: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just raising a point of procedure because we usually would have had debates for at least two days for such big reports like the one for Social Services. It is unfortunate that we have a very short time now. Yesterday we debated for only one day and many of us did not have the opportunity, but I remember before you asked the ministers to respond you gave an opportunity to members to interject. 

The issue we are discussing now, the one the minister is responding to, is very important. How are we going to pass the budget when we are not convinced about some of these issues? So, Madam Speaker, I think it is necessary for members to chip in those very important issues so that we pass the Budget when we are confident that such issues are really taken care of.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have power to extend the time but you see we passed Vote-on-Account; we know when it is going to end. We know when we are supposed to give the country money to use; and you know we had time during the Social Services Committee session, the general debate on the Budget, and the State of the Nation Address. But we shall allow those, which are pertinent, so that the minister can answer them. And I have already acknowledged that these are very important matters.

MR GAGAWALA: Procedurally, as a Member of Parliament for Bulamogi County, I am entitled to say no to what the Minister of Finance or the Minister of Education is saying if I feel that my constituents are really not benefiting from the proposals of either minister. Therefore, I would like to request, in a situation where I feel that I am totally flabbergasted and in a situation where I am inclined to vote “no” - Madam Speaker, can you assure me here today that there will be a committee to look into what is hurting the people of my constituency? It is difficult for me to stand and say I accept this and that because I would like today – this morning I woke up to come and say no to the Minister of Education but from the proposals you have put forward, Madam Speaker, it appears that you are convincing me that there are other options, which can be used like Government Assurances and the Public Accounts Committee. For example, today –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wambuzi, what is the matter related to the Ministry of Education, which is bothering you at this moment?

MR GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, I have got a file of a whole sub-county, whose teachers have not received salaries for some time. I beg you to allow me to tender the file from that sub-county so that the Public Accounts Committee looks into that matter instead of me standing up to block this Vote because it is an issue, which affects the welfare of teachers in some of my sub-counties.

Secondly, the Auditor-General made a comment about Kamuli District – Shs 3 billion out of a budget of Shs 23 billion of Kamuli District is not accounted for, and I am sure it is my teachers who are suffering as a result of this. In view of the fact that we cannot really stop this budget from being passed, then it is very important for me to appeal to you to allow the Public Accounts Committee to look into these areas. They are irregular, and this is actually abusing or violating the rights of the primary school teachers. 

Of course I thank the Ministry of Education for having listened to my appeals in that at least the Minister of Education came to visit my constituency. Already some classrooms are being built, but this is out of cries! It has now come to teachers. If we just look on, then we are not performing our oversight role and if we do not bring our cries in front of you, Madam Speaker, where shall we cry from if it is not in this House? It must be to you and it is incumbent upon you to see to it that these committees like of Government Assurances see that Kaliro gets district status. The Committee of Public Accounts should see to it that the teachers get their salaries. It is really in your powers to see to it that these people get heard and these people get attention. 

I appeal to you, Madam Speaker, to allow me to tender the file on the Auditor-General’s report about the Shs 3 billion, which was lost in Kamuli District. I also tender the irregularity of teachers who have not been paid for a period of six months and - one of them is I think two years. It is very important; we cannot block this Vote. We shall allow it to pass but allow us to use other committees to look into these affairs. This is the procedural point, which I wanted to point out to you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think my Chair has never denied anybody in this House an opportunity to present his or her problems. (Applause) You are behaving as if you have been prevented from bringing your problems; this has not happened. Hon. Wambuzi, I am speaking. Do not drag the Speaker’s office into some of these petty matters. We have the Local Government Accounts Committee and we have the Public Accounts Committee, which are open to all the members of this House. 

MR GAGAWALA: But, Madam Speaker, I am appealing that if I am going to request -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, once again I repeat what is the established order in this august House. Once the Speaker has made a ruling on a matter, that is the end of it; no Member shall follow it up. It would be in total breach of our decorum. Is it in order for my honourable colleague to keep following up a matter on which you have ruled?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is out of order. (Laughter) Honourable members, I am very delighted to inform you that in the distinguished strangers’ gallery we have the Assistant Minister for Transport, of Kenya, Mr Andrew Ligale. (Applause) He is a Member of Parliament for Vihiga in Western Kenya and he has come for a meeting of the Uganda-Kenya Railways Joint Commission. We hope that very soon we shall have trains running all across East Africa, with his co-operation. You are very welcome, together with your delegation. (Applause)

11.40
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleagues for their interventions. I just want to make one observation with regard to the quality of education in this country. The foundation, which is primary school, is not given its due attention. I am interested in the education sector particularly in my constituency, and if I told you my standard, I think I have the worst in this country especially when I compare with the rest of the district. 

I have observed that at primary level, if all of us look back and see how we were prepared at Primary level, it is not the case now. So, we need to address the primary sector so that these children complete when they have a very strong foundation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you seeking clarification from the Speaker?

MR BIKWASIZEHI: No, I am just making a recommendation. It has something to do with this Budget -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Another recommendation?

MR BIKWASIZEHI: No, not recommendation, I am making an observation. We must motivate the people in the sector, the players in that sector and these are the primary teachers. I was happy when the President promised to increase their salaries to Shs 200,000 per month. I strongly support that and I have realized they are putting in place a committee to study that. I feel it should be seriously addressed because these are major players. If they are not well motivated, the sector will remain very shaky. That means even if you have very good secondary schools and very good universities, they will build on a shaky foundation. Hence, our quality of education will remain very low. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

11.55
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you once again, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank honourable members for all these interventions but let me try to be fair to everybody beginning with those who made their contributions yesterday, and then I will return to the contributions that have been made today. I fear that otherwise I am going to forget the issues that were raised yesterday. 

The President in the State of the Nation Address promised awards in science and technology and I was required to respond to what arrangements have been made to operationalize these awards. My understanding is that Government has set aside Shs 400 million in the current budget, under the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology, to operationalize the President’s promise to recognize science, technology and similar innovations. 

Madam Speaker, the Government was thanked for arranging to pay school fees for students in post-primary education and training institutions whose parents are in the camps for internally displaced people. I think the concern was that we have paid for second term but what is going to happen to subsequent terms? The Government has a commitment to pay school fees until alternative arrangements can be made. 

Hon. Wakikona advised Government to set up a committee for harmonising and equating qualifications of non-traditional areas. I accept this advice. 

Some members wanted the seed school programme to be dropped at secondary level so that the focus is on granting more aid. Madam Speaker, dropping the seed school programme is at this point in time very risky. You say we have built very few seed schools and, therefore, we should drop it in favour of granting aid; but the concept of a seed school is the following. The recipient sub-county does not have a school at all and so Government comes in to start it off. There will be new sub-counties - before this session started I was talking to some honourable members and they were saying we have new sub-counties, what are we going to do? We have just built the sub-county headquarters; we have just done so much and so the programme of seed schools has, frankly, to be strengthened. What I accept in this contribution is that we should speed it up and I agree we will endeavour to do this depending on the resources availed to us.

There is some concern over the matter of the university in Eastern Uganda and there was a proposal that we allocate at least a nominal budget to this project and then move forward. Madam Speaker, I have appointed a committee to plan for the establishment of the public university in Eastern Uganda. This committee has a deadline to report to me; it has two more months to report back and then we will move forward. We are at project formulation phase and the funding of this stage is covered by the Education Sector Planning Project. When this committee reports back, the Education Planning Department will write up the findings as a project to be submitted to the development committee of the Ministry of Finance. 

Madam Speaker, my understanding is that there is no short cut and so I am happy that on this occasion I am not just lamenting the non-existence of a public university in the East, I am actually moving forward with an actual plan to establish it.  

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, we specifically recommended yesterday that the honourable minister, using his office, should establish a temporary  - or a vote whether it is of one shilling or twenty shillings - as a way of commitment to the project. There should be a commitment, in other words the idea that you have accepted it. And I know from various political speeches by the head of state, he has made a commitment to that effect. 

My honourable colleague here in charge of Education is now telling the august House that he has set up a committee to look into the matter. A committee, whose terms of reference he has not told us. If he had told us, among other things, that the terms of reference include looking for a site, then I could say we should wait. But if one of the terms is to look into the feasibility of the need for it, then I take you to task, and I take your Chairman of the Cabinet to task too. When he meets a number of people he says, “Yes, it is time to have a public university in Eastern Uganda.” So, I am seeking clarification, are you committed to the concept or are you still shopping for a concept?  

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The more the Minister of Education and Sports talks about a public university in the East, the more it becomes difficult for me to understand which direction we are taking. Often the President of this country, speaking to different communities in the Eastern part of the country, has promised them a public university in their region. While fighting the Kony insurgency in Teso, during a meeting of political leaders, elders and religious leaders, the President promised the people of Teso a public university sooner than later. 

I am also aware that during his mobilization trips to Busoga region, he promised the people of Busoga a public university sooner than later. This was coming from the horse’s mouth. When the committee set up by the Minister sets out to do its work, there is a lot of confusion among the public and this could cause anger among them. So, I would like my mind to be cleared on this so that as I go back home in Teso I tell them, “Look, I think it was hot air that the President was blowing and you are not going to get a public university in your region”.  

DR NKUUHE: I would like the Minister to clarify to me, there was a task force set up to investigate the possibility of setting up an open university in Uganda. I sat on that task force and we did commendable work; we traversed the whole country and we submitted our report. This open university is actually not fixed in terms of location. So, why are you setting up another task force? Why do you not build up on what the open university team recommended and maybe you place that university in the East and then you build on that? Mr Minister, could you clarify to us what happened to the open university?  

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Social Services Committee presented its report and there was a general debate on this report yesterday. I am responding to some of the contributions of the members, but we can go back to the report at page 20, and I will read it out;

“7.0 Higher Education
7.1 Public University in Eastern Uganda
Government will set up a public university in Eastern Uganda. The committee was happy to note that a taskforce to carry out a study about the establishment of a public university in the East has been set up. The terms of reference for the taskforce are:

i) To carry out a feasibility study on the establishment of a public university in Eastern Uganda.
ii) To assess the available options and come up with a justifiable location on the proposed university.
iii) To come up with justifiable proposals on possible disciplines to be offered by the university.
iv) To carry out wide consultations with key stakeholders.
v) The task committee will be expected to present the draft report to top management of the Ministry of Education and Sports by the end of October, 2004.”

Madam Speaker, as a country we have some experience in setting up public universities and we have some experience in sorting out disputes on the location of public universities. So, we are going to use this experience even to sort out the matter of location. 

And this is not the open university, this is a public university in the East. The question of the open university is still under study and consideration by the Ministry. When we are ready we will report on it. I would like to say –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know my honourable colleague has qualifications in law and education, but now he is playing the role of a diplomat. We want a commitment; you are going round and round. Can you tell this august House, especially those of us who come from that region, that the Government has committed itself to a public university in Eastern Uganda, subject to the following? We want a commitment subject to these terms of reference. Can you commit yourself to that position?

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Thank you very much once again, Madam Speaker and honourable members. First of all, hon. Aggrey Awori had said that I am talking about a committee, which does not even have terms of reference. I read out these terms of reference to answer hon. Aggrey Awori on that matter. 

Having answered that, Madam Speaker, as you know I thanked the Committee on Social Services for having done a good job and I am serious about this; this is not diplomacy. I am glad that hon. Aggrey Awori wants me to go up in terms of appointment, but it is not yet happening. So, I would appeal to members –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: I appeal to members to really take this committee seriously. It spent a lot of time with us, it cross-examined us, and I can also confess they are not very easy people to deal with but – yes, this is a very serious committee. 

The committee says that Government will set up a public university in Eastern Uganda; I am not contesting this. I am here, I could say this is not correct. It would not be the first time because as you know, sometimes I come here and say, “this is not correct”. But I am here to say, “this is correct”. What commitment do you want? An affidavit or what?  

I think the last point is about hot air. I do not think that the President promised hot air to the people of the East. Evidence that it is not hot air is this section of this report of the Committee on Social Services. We are in business and the money is not the starting point. It is the planning, which is the starting point. You have to cost the project. You cannot just see the money; money to what? We are moving this process forward and I think that this is the proper procedure to follow. We are trying to avoid being queried by other authorities. We are doing it the proper way we are supposed to, and we will be reporting regularly to Parliament on the progress made on this matter. 

Hon. Anang-Odur said that he supports the recommendation of the committee to use UNEB results for selection of beneficiaries of the bursary scheme in secondary schools. I do not contest this. We shall see how it works. 

Then there was the question of recasting sponsorship at the public universities so that we accommodate merit, the human resource needs of Uganda and the poor but brilliant. Madam Speaker, you will recall that hon. Anang-Odur came up with a formula. This is a matter, which must be concluded and be implemented by academic year 2005/2006. It cannot be delayed beyond that. So, this proposal from hon. Anang-Odur will be part of the material we are now studying to conclude this matter. 

Hon. Zirabamuzaale mentioned the issue of multi-grade teaching and the committee made – if you look at page 18, recommendation 5.1, the committee appreciated the policy of multi-grade teaching. However, they recommended that it should move slowly so that it can be adequately internalized. I do not contest this recommendation and I am glad that hon. Zirabamuzaale herself mentioned that she is aware that this approach is used in other countries. We are not inventing it here but it is one of the options available and we accept the recommendation that it should be taken up in stages.  

Madam Speaker, there was something about school feeding. It has been raised this morning but it was raised even yesterday. I think honourable members have to remember that the original plan for UPE did not include school feeding. Indeed, it was being cited internationally as a cost saving measure and the people who were commending it know about the need for feeding and so on but you can only do so much at a time. We are now saying that the funds available to us allow us to start it in 19 districts. We shall scale it up as funds become available -(Interruption) 

MR GAGAWALA: Last year, at about the same time, the Minister of Education indeed suffered a delay in approving his budget because of the issue of primary school feeding. You ruled yourself, Madam Speaker, that the Minister of Education should hold a serious seminar so that all stakeholders interface on the issue of school feeding. Now we are being told that nine districts in hardship are likely to get school feeding yet actually there has not been a seminar for all stakeholders to brainstorm on the issue of primary school feeding? 

Is the minister now changing goalposts and taking a short cut instead of actually causing all of us to get involved in addressing the issue of school feeding? I remember that year, Madam Speaker, when you were in the Chair it was a serious debate on this Floor and we all agreed that the Ministry of Education would be able to call us together and we brainstorm on this issue. It appears now this issue has been forgotten and he is taking a short cut. He is actually addressing the crisis in the North instead of addressing the whole nation’s problem. This is a national problem. Karamoja has the problem and even Bunya has the problem, Bulamogi has the problem, and Kamwenge has the same problem. Can I get clarification on why the minister has taken on this style of a shortcut? 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give the minister is on this issue it not that certain districts were left out. However, the concern of the members is that there are districts that are more needy and these should have been included first and others would have waited and come in the second phase. When I look at this report, in February 2000 the national economy - this was from the Ministry of Finance about the poverty statistics - you do realize on page 17 that Western region is not as badly off as other regions. When I look at this, the people who are never poor, from the Northern region, are 7 percent, Western region it is 33 percent, Eastern region it is 19 percent, Central region it is 37 percent. 

Going by those statistics from the Ministry of Finance, we would have expected all the districts from Northern Uganda, which has only 17 percent who are never poor - meaning 93 percent are poor and should have benefited - we would not expect a district like Mbarara to come in at this stage. We would have a district like Kibaale come in, Pallisa, Sironko to appear first; Kumi is not here. That was the concern. They had also given us the criteria of picking these districts. One of them was a low illiteracy rate. 

We all know that Northern and Eastern Uganda are affected most by the low enrolment rates, high dropout rate, high food insecurity index and high poverty levels, which is a key in the criteria; not to mention poor health indicators. This report summarizes all these and you will realize that North and East are the worst hit districts. So, we expected those districts to be the first, we should start with them as we roll out to other districts.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Two days ago we had a meeting with His Excellency the President and among other things he expressed concern about the market for milk. He actually told us that dairy farmers in Western Uganda - there are seasons when they have to pour out and waste thousands of liters of milk for lack of a market, and yet the same person chairs the Cabinet, which among other things, came up with the UPE programme? I am just surprised, knowing very well that milk is a notable component of proper nutrition, why is it that he did not put it in your budget for UPE to ferry milk from the President’s farm and distribute it in primary schools? Why can you not do that? The poor man has got to pour his milk when there are kids who need that milk.  

PROF. KAMUNTU: You know, sometimes hon. Aggrey Awori of course uses words, which are provocative. What we are talking about is a very serious matter. It is a matter, which relates to the learning of a child, regardless of where that child is. A child cannot learn when he is hungry; no, it cannot happen. We have taught before. When a child is yawning, what you teach enters from one ear and out the other, and there is nothing registered in the brain because the child is very hungry. It is true. Therefore, when you have Universal Primary Education, a policy that every child in the nation should have access to education, an integral part of that policy should have been school feeding. Now you are simply putting numbers in class, you are not caring about whether they are actually learning anything. Therefore, the whole purpose of Universal Primary Education is defeated. 

Consequently, with the criteria you have put in place, you are finding some excuses to exclude others. But frankly speaking, every child who is a beneficiary of Universal Primary Education regardless of where he is, should have a feeding programme as a component of this. You know why? There are even districts where children who are stunted are higher in percentage terms. Anyway, I am really not arguing about a district being included or excluded, what I am arguing for is the Government to come up with a programme, which is a national programme. Absolutely; not slowly by slowly. A life of a child is an individualized thing. If a child fails to learn this year, it is not slowly by slowly. 

What is the purpose of having Universal Primary Education when the education is not being instilled in the mind of a child because he is hungry? What is the purpose? Mr Minister, I do know the resource constraint but listen, Madam Speaker, the resources are an excuse. When somebody does not want to do anything, he will tell you the resources are not there. It is not true that resources are not there, it is how they are being allocated. If Universal Primary Education is a priority, the resources will be found. You could look at the leakages, how much money? Bwana Minister, come forward, you have our support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why do we not leave this matter of the food? Are you talking about the milk?

MRS SENINDE: Yes, I am talking about the food issue. Madam Speaker, I just want to inquire from my honourable colleague, I wonder whether we are really realistic because to be honest, feeding schools, UPE schools, has financial implications. It is right the children have to eat, and my colleague is insisting that this should be done immediately, according to how I understand it. But we should also be considerate because in the first place if the Government has put up UPE and it has just started, how do we force the Government to feed the children? So, what are the parents going to do? 

Madam Speaker, what I am trying to come up with is –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order, members!

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I know we all love our country and we love the children but on the other hand we must also be considerate and realistic. If we insist that the Government should feed the children, I need to be told what the parents now have to do. What is their contribution? The only thing probably I would blame on the Ministry is to refuse parents from contributing at least something. I know our people are poor, but does it mean we have to make them sleep without contributing anything towards this programme. We need to be considerate. It has just started, we are blaming the Government –(Interjection)- yes, you have to be realistic. 

What I am trying to raise is that not so many schools have had a chance of having structures for UPE. The Government has not completed doing that. The teachers do not have houses and the Government is trying its level best and now we are bringing in this element of feeding! We should be considerate. It is our responsibility as leaders to educate the parents.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I did not intend to interrupt my colleague but by saying that feeding is less important than actually the infrastructure, I feel this is a violation of the rights of our children to access quality education. Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that actually feeding is less important than infrastructure in education, and in the process misleading the House? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This issue of feeding, from what I have been hearing, is really dimensional. There are those who are saying that there are some parts of the country where there is excess milk, which is poured, and that should find its way into the school system. Then there are those who are saying that the Government ought to have been clear on feeding all schools in the country. So, there are many aspects to this question of feeding. I think we need the Minister to come out clearly on this. But note that some parents have no responsibility at all. They tell children to go to school in the morning and they just go -(Interjection)- no, there are those who believe that they have no responsibility. That is why, as the honorable member said –(Interjections)- order, order! 

That is why last year we had said that we could, as stakeholders, discuss this matter and advise our constituents on what to do about the question of feeding. Mr Minister, I hope you are able to say something about it now.

DR NKUUHE: We have very important information from the UN.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From the UN?

DR NKUUHE: Yes. I am on the hunger task force, we have been working for two years and we have all sorts of information. In fact Uganda itself has got a policy on school feeding. There is a whole document - I am surprised I did not bring it, but we have come up with the recommendations. First of all, it is possible to feed school children but it is costly. It is expensive.  

Secondly, it would make more sense to feed school children using locally produced feeding material, so that you stimulate the local market and you stimulate the effective demand within the local market. 

Thirdly, it would help also to do some sort of fortification. In other words, to enrich the food, process it locally and enrich it so that you buy all the locally available food and, therefore, the quality of nutrition is improved. What is needed though is some sort of fund to start the process, to catalyze the process. The countries can then work - because additional resources would be needed definitely as the costs are known. And also there are areas where hunger is known; both visible and hidden hunger. You may think Bushenyi is actually well fed, but in actual fact 45 percent of the children are stunted - yes, something like that. I have a lot of documents, Madam Speaker, I can make them available in all sorts of formats. I will make them available to the Committee on Agriculture, because the solution is there. It is just that we need to see how to put it in the national plans. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, but is it not something for which – there are so many grants and loans for I do not know what: capacity building, et cetera. Is feeding not something we can do for the children of this country? We borrow for so many things.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I want to supplement my honourable sister, Seninde’s contribution. Feeding decisions are economic decisions. The programme is very popular, we know we need it but the issue of feeding children, the issue of buying pads for children, it does not need people to be just sentimental. It has to do with numbers, it has to do with family planning, and it has to do with taxation. Because when you talk of feeding children, there are those who are producing ten children and it means those who are producing two children must subsidize for the numbers.

Madam Speaker, we have a need for the children but the only way to solve this problem is through answering the question: who is to bear the cost? Who is going to bear the cost? Hon. Nkuuhe brought it out very well. There is a study but the fundamental question is: who is going to bear the cost? Is it the state? If it is the state then we have to tax more. Yes, there is no short cut. I would like to urge my colleagues, those who want those programmes, that you must tell people to save money and pay for the food. (Applause)

MR ANTHONY MUKASA: Madam Speaker, can you protect us from hon. Okupa, hon. Odonga Otto and hon. Tibarimbasa who are not allowing us to even hear what hon. Rwamirama is saying?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, our rules are very clear. When somebody is on the Floor, the rest of you listen. So please, listen to hon. Rwamirama.

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to reinforce the point of my honourable colleague, Bright Rwamirama. The minister said that if there is cost saving here, it is on the part of the parent. If you are not paying school fees and you are earning an income, from primary one to primary seven, how much are you saving? Can you not feed your child? You are producing, can you not contribute to the nation as a person?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we now have enough ideas on how to feed the children. Please, conclude so that the minister can give us an answer.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, allow me to conclude. The quality of life is very important and I would like Uganda to borrow the example of the Republic of Ireland. The Republic of Ireland was the poorest in Europe and now it is second or third in terms of per capita income. The only way they have done it is to improve the quality of life and you can do it by controlling numbers. Please, take on what you can manage. Do not expect the state to pay schools fees and buy pads for your daughter. Yes. Madam Speaker, allow me to finish. 

The question of Northern Uganda is understood, and Eastern, where there is rebellion. That should come under the programme of intervention of disaster management, not UPE. And the biggest disservice we have done to this country is to introduce UPE without a legal framework. We started with four children, now people are marrying four women, even those who cannot afford them, and now you want us to feed them? (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I think there is a misunderstanding here. Let me put it to you this way. Once a child is born – we are not debating the unborn people, that is a different issue - we are talking about people who are already born, who have life. When you read the report of the committee, already Government has accepted the school feeding programme starting with 19 districts and I read them. Not all of them are from the North: Arua, Gulu, Kitgum, Bundibugyo is not in the North, Masindi, Moyo, Adjumani, Mbarara is not in the North, Soroti, Katakwi, Kaberamaido, Lira, Apac, Moroto, Kotido, Nakapiririt, Yumbe, Nebbi; but you realize the point. The point at issue is not really the districts, which have been selected.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I respect hon. Kamuntu. He knows a lot of economics, he is a teacher, but when you start something it must be sustainable. Are you going to sustain it?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, it is sustainable, Madam Speaker. It is a question of what choices we make regarding the resources that we have and I am putting it to you this way. The education of our children is the cornerstone of sustainable development; this is very true.  There is no any other alternative except that we talk about knowledge based economy; knowledge based economy is not a natural endowment to economies.  The sustainability of any development economy is based on knowledge and that knowledge can only come if children are fed.  If they are not fed, you are simply putting numbers in a class and nothing happens. 

Madam Speaker, when I look at the budgets or these votes, I could tell you the alternative allocation of where you can get money to feed these children.  I agree totally on family planning.  People should produce the number of children they can sustain; there is no argument.  But once a child is already born, do you kill them?  No!  Let me put it even bluntly, Madam Speaker -(Interjections)- I want to put this bluntly - I am just putting a simple question.  If by family planning programme you discovered you should have produced four children, but you learnt it when you already had seven, would you kill the difference for you to come to four?  Would you swallow them?  That is what she is telling me, hon. Bakoko, would you swallow the three?  No, they are already born. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. members, yesterday I made one comment after listening to the reports.  I asked the Minister of Finance and all of you how the national planning authority fits in all these programmes.  This is part of the thinking I had in my mind, how do all these recommendations and the plans of the ministries fit in the national planning authority? I hope somebody will be able to answer that question.

Hon. members, I think we have heard the pros and cons of swallowing children and not swallowing them.  Can I ask the Minister of Education to really conclude on the food and all those other matters before we go for lunch?

DR  MAKUBUYA: Thank you very much once again.  Madam Speaker, may I refer to Article 34, (2) of the Constitution: “A child is entitled to basic education which shall be the responsibility of the State and the parents of the child.”  I repeat, Article 34(2) on the rights of children, “A child is entitled to basic education which shall be the responsibility of the state and the parents of the child.”  Now under UPE the Government has assumed responsibility for the school buildings, for the teachers, for the scholastic materials and then for the running costs of the school, and they have said the parents should contribute food; just feed the child because the responsibility in basic education is to be shared by the state and the parent.  What would you prefer, that the state feeds the child and the parent meets the other costs? 

Madam Speaker, hon. members, it has been argued that once you prioritise the money will be available; you can just re-allocate and so on.  Now, the Ministry of Education, working with the Ministry of Finance, did a study on what it would take to provide food for the children.  Lunch was costed at UShs325 and the year consists of 270 school days, and the basic figure used for the number of children was UShs. 7.1 million, and the total cost of lunch only for 270 days came to UShs. 623 billion.  This is more than the total allocation to education this financial year.  So, you will then believe what hon. Dr Nkuuhe said that school feeding is possible, but it is costly.  

Madam Speaker, criteria used for selecting the districts.  It is listed at page 10 of the committee’s report.  I think what you can disagree with are the results, but the criteria itself is there.  The economists and educationists applied it and in the initial selection those are the districts they came up with.

Madam Speaker, the committee’s recommendation is at page 10.  The committee recommended that the Ministry of Education and Sports should have a master plan to address the school feeding programme throughout primary schools in the country.  Yes, we shall develop this master plan, but we need the experience in these 19 districts to fit into the master plan rather than doing it theoretically.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, is that the exchange on the Floor has really shown we need to do more dissemination work than we have done. Therefore, I commit the ministry to arrange a seminar of stakeholders on this in the nearest possible future.  

Yesterday, Madam Speaker, there was a major issue of admissions to universities and the demand that I submit a report on the studies of my colleague, hon. Mike Mukula, to Parliament as soon as possible.  Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister committed himself and Government that he will make a report on this matter.  We are actually doing a study on this and I do not want to come to Parliament prematurely because this is a matter of great interest to honourable colleagues. I want to handle it justly and fairly. I am still investigating.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  It is now several weeks since this matter came to Parliament and that commitment by Government was made to us.  I would like to appreciate what the minister has just said, but to understand this issue in relation to the individual who is now the topic of discussion, we must appreciate that he has feelings just like anyone in this chamber.  We should also appreciate that he is a public figure; a lot of debate has been going on in the press and indeed in the region over the matter of qualification of hon. Mukula.  I think this is sufficient to traumatize anybody including a person whom we are discussing at this moment in time.

I would like to find out from the minister whether it is possible really to give this House some idea about a time frame within which this information could be given to us.  Remember that as this matter is being investigated and the minister delays in his investigation, even the students in the university under question are affected.  Indeed a few weeks ago, a few students wanted to mobilize themselves to come to Parliament to find out from here. Madam Speaker, what is going on in as far as the clearing of the name of their university is concerned.  So this is not a matter that should be delayed. I believe it is a matter that needs to be expeditiously handled and personally the way the ministry is handling it does not demonstrate the seriousness that it deserves.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, hon. members, history will show that the way I am handling this matter is the fairest way in the circumstances.  You want me to rush and then what?  What is the objective of this inquiry?  Really I have a lot of respect for this august House, this is why I want to come when I am ready on a very important matter.  Other ways of handling it are going to lead to burning of fingers.

MR AMURIAT: But, Madam Speaker, I am sorry to stand up again.  I think the minister being the experienced person that he is and knowing the task that is before him, surely he should be able to come to this House and say within such and such a time, I believe I shall have concluded the investigation into this matter.  I do not see why the minister is dilly-dallying on this matter.  This is a matter that affects so many people not just an individual. It affects hon. Mukula’s constituents, it affects the students in Nkumba University and indeed it affects this august House.  So, I expect the minister to come here and tell us, “Look, realistically I will take three years before I come with an answer to this House, or I will take one month or it will be in a matter of weeks before an answer is brought to this House”.  Why is the minister not being open to us?

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, there are some terms, which have been used by the honourable member that I find to be unfortunate, “delay” and “dilly-dallying”.  I would like to declare, Madam Speaker and honourable members, that I have no personal interest in this matter, none at all.  I am trying to be as fair as possible to all parties involved in this.  Some people want the judgment one side as soon as possible and others do not want it. But, Madam Speaker, may I be allowed to do a good job and you do not have to accept my findings but may my method be found to be acceptable.  I have not delayed this investigation, we are building institutions and you need to be careful how you tread in fire -(Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA AVITUS: In management, Madam Speaker, we advise not to use the word, “as soon as possible” because you may come after 5 years and still say it is not yet possible.  My colleague here wanted to get a time frame that we can expect to get a report from the minister so that we clear the air.  I spent a week in Jinja about two weeks ago with the Vice Chancellor of Nkumba University and the Academic Registrar of Nkumba University and I put them to task about this matter.  I think the information they gave me is that they have already answered the query the minister wanted from them.  What is the problem, if the vice chancellor has answered, the Academic Registrar has answered, Council for Higher Education has had its input, what is the problem in decision as I said earlier?  Thank you very much.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am a little bit disappointed with my colleague the Minister of Education.  I would not like to take question from angle of the person in discussion.  The most important point we are raising here is the standards of education in this country.  Somebody is alleged to have gone to a university without the qualifications to enroll for a master’s programme, he got enrolled and he got a degree.  

Now what we are saying as nationals of this country- first of all, there is a programme in this country, we are now educating our people to be sent abroad, we want to export labour of our human beings, but if we start undermining the standards of our own education and the Government seems to be either condoning it or not serious about it, then we are just shooting ourselves in the foot, Madam Speaker.  This is the reason why we are saying the minister should very quickly handle this case and tell the country what is happening in this institution. Why should a university take somebody who doesn’t qualify to enrol for a programme?  I think this is the question, Mr minister.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I know this Minister of Education is a professor, he is a doctor, he has a masters, he has a first degree, he was the Dean of the School of law and he went to Yale University; he could be able to tell us logically if really it is common knowledge, even in the school of law, that they admit people for masters without getting a first degree?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to simply advice, honourable minister, when we finish these budgetary issues next week, these matters may recur even more often than they are doing now.  I would appeal to you to help our friend so that he is no longer a subject of debate on this Floor.  Can you please put an end to his misery by briefing the plenary so that it ends?  I do not like it; I have been here for two days, they are talking about a colleague.  I do not know what will happen when we finish the budget, may be he will become a subject everyday.  We you should help our Colleague.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, yesterday hon. Wakikona stood up and said that we need a committee in the ministry for equating non-traditional qualifications with traditional qualifications, and he even gave an example - you will check the Hansard – that you can come with qualifications as an astronaut, that is what he said, and when you come here they are asking you about PLE, about ‘O’ Level, about ‘A’ level and so on.  He was telling us to update ourselves so that –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, you cannot hide the truth for a long time.  There is a precedent on this matter.  Hon. Babu, who is a S6 person, who is more qualified, he is a captain, was rejected from Makerere University for an MBA; that is the precedent.  The member in question was rejected from Makerere University; a precedent is there.  So, now to bring and say you are an astronaut; there is precedence, it is very simple.  So, if you are defending the person, you want to cover them and then say so because we know there are attempts to have that.  Just have it and say, “The man has got the papers,” and things stops there as you have said, Madam Speaker, then posterity will judge us.

MR AWORI: Supplementary, just to help my good Friend, the Minister of Education.  At one time in this country we had an election and the minimum qualification to stand was ‘O’ level.  My good relative who was highly educated and a lecturer at the university had a degree.  When he went to take his nomination papers, they said, “Show us your papers; he brought his university degree.  The returning officer said, “I asked for your ‘O’ levels”.  He said, “But you see, I am a lecturer at Makerere University; I am literate, I can speak English.”  They said, “Do you have the qualifications?”  He said, “Yes.”  “Can you read the electoral law conditions?”  He read, he said, “They did not say the minimum qualification is ‘O’ levels, they said qualifications, ‘O’ levels.”  They asked, “Do you have ‘O’ levels?”  He said, “No, Sir.”  Then you cannot be a candidate.  

MRS BAKOKO BAKORU:  Madam Speaker, I want to thank the hon. minister for giving me way.  I have a petition on my table and that petition is coming from Ugandans, Ugandans who have been undertaking life long learning and now they want their certificates to be equated by the Ministry of Education, and I have communicated to the minister.  These people are saying they have been denied access to Secondary Education because they must produce PLE results and yet the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has been giving them certificates in life long learning, and my colleague, the minister, is going to have a committee which has to equate this.  So, what do we do to these Ugandans who have been involved in life long learning?  This is not an issue of hon. Mukula alone; it is unfair, honourable colleagues, for us just to be talking about an honourable member of this House.  

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Minister of Gender to continuously protect wrong doers - members of Cabinet fraudulent in charge of State duties?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. minister, can I appeal to you to save our colleague from constantly being talked about in this House.  I am tired of this matter, since April, this is end of August.  Please minister!

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I have very little to add because today I am not in position to report on this case.  I am investigating and I will report as soon as possible- (Laughter) Hon. Tibarimbasa said that in management there is no such thing “as soon as possible”.  I have to talk realistically because one of the things being objected is a deadline which is not kept. 

You see, some honourable members think it is a matter of standing up and saying this is wrong.  I need evidence; I need a foundation, I need to study university practices – (Laughter) - in order to come to a conclusion.  You see it is clear to some members – hon. Elijah Okupa, for example, insists that there is a precedent and therefore the matter ends there.  No, the matter is complicated, honourable members, because what you download from the internet tells you this and the other; we are not an Island.  You are talking about protecting your standards but against who and against what?  So, we are projecting ourselves on the international arena and we need to come out with a fair judgement on the matter.  Madam Speaker, 15th October – (Interruption)

MR PATRICK AMURIAT:  Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion that the minister be given a specific amount of time to report to this House on a matter of investigation on the qualifications of hon. Mukula.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, I think did you not say the 15th of – what day did you say?

DR MAKUBUYA:  Madam Speaker, I will be in position to report to the House on or by the 15th October this year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So, hon. members, that is now a Government assurance that on or about the 15th October, a report on that matter will have been brought to this House.  It is now a Government assurance so let us finish it.  Have you concluded the other answers?

DR MAKUBUYA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The question of fires 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order! You wanted answers, the minister is answering.

DR MAKUBUYA:  Yes, Madam Speaker, the question of fires. We were given some information here yesterday on the many elements that we should take into account and we have been studying this matter seriously.  I will be able to make a report to the House in 21 days.  I would like to assure you, Madam Speaker and honourable members, that the school fees for the IDP children which caused some concern yesterday we have started the programme and there will be money to do it for the foreseeable future. 

Yes, there was concern about demonstration schools, which used to be attached and some are still attached to PTC.  When we withdrew from some PTC, the primary schools attached to them reverted to the districts.  The ones which are attached to existing PTCs are the responsibility of the boards of Governors of those PTCs.  Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with one matter.  

There are issues which have been arching, honourable members, and for me I accept your proposal that shortly after dealing with the budget, we should have a special session to which I report substantively on them because now appending them to this will not be helpful to all of us.  So, yes, when we clear this, Madam Speaker, you can fix a date for me to report on those outstanding matters. I will come here and report on them.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking guidance from you, but at the same time seeking clarification from the hon. minister.  You gave us the proposal that probably at the end of the session we can look into more details on specific areas of concern.  Now, Madam Speaker, this session part of it is to approve a budget for the ministry.  Now, how do I approve a budget for the ministry when I have serious concerns on certain aspects of his responsibility?  Now, take for instance, Madam Speaker, I am worried about the status of UMI.  UMI has no legal status and yet its budget is incorporated in this proposal that the minister has brought to us.  Now if I approve the budget including UMI, I will be committing a serious breach of budget and our recommendations last year from the same committee.  So, how can I postpone it, and as a matter of fact, Madam Speaker, if I had to stretch the point on the matter we have just been discussing on qualifications, there are people even in this august House who are studying at UMI and yet it has no legal status.  Previously the awards it gave were Makerere and Institute of Public Administration, but how it has been detached from Makerere and it continues to take in students including the honourable members of the august House.  But before it gets legal status, are we compelled to recognize their degrees?  

Two, why should I really approve a budget for an organisation that does not exist in law?  

DR EPETAIT:  Madam Speaker, I get a bit worried when the minister continues to pray for more time to have session with members to explain on the way forward for certain intricate matters like the demonstration schools.  It is way back into 2002 that I again raised a complaint regarding a particular demonstration school in my constituency, Bishop Kitching College Demonstration School; and at that time, I somehow had my worries appeased by the promise that it was an oversight that all the demonstration schools in the country were not really getting SFG, and that the ministry was going to take serious steps towards catering for those demonstration schools.  Today, again we are told a similar story that we need yet more time and yet the pupils are in such a very bad state - studying on the ground. I mean they do not have any desk; the demonstration schools are simply in a sorry state. I think let the minister be specific and frank here that the matter of demonstration schools is no longer in their hands so that we know how to go about it rather than keeping on postponing the problem.  May I know the exact policy of Government on the demonstration schools whose teacher training colleges (TTCs) were closed?  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I raised the issue of Government schools.  Government schools are given money; they are like entities, which must account for the money.  Now they are supposed to submit audited accounts to Ministry of Education so that we know the money they have got and the one they have collected from the students, how it has been utilized and the balances.  Madam Speaker, I want to seek a clarification from the minister of Education, has he been getting the audited accounts for Government schools - of course that one must have the report of the Auditor General certifying them.  

Another point, I want the Minister of Education to help me.  Many of us have our children in private schools; we are paying a lot of money.  If a term is ending next week, the children get holidays this week- that is one week less.  When they are going, they go one week late, those are two weeks in a term.  Now, we have paid a lot of money, children are missing two weeks, who really controls? Are there standards to match that the timetable for school holidays and the opening of term is like this.  Thank you.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, I was disappointed with the minister’s position on standards of education vis-à-vis other countries.  I think he should be in a better position than myself to know that all these other countries where you go to seek “white collar” employment, you cannot be accepted or employed unless the institution where you are coming from is rated by them.  So, when you talked about these Italians and so on, Madam Speaker, I was very disappointed.  But I would wish him in the same spirit- is that why now he does not care whether Makerere people attend lectures in rallies?  You have several studies in one lecture, you use loud speakers and some students are attending lectures from windows. The minister is saying that for him it is okay because everywhere you have to compete.  But for me when I am going to vote for this money, with my little knowledge of what education is; I want the minister to assure me today that these matters of overcrowding at Makerere University and other higher institutions of learning are going to be handled.  It is becoming a very serious matter, and I think this is a very sad situation, Mr minister.  

DR MAKUBUYA:  Madam Speaker, hon. members, I appreciate all these interventions, but I do not think it is reasonable to condemn the minister for wanting to compare standards here with standards of other operators in the region and internationally.  I think it is better to hold on as I have indicated. If I do not report satisfactorily by the 15th October, then I can be taken to task.  The reason why I think that the budget process should be separated from conclusive answers on these outstanding issues – By the way, Madam Speaker, these outstanding issues do not include the demonstration school at Bishop Kitching PTC because I have said that when Government withdrew from some of the PTCs the demonstration schools became regular UPE schools under district management.  But those, which are attached to the PTCs where Government is still a stakeholder and a partner, they are under the management of the Boards of Governors of those ones.  Madam Speaker, if there is problem at Bishop Kitching Demonstration School, I think we are going to investigate that specifically and report here by the 15th of October.  

Hon. Aggrey Awori stands up and says institution x has no legal status, and I think that this is too categorical; and to avoid an exchange which will not advance the case of either side, that is why I was saying that a matter of that nature we can go at the nearest future date possible and we involve the legal sector and we come to a conclusion, which will help us as a country rather than for me to say – otherwise, Madam Speaker, it can easily become a shouting match, ‘It is this; no, it is that.”  No, let us sit down rationally and sort it out; yes, let us sit down rationally and sort it out –(Interjection)- I do not want information, I am sorry. I do not want information, I am properly informed.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague is attributing certain information to me in a fashion which is not correct.  A report was made by a Committee of Parliament, and I would like to read a portion of that report - page 23, the report we are discussing, “Uganda Management Institute: The Committee was concerned that the legal status of Uganda Management Institute is not clear yet it continues to award degrees.”  It is a concern of the committee- I was only emphasizing the concern of the committee.  It is a fact of the matter that according to the findings of the Committee the status of Uganda Management Institute is not clear.  Is it in order for my hon. Colleague- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.  Hon. Kamuntu?

MR AWORI: With your permission, I would like to inform my honourable Colleague that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a point of order –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: I am putting a point of order.  I hope you have been with us all along.  Now, is it in order for my honourable colleague to deny and to attribute information which is not correct that I just get up and say, “yah and yah”?  Madam Speaker, is he in order to attribute such unparliamentary behaviour to me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think he gets carried away when you are gesticulating with your hands, but otherwise the fact of the matter is that the report did say that the status of Uganda Management Institute is indeterminate.  Yes, minister?

DR KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: I thank you for your ruling. The status of Uganda Management Institute is not clear yet according to the report. What I was contesting, Madam Speaker, is the categorical statement by hon. Aggrey Awori that it has no legal status.  It is not clear but – yes and the difference is what we will drive us away from pressure. That is all, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that some issues have been difficult for us; some we will take time to sort them out and many have been substantively sorted out. The performance of the ministry improved last financial year.  Therefore, Madam Speaker, honourable members, I urge you to support this report.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, my problem has not been resolved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I did say earlier that when we complete the budget process, I will give you two sittings in which we need to discuss outstanding issues from this ministry because they are quite many. 

Now, honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming 28 head teachers from Kassanda South Constituency in Mubende.  They are up there in the Stranger’s Gallery and their Member of Parliament, hon. Nyombi Tembo, arranged their visit. So you are very welcome! -(Applause)- You may come back for the afternoon session because we are now suspending the House for one hour. We will resume at 2.30 to take the report from the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  So the House is suspended until 2.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 1.32 p.m)

(On resumption at 2.50p.m _)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2004/2005

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is the chairperson of the Committee?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the chairperson is fully aware that we are supposed to start with this report.  I have seen him around the precincts of this House.  May be, Madam Speaker, we could ask the Sergeant-at-Arms to call him, but he is fully aware and prepared.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable members, I believe the Chairperson of the Committee has now been discovered.  However, while he gets time to breathe a bit, I am delighted to inform you that in the distinguished members’ Gallery we have a delegation from the Parliament of Zambia.  They arrived here from Saturday and they will be here for one week to study, among others, the working of the budget Committee, the budget Office and issues related to how Parliament of Uganda deals with corruption.  So the head of delegation and Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates of the Zambian Parliament, the hon. Mr M.S Mulanda, Chairperson and leader of delegation. You are welcome!  Members of the delegation, the hon. A. Kalunga, Mr Nyirenda, hon. M. Mwale, the hon. E.M. Hachipuka, the hon. Chulumanda, hon. Lubinda, hon. A.C.Luhila and the delegation’s Secretary, is Kateule. You are most welcome!  

Today we are really happy to receive people from Mubende District, we now have students and teachers of Bukuya Integrated Academy of Kassanda North in Mubende District. You are welcome! (Applause) Their Member of Parliament has arranged the visit. 

Hon. Chairperson of the Finance Committee, yesterday we had indicated that since the reports have been distributed, you could really highlight the salient points so that we do not spend too much time on verbatim reading of the report.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I think I will have to take you through the preamble. The Sessional Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in conformity with Article 90 of the Constitution and in accordance with Rule 154 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, analysed and discussed the policy statement of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development Vote 008.  

The Committee now wishes to present to the House its observations and recommendations on the two Votes for consideration and adoption.  

The structure of the ministry:

The ministerial policy statement outlines the structure of the ministry comprising of two broad levels - political and technical. 

At the political level, the structure provides for one substantive minister, supported by five ministers of state. At the technical level, the structure provides for Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury as the chief executive supported by four directorates namely; Economic Affairs, Budget, Accountant General and Administration. Their roles and responsibilities are prescribed in the policy statement.  

The ministry supervises a number of autonomous institutions as highlighted below. The Committee was able to meet some of the above as shown in the methodology.

Observations:

As the Committee has observed in the past, the ministry’s six ministers are too many and their schedule of work can be carried out by a less number.  

The Committee was particularly concerned about two ministers, in charge of Investment and Planning respectively and yet there are statutory bodies charged with the same functions.  

The functions of some of the departments in the ministry were found to be overlapping with those of some of the statutory bodies under the same ministry. 

It was also noted that some organisations have outlived their usefulness, for example, Departed Asians Custodian Board, which continues to drain resources that would otherwise be put to provision of other useful public services.

Recommendations:

The ministry should be restructured to be cost effective and conform to the principles of reducing public expenditure. The functions of two ministers, that is, Investment and Planning should be devolved to the Uganda Investment Authority and Uganda National Planning Authority respectively.  

The functions of the departments in the ministry, which duplicate functions of statutory bodies, should be transferred to the relevant bodies, for example, Directorate of Economic Affairs to National Planning Authority.  

The autonomous organisations under the ministry should be reviewed in order to retain those that are very important to the economy and are relevant to the ministry’s mission. 

Vision, Mission and Objective of the Ministry:

Madam Speaker, the vision and objective of the ministry is to eradicate mass poverty by the year 2017.

The mission is to promote economic development by ensuring stability through the mobilisation and allocation of budgetary resources in line with the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP). 

The mandate includes overseeing the national planning strategic development initiatives, mobilising resources domestically and externally, and to manage and control public finances in a prudent and sustainable manner. 

Observations:

Madam Speaker, the Committee noted that the ministry shares the vision with the whole country. There is no specific vision of the ministry like other Government departments and yet it has specific challenges and a desired future state from which to draw its own vision.  

The absence of a clear vision frustrates proper strategic planning and leads to ad hoc allocation and management of public resources.  

It was also noted that the objectives are set out in plain term with no specific targets or benchmarks against which performance would be evaluated.  

Recommendations:

The ministry should have its own mission that fits in its overall national vision. The particular roles of the ministry in the whole set of economic development should, therefore, be a guide to its mission. 

The ministry should quantify, wherever possible, the expected outcomes and outputs for ease of monitoring and evaluation. There should be milestones for achievements and performance.  

Methods of work:

Madam Speaker, the Committee adopted the following methods: 

The Committee held a meeting with the minister and his technical staff and the management of the following semi-autonomous organisations:

The Committee also met the officials from Bank of Uganda and Uganda Development Bank. 

Members also examined the following documents:

• Background to the Budget 2004/05

• The President’s State of the Nation Address to the 4th Session of the 7th Parliament of Uganda

• The Committee’s recommendations contained in the Committee’s report of last financial year 2003/04 policy statement

• The ministerial policy statement for this financial year and

• The Budget Speech of the same financial year.

Policy objectives, goals and economic performance:  The policy objectives and goals are stated to focus on:

• Maintaining a conducive macro-economic stability

• Mobilising domestic and external resources for public expenditure

• Enhancing transparency and accountability through integrated financial management systems

• Monitoring poverty levels and planning for its eradication. 

Macro-Economic targets:

Inflation: The inflation levels were targeted at less than five per cent and the outturn was 4.8 per cent. This is an average of both Headline and Underlying inflation rates that on average is at five per cent each as per the outturn as at 1 July 2004.  

The Committee commends the ministry on the control of inflation attributed to prudent monetary policies in the country. 

The explicit programme designed to restrict domestic supply to a level that is compatible with annual underlying inflation rate of five per cent, a figure that has been kept at this level since the financial year 1996/97, is appreciated. 

The Committee was informed that although the capital account is liberalised, Bank of Uganda monitors the outflow and inflow of foreign currencies and that is why it intervenes as a buyer or seller, wherever indications are not favourable. 

Observations: 

Keeping inflation at a very low level hurts some sectors of the economy especially agriculture. The internal terms of trade seem to favour the manufacturing sector.

Inflation has been kept in single digits, because of persistent low food prices. Therefore, poor farmers are inequitably taxed contrary to PEAP objectives. 

There is urgent need to add value to our products and look for markets for our agricultural products to combat the effects of poverty. Lack of a “niche market” for Uganda’s agricultural produce is not favourable for farming activities here. 

It was noted that Government had put in place intervention measures to promote marketing, research and value addition in agricultural produce throughout AAMPS, PMA, NAADS to mention but a few.

Strategic intervention funds are not efficiently managed. Much of the funds are spent on administration and expensive inputs. Some interventions duplicate activities and create an environment for corruption as each programme may claim ownership of the activity once completed.  

It was however noted that the funds committed to research and marketing are so little and scattered.  A lot of funds are committed to consuming sectors of the economy, and the interventions are not very systematic and transparent.  

The Committee was informed that there was some degree of externalising the profits/dividends.  This creates artificial shortage of foreign currency though it may normalise shortly after a while due to inflow from donors.  

Interest rates: 

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the Committee observed with concern that the bank interest rates on loans still remain very high despite the inflation rates being in single digits. The prime lending rates are between 17 percent and 25 percent, which is still very high, while the Treasury Bill rates have gone down.  The 90 Day TB’s are at seven percent, a year is at 10 percent and 10 years is at 10.2 percent. 

The interest rates on one year and 10 year bonds do not conform to the time value for money. The 10-year bond is not attractive to investors, as they would prefer one-year bond due to small difference in interest rate, and of course return on investment.

Treasury Bills are sold to mop up the liquidity generated by Government spending donor money in Uganda so that inflation remains within target, and thus affecting the interest rates on Treasury Bills.  

The Committee was also informed that the purpose of issuing long-term bond is two fold:

• To produce benchmark for long term investment rates to the financial markets for pricing of long-term loans and investments. 

• To assist with stable conduct on monitory policy, so that not all of Government domestic debts is falling due in less than one year.

Recommendations:  

• Government should rationalise expenditure and revisit priorities to include productive sectors for financing of socio-economic activities.  

• There should be a deliberate effort by Government to promote research and marketing of agricultural produce to address the problems of internal terms of trade.  

• Research should be directed towards value addition and alternative ways of production to avoid the adverse effect of vagaries of weather. Areas like mining, horticulture, etcetera should be promoted.

• Government deficit should be narrowed by minimising borrowing from both within and without and restrict it to only productive ventures.

• The high cost of public administration must be seriously addressed.

• Government should devise ways of promoting the banking culture by discussing with the banks, through their associations, to rationalise the various bank charges.

• Madam Speaker, the Uganda Development Bank should never be privatised due to its strategic importance. It should be capitalised, strengthened to address long-term funding and other financial interventions for long-term development. The ongoing restructuring should be geared towards this objective. 

Madam Speaker, I want to pause here and inform Members that, following the divesture of UCB, the African entrepreneurs had no local banks where they can receive affirmative actions. The current foreign banks are demand driven and, therefore, they are concentrated in areas where they make profits. It is against this background that the Committee thinks that a development bank should be retained to provide affirmative action through which strategic intervention funds should be channelled.  

• The Uganda entrepreneurs need an organised way of accessing capital for financing their business. UDB should be the major player in disbursement of strategic intervention funds to ensure fair play, accountability and competitiveness in addition to presenting economically viable projects. This should also apply to APEX funds.

• The Registrar of Companies should be strengthened in accordance with the law. This will reduce incidences of fraud, loss of documents and improve on the efficiency.  

• Land registry should be modernised if it is to meet international standards for purposes of efficiency, avoidance of fraud and to promote investment.  

• The weakness in the commercial courts should be addressed to create confidence for the investors.

Growth rates: 

The Committee was informed that the growth rate was targeted at seven percent but the outturn was six percent, which is also a commendable effort.  

The average growth rate has been 6.7 percent for the last 20 years with reported population growth over 3.5 percent, which is translated into the per capita income of growth of 3.5 percent or slightly less, given that the recent figures for the population growth rate is a bit high.

The Committee was informed that the diversification strategy is yielding results with non-coffee exports projected to increase by 30 percent to the tune of US$ 521 million and fish alone to bring in US$ 98 million.

In the years 2003/04, agriculture contributed 38.5 percent, industry 19.4 percent and services 42 percent to the economy. It was noted that agriculture contributed a lot to the economy, but yet is allocated inadequate resources. Madam Speaker, the biggest wealth we have here is our weather and our agriculture potential. And what we are looking at here is that in spite of the fact that agriculture received less attention, we got more returns.

Recommendations: 

The diversification drive should be intensified to include value addition on the products to compete with other East African countries in light of the Customs Union.

More resources should be allocated to productive sectors of the economy to improve the economic growth.

Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP):PEAP is the major tool to realisation of the Government’s vision of eradicating mass poverty by the year 2017.

The second PEAP revision was concluded and the Committee was informed that the draft report is yet to be presented to Cabinet and will be ready for implementation by October 2004.  

It was further noted that the revised edition contributed heavily to the resource allocation in the year 2004/05. 

Some of the challenges to PEAP are as follows:

• Restoring the growth in the incomes of agricultural households.

• Reducing insecurity and dealing with its consequences mainly in the North.

• Transparency and efficiency in the public resource utilisation and

• Human development. 

To realise the above, the following have been identified as priority areas:

• Agricultural extension, research and marketing
• Water for production
• Rural electrification
• Micro-Finance and Outreach programmes for small farmers and
• Improving transport by concessioning Uganda Railways.

Observations:

The identified priorities would go a long way to address some of the basic problems in the agricultural sector. 

There has been some duplication in delivery of services by both Government and non-Government agencies. This creates some level of wastage and corruption in some instances.
 
There have been reports of poorly constructed valley dams and other malpractices. 
 
There have also been reports of poor funding of research institutes, yet research is supposed to be a priority as adequate knowledge assists in planning and implementation.

There have been reports of the misuse of Rural Micro-Finance Support Project funds by executives.  A lot of wastage is attributed to overseas travels, capacity building workshops and unviable loans.

The animal sub-sector has been neglected for quite sometime and its contribution to GDP is drastically declining. Madam Speaker, we borrowed an example of Botswana. Botswana earns about 12 million Euros with only three million herds of cattle, but Uganda earnings are small and mostly from hides and skins with about 6.3 million herds of cattle. So, you can imagine, six million herds of cattle for beef earning zero and three million herds of cattle earning 12 million Euros. There is poor animal disease control, lack of water for animals and coordination difficulties given that this is a ministry within another one.

Madam Speaker, the Committee discovered that the ministry’s restructuring was not made in consideration of sectors that supplement each other. Take an example of wild animals; the Wild Animal Authority resides in the Ministry of Trade and yet the diseases that attack livestock are transmitted by wildlife. Water for production resides in the Ministry of Water and Environment and yet the ministry that is supposed to ensure that agricultural animals are kept is not accessing this budget. There are also instances where some basic services like water, power and so on have continued being supplied despite shortage of funds.

Recommendations:

In order to realise the objective of PEAP, transparency should be the driving force.  Government should come out to implement the findings of the various commissions of inquiry into allegations of corruption in order to create confidence in the fight against corruption.

Government should look into ways of reducing wastage by ensuring a one-point centre for distribution of some of the services, for example, one central point could be used to distribute water for various use like human consumption, animals and agriculture. Services delivery should be streamlined to avoid duplication and enhance efficiency.  

Research institutes should be adequately funded in order to realise their potential.

The Ministry of Agriculture should be spilt into two for adequate management of the programme under it. There should be one for livestock and fisheries and another one purely for agriculture. 
 
Commitment Control System (CCS):
Madam Speaker, honourable members, some time back, Government tried to control expenditure by introducing a system known as, Commitment Control System (CCS). However, we have achieved results in some areas and in some areas we have not. This system has greatly enhanced compliance with budgetary provision and strengthening arrears control mechanism. 

One of the major areas has been prepayment of telephone bills and in some departments fuel using prepaid card systems. 

The accounting officers have been compelled to commit only after receipt of the accounting warrant as provided for in the Public Finance and Accountability Act. 

The arrears created after CCS totals to Shs79 billion as at end of June 2004. 

The reasons given for contracting these arrears when Government operates a cash budget were as follows:

• There are some aspects of indiscipline in budgeting, which result into budget cuts. This happens when some accounting officers have already committed to purchasing some of the items and sometimes already raising LPOs and goods sometimes already supplied.  

• Another instance is where there are court awards that are not budgeted for. This compels Government to incur arrears.  

• There are also instances where some basic services like water, power and so on have continued being supplied despite of the knowledge that funds are not adequate.

Observation:

In spite of Commitment Control System, Government has continued to accumulate domestic arrears and this is a concern of the committee. 

Recommendations:

We wish to recommend that the accounting officers should strengthen their budgetary discipline to avoid contracting unnecessary arrears and those who do so should be disciplined. 

Government should institute the prepayment method for the utilities in all its departments, especially for utilities.

Micro Finance services:

The Committee has previously reported on the performance of micro-finance sector in its report.  Particular focus was given to the implementation of Micro-Deposit Taking Institution Act and the outreach programme.
  
Micro-Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2003:

The Committee noted that the Act has not been as effective as has been earlier anticipated. No institutions have obtained license since the passing of the Act.
  
Only five institutions are currently fulfilling the necessary conditions for obtaining their MDI operating licenses. These are:

• FINCA
• FAULU
• Uganda Finance Trust (UFT) 
• Uganda Micro-Finance Union (UMU) and
• Pride Uganda. 
·	
The Committee was informed that these would be registered by the end of this financial year.  

Micro-Finance Outreach programme:

The key components of the Micro-Finance Outreach programme are intended to ensure well-managed, professional micro-finance institutions, which are able to expand their services to underserved areas in the country.  

These activities include:

• Capacity Building Unit for Outreach

• Matching grant facility

• Performance Monitoring System for Tier 4 of MFI’s

• District micro-finance committees and kick off workshops

• Recruitment and role of financial extension workers

• Data collection and updating of the outreach plan

• Winding up of Government credit schemes.

The Entandikwa scheme:

This scheme was funded by Government in March 1995, and a total of Shs 9,924,000,000 had been disbursed by 1996/97. The distribution regionally was 32 per cent central, 27 per cent western, 25 per cent eastern, 16 per cent Northern.  

Out of the total disbursed funds only Shs 2.3 billion has been recovered.  

Observations:

Honourable members, in the interest of time, the Committee observed that the lending rates of MFI’s are prohibitively high and unaffordable by the intended beneficiaries. 

The MFI’s require collateral from their respective customers, which has ended up being sold due to inability to pay because of high interest rates.

There is borrowing for wrong and unviable priorities due to lack of guidance. Most borrowing is for non-productive activities like school fees, clearing debts and other social requirements, which has led to loss of household property.

Agriculture, the major household activity in the country, cannot easily be funded by MFI’s due to high interest rates. The Return On Investment (ROI) makes it risky to borrow from these institutions.

Centenary Rural Development Bank has evolved one way of financing agriculture and the Committee was also informed that the Rural Micro-Finance programme would, on a pilot basis, start an arm to finance agriculture.

Micro-finance institutions - honourable members, our Committee found out that of all the micro-finance institutions, it is Centenary Rural Development Bank that has done a commendable job -(Applause)- and, Madam Speaker, I want to inform the whole House that Centenary Rural Development Bank is almost in every district, and the Committee was very pleased and appreciated their role in financing agriculture especially.

The micro-finance institutions have helped in mobilisation of savings in the country. Savings have grown from Shs 41.8 billion in 1999, to Shs 129 billion as at September 2002. The Committee was informed that at the moment, saving from micro-finance institutions account for 15 per cent of the national financial savings.

The recovery rate of the Entandikwa scheme is very low and miserable, bearing in mind that the recovered funds would revolve to other beneficiaries, which purpose has not been received.

The funds recovered are perceived to be with the chief administration officers and have not been remitted to the Consolidated Fund.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this was a very serious concern of the Committee that Government was having money lying idol somewhere and bearing in mind that only about less than 30 per cent has been recovered.

Recommendations:

The Committee, therefore, wishes to make the following recommendations on the sector:

The Rural Micro-Finance Support project should address the idea of lending to the agricultural sector at a reasonable interest rate as an affirmative action in the effort to increase household incomes and improve the quality of life.

The funds that are meant for long-term financing and borrowed at concessional rates, for example, like APEX funds, should be equally availed to the majority poor through approved MFI’s at low interest rates. This is so because the purpose for which Government borrowed these funds was to fight poverty.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this money was accessed by Government to fight poverty.  Unfortunately, it has ended up in corporate banks and, therefore, our poor farmers are not accessing this money. It is the view of the Committee, for instance, that this money could be channelled in already registered micro-finance banks like Centenary, so that our poor peasants for whom we represent can access it.

To promote the culture of paying debts, Government should intensify on the recovery measures particularly on the Entandikwa scheme. 

The CAOs should immediately remit the corrected funds to the Consolidated Fund, as the Committee thinks that there should not be money without interest any more since people took it as “kasiimo” (gift), and they are not meant to pay back.  

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, unfortunately he is matching out. I was going to raise a point of order. My honourable colleague, Mbabazi, has been crossing the Floor several times contrary to our Rules of Procedure, and finally he got up and disrupted the front bench. Is he in order to behave in such a manner and immediately leave the Chamber? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you will appreciate, that assignment of the Attorney General is relatively new to him, so he is consulting more senior colleagues on how to handle the office.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: The micro-finance should be restructured and strengthened to address the ideals of the Entandikwa scheme.  

Privatisation process:

The Committee was informed that the Privatisation Unit (PU) has adopted a concessionary method for some of the PEs. Under this method, two PEs have already been privatised. These are Nile Hotel Complex and Uganda Electricity Distribution Company. Uganda Railways is also in the process of being concessioned in a joint venture with Kenya Railways, and negotiations between the two countries were reported to be in advanced stages.  

The Committee was further informed that the Privatisation Unit is going to actively use the Uganda Stock Exchange in the sale of shares to the public through listing. Some of the initial companies to be listed under the 2004 plans are: DFCU, New Vision and at a later date Kinyara Sugar Works and shares of Government in Stanbic Bank.  

The Committee was informed that Uganda Stock Exchange (USE) has the capacity to handle the sale of PEs, but most of them do not meet the standard requirements for USE.

Observations:

The Committee regretted that the statutory reports on privatisation, which are supposed to be laid on Table twice a year, have not been laid for two years. The ministry is in breach of the law, that is, the PERD Statute. The Committee has cautioned the minister and will report to the House in due course. Madam Speaker, the minister has appeared before us and promised that in two weeks time, both the statutory reports will be with the committee. 

The rate of privatisation is slow and this affects the performance of the PEs and asset stripping may occur. The morale of the workers declined due to uncertainty and this affects their productivity.

The Committee has received petition on the effect that, some of the workers of privatised enterprises were not paid their dues as per the PERD Statute.  The petitioners include Nile Hotel and former UCBL workers.

Terminal benefits of workers:

The Committee noted with concern that the workers of former UCBL were denied their terminal benefits on the pretext that UCBL was sold as a going concern under the financial institutions statute and not – I want to clarify, UCBL was not actually privatised under the PERD Statute, it was privatised under the financial institutions statute and the new owners have refused to consider their previous years of service. The committee was informed that the problem is now between the new managers and the workers.

It was also noted that in companies like Nile Hotel International, some workers have contested their calculated benefits in courts of law.

Recommendations: 

The workers’ terminal benefits from the privatised enterprises should be paid in accordance with the law. Workers should not lose their long-term services benefits where some PEs were sold as going concerns. Due consideration should be taken during the process of negotiations so that the workers’ plight is considered. 

The ministry should adhere to the law and bring to Parliament the statutory reports as provided for in the PERD Statute.

Privatisation of Utility PEs: 

Uganda Railways Corporation (URC) - Madam Speaker, I want to inform Members that the report was originally 50 pages, but considering the fact that we make executive summary, I had to sit for long hours to condense it to this level. That is why I am reading some of the pages fully because I have reduced beyond the levels I can reduce.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, honourable Member, you are saying I should now prepare to listen to the whole report.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: No, I am jumping some pages. 

Uganda Railways Corporation (URC):

The Committee welcomed efforts to revamp the Northern line up to Soroti so far. 

The rehabilitation of the railway lines will greatly reduce on the cost of transport, maintaining the road network, reducing national fuel expenditure and on fuel, and reduce on the rate of accidents on our roads. And besides make agricultural produce cheaper here in Kampala because of cheap transport.

The Committee was informed that the discussion on concessioning of Uganda Railways Corporation (URC) together with Kenya Railways is in advanced stage. The Committee appreciates this move since it is geared towards revamping of the major transport items in the economy for the region and the country. 

The Committee was also informed that there are efforts to extend railway lines to Southern Sudan and Eastern DRC in a plan to jointly concession the railway with our neighbours, Kenya. It was, however, noted that there are alternative efforts to have the line from Kenya direct to Southern Sudan and Tanzania directly to DRC. 

Observation: 

The current state of Uganda Railways line is in a poor state and needs to be rehabilitated before concessioning it. The Northern line to Pakwach and the western like to Kasese are very strategic for regional transport to Sudan, DRC, Rwanda and Burundi.

Recommendations: 

Government should rehabilitate the strategic rail network before any other country takes on the lead.  The timeliness of rehabilitating of this line is very important.  Madam Speaker, in the world over, we are talking of reducing costs and rehabilitating our railway is one way of reducing our costs on imported products. We are not only focusing on products consumed here in Uganda, we are looking at those who use our roads to take goods to their countries. And we are urging Government that there is an existing line, take advantage of it, make these goods closer to our neighbours so that in addition to accessing our imports cheaply, we can also reap money from these people who use our roads. Save tear and wear on our roads, reduce accidents, save foreign exchange in fuel and so on. The list is very long.

The Government must expedite its move to rehabilitate the railway network to reduce costs on road construction and maintenance. There should be regional negotiations to expand the line to the neighbouring countries.

National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NW&SC):

Observations:

It was observed that water is a basic need and very crucial to society. The performance of National Water and Sewerage Corporation is exemplary and it calls for no subsidies.
The body is progressing on well and opening up new connections in other town councils and municipalities.  

The Committee was uncertain whether the private sector would continue with the commitment of expanding water for production and for human consumption. It is against this background, Madam Speaker and honourable members, that the Committee recommends to Government as follows:

To be extremely cautious on the move to privatise National Water and Sewerage Corporation. The National Water and Sewerage Corporation should not be privatised at any cost. 

The PERD Statute should be amended to reclassify this body to Class I of the 1st Schedule of the PERD Statute, 1993.

Uganda Airlines Corporation:
The Committee was informed that the Uganda Airlines Corporation was under liquidation. 

Members were informed, however, that the brand name of Uganda Airlines is still being used by Kenya Airways and occasionally East African Airlines. 

Recommendations:

The Committee recommends that the status of the liquidated public enterprises should be clarified and the collections being made from use of the name and flight code are remitted to the Consolidated Fund. The liquation should be expedited in order to put the case to rest.  

The minister concerned should report on the progress of liquidating of this enterprise to Parliament within one-month’s time.  

Uganda Telecommunications Corporation (UTL):

The Committee noted that the Government of Uganda still holds 99 per cent shares in UTL. 

It was also reported that no dividends have been remitted to Government coffers ever since the majority shares were sold. 

The Committee was informed that all the profits made were being ploughed back in order to expand the corporation and prepare it for listing on the Stock Exchange.  

The minister did not present the financial statements on the previous years for the committee to analyse and this was a point of concern. When you own shares you should – (Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: The Chairman has read 99 per cent shares; I thought it was an amendment, which does not appear on my paper.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable Minister. It could have been a slip of the tongue but I meant to say 49 per cent.  

Observations:

The Committee has observed that the corporation is run like a complete private company with less Government involvement. 

Note: A comprehensive report on the status of privatisation to-date will be availed after analysis of the audited accounts and other public enterprises during consideration of the statutory report from Privatisation Unit.  

Madam Speaker, I do not want to waste Members’ time, we shall have a report on these. So, when we get to statutory reports we shall report to the House.

Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust (NPART):

Achievements:

The Committee noted that the Trust has realised a total collection of Shs 38 billion as at 30 June 2004, which is 42 percent of the total assigned UCB portfolio and 15 per cent of the UDB portfolio.  

This is a recovery rate efficiency ratio of 33 per cent, which is a commendable job given that these loan portfolios were already bad. Madam Speaker, the Committee commends Government for this effort. 

Over 402 properties are on the market with an estimated realised value of 3.3 billion out of a total collection of 5.3 billion. 

Out of the total collections, Shs 27.0449 billion have been transferred to the Consolidated Fund.  NPART’s mandate was expanded to recover Uganda Development Bank’s Shs 74 billion of non-performing loans after the amendment of the NPART Statute of 1993.  

Madam Speaker, the Committee made the following observations:  

That the work of the tribunal is greatly frustrated by delays in court cases due to lengthy appeals. The Committee was informed of cases that lasted for over 12 years.

The Committee was also informed that NPART could not recover most of the assigned portfolios due to poor banking practices that led to some of the following: 

• Unsecured portfolios
• Under secured portfolios
• Securities pledged became null and void due to successful court challenges
• Obsolete plant and machinery that are in disrepair conditions.  

The Committee wishes to recommend as follows:  

The delays in the settlement of appeals should be addressed to allow NPART tribunal to finalise cases. 

The amendment to the NPART Statute should be urgently brought to the House to address the various problems in its implementation especially the loopholes of appeals by the various defaulters and provide for only one appeal to the Supreme Court.  

Government should come up with a proposal to establish a permanent tribunal to address the problem of defaulters in both public and private banks. Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that in New Zealand, which is regarded as the most transparent country, they have kept a permanent body to monitor debtors and to minimise fraud. It is against this background and the study done by the committees of this Parliament in New Zealand, Canada and UK that we made this recommendation.  

Departed Asians Property Custodian Board (DAPCB): This was set up under the Decree Number 27 of 1973 to manage the assets that were left in Uganda by Asians, and its current role is governed by the provision of the Expropriated Properties Act 1982.

Madam Speaker, the Committee made the following observations:

The board has taken quite some time in place and what has not been identified and valued may be costly to identify.

Since the board has not sat for a long time, Members wondered whether this was not a sign of lack of transparency, given the value and magnitude of the properties they are handling. 

The Committee recommends as follows: 

The Custodian Board should be dissolved by Government by bringing a bill to repeal the Act under which it operates.

Public auction method should be resorted to and all properties not yet sold by the time of dissolution be put under Uganda Property Holdings Limited.

Expedite the collection of funds from those who bought the properties but paid half of the agreed figure.

The Government should consider the possibility of giving out those other properties to Government Institutions and Local Government in their localities since Government is in serious lack of office space.  

Uganda Property Holding Limited (UPHL):  

Madam Speaker, UPHL is a limited liability company, fully owned by Government and was incorporated on 3rd November 1998. 

The company was created after Cabinet approved that there is need for a company to take over management of all Real Estate properties abroad belonging to the Government. These include former Coffee Marketing Board, Lint Marketing Board and Trans-Ocean Uganda Limited.  

Properties belonging to privatized companies were also to be put under the management of UPHL.  

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, however, has not handed over the properties to UPHL, especially Government Missions abroad.  

Observations:

Government is poorly managing its properties, especially real estate, and yet there is need to expand due to lack of office space for Government departments. Government is spending a lot of money on rented premises. 

The status of Government buildings world over is deteriorating and some are inhabitable despite their prime locations and potential to generate revenue to Government. Various missions abroad are reported to be in a very sorry state.  

The estates in Mombasa have some of the best warehouses on the coast and beautiful mansions on the beach, but are neglected. 

The Management of UPHL was reportedly to work through agencies and there is a small skeleton of staff. So, what they do is to hire out people to do their work. The committee, however, noted that this may not serve the purpose because the challenges need a well structured and staffed organization. 

UPHL has done some commendable work in a short period of its existence by carrying out some of the renovation in Mombasa and Farmers House under President’s Office. It also manages Kololo airstrip, and you will bear with me that you no longer see an overgrown airstrip. At one time it was threatened to be gazetted as a national park because of too much growth, but they are doing a good job now.

Embassy House, Development House and PMB Nalukolongo and Tororo warehouses are also managed by UPHL. 

It has also carried out the conversion of Bugolobi into an apparels garment training centre, including re-configuring the factory set up into a hostel and other accessories, which cost about Shs 7.169 billion and Shs 1.3 billion owed to the contractors. However, Apparels Tri-Star has not paid rent ever since it started operations about two years ago, and there is no tenancy agreement in place. 

The committee observed that about 25 percent of the cost of renovation of Bugolobi complex is not related to construction. 

The Committee further noted that the mandate of UPHL does not conflict with the constitutional provision of putting Government land under Uganda Land Commission and the Committee, therefore, recommends as follows:

There should be a deliberate effort by Government to empower an independent authority to manage the assets abroad. This should be treated with urgency.  

UPHL should be facilitated to maintain the properties so far handed over to it and be allowed to re-invest the collections from rental.  

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs should comply with the Cabinet decision and hand over the properties to UPHL.  

UPHL should as a matter of urgency secure a tenancy agreement with ATS and recover the rental in arrears.  

Resource Mobilization:  

Uganda Revenue Authority (URA):

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee was informed that URA operations had improved during the last two years, and that there is a harmonious relationship between the Authority and Special Revenue Protection Service.  

The committee was also informed that while RPS is within the management of URA, SRPS was not URA and their budgets are different. Government only releases money to URA for onward transmission to SRPS staff. SRPS are soldiers and their areas of operation are not necessarily restricted to URA as it was seen that they even extend their scope in other areas of Government.   

The Authority appreciated their role in combating smuggling especially along the lake and Eastern border areas. The non-tax revenue component was Shs 24 billion and the donor component stood at Shs 1.275 billion. Foreign and domestic financing totalled to Shs 242 billion. The tax base is still narrow and there is need to widen it. 

Members were informed that there is high labour turnover due to poor remuneration and job security in URA. They are being absorbed into banks and consultancies due to favourable terms of employment. 

The committee was informed that there was a study that was done to the effect, and Members observed that revenue collection has improved from Shs 1,635 billion against a target of Shs 1,655 billion, which is a performance of about 98.7 percent.  

However, Members expressed concern on the statutory instruments issued by the Minister three months to the Budget day altering some of the taxes, which had been passed in the Finance Act, 2004. This costs Government Shs 1.5 billion, and this will be increasing with time. It is estimated that by September, Government will have lost Shs 3 billion because of this statutory instrument; and the committee was concerned whether it is prudent for Ministers to continually issue statutory instruments against an Act? I think the Attorney General at a later stage will have to clarify whether a statutory instrument should amend an Act. I was wondering why Parliament should urge and identify the source of revenue and then Government itself turns around to cut it and cause loss, and bearing in mind that we have a deficit in our Budget.  

Recommendations:

Political interference in the operation of URA should stop to enable the organisation to do a professional job, and the human resource element should be strengthened to avoid labour turnover.  Terms and conditions of services should be reviewed.  

The Capacity of URA should be strengthened in advent of AGOA, GATT, East African Customs Union and other multilateral arrangements.  

The training of SRPS should be enhanced in terms of tax collection and public relations to minimize conflicts. 

The tax base should be widened by penetrating the large informal sector, which include fishmongers, farmers and traders who are in business but are usually not taxed. Everybody should be allocated a Tax Identification Number for ease of tracking.  This should be strictly monitored as there are reports of changing TIN by altering names. 

The study carried out on terms and conditions of service of URA should be implemented to change on the high labour turnover.  

The budget of URA, especially, the capital development should be addressed in order to allow them purchase new vehicles, computers, and any other necessary inputs to enhance their performance.

Bank of Uganda:

Bank of Uganda has consistently made losses for the last three years as shown in the annual report.  

The proceeds from the sale of UCBL have not been transferred to the Consolidated Fund. 

The cost of the sale of UCBL was extremely high. The consultancies fees were particularly rather very high (Appendix 1) of your reports.  Taxes were not deducted, and instead they were paid by Government. 

Provision for bad debts and bad debts, as assets to the bank were never sold to the buyer. Madam Speaker, and honourable Members, whereas UCB was sold as a going concern, these were never provided in the agreements and Members are concerned that the Minister concerned or Governor or whoever, should explain if this - because some of them were secured.  So where is the money going?  

The committee therefore, recommends as follows:  

The proceeds from sale of UCB should be transferred to the consolidated fund without any delay.   

The Minister should report on the implementation of the recommendations made by this House on the sale of UCBL.

Bank of Uganda should account for the provisions of bad debts, and bad debts that were off balance sheet at the time of sale of UCBL.

We wish however to note that we were expecting some response from the Bank of Uganda and it had not responded at the time of writing this report. Therefore, the committee will present to this House the comprehensive report on Bank of Uganda after analysing votes and responses on UCB.  

Vote 018 - National Planning Authority (NPA) 

The 6th Parliament enacted NPA in order to enhance the planning function in the country. This is anticipated to harmonize all planning efforts and integrating both local and central Government’s plans.  

NPA structure

In accordance with section 56(1) of the NPA, the NPA has a five-member full-time board and an Executive Director as their accounting officer and head of the secretariat.  

NPA has affiliated bodies/institutions totalling to 15 and their heads are ex-officio members of board.  The expanded authority board is composed of 26 members and these include the various advisers of the President on economic matters and the Governor Bank of Uganda.  

The established number of staff is 60 out of which only 32 had been recruited at the time of writing this report.

Achievements:

Its achievements include: 

• Setting up of a Secretariat, which include acquiring offices, staff recruitment, equipping office, to mention but a few. 

• Procurement of two vehicles and other major assets like computers, preparation of the draft overall operational framework and strategy for development planning and management in Uganda.  

• Reviewed the existing development policy, planning and management frameworks. 

• Attended the meeting and workshops related to PEAP and built a consultative effort of the authority.  

• The NPA has put in place the following technical committee of the NPA expanded authority on the national development issues and priorities.

Committees set up:

1. Agriculture and Natural resources 
2. Population, Human Resource Development and social services 
3. Macro-economic management 
4. Industry technology, Physical planning and infrastructure, 
5. Trade development and management.

Planned activities:

Conducting a multi-sectoral situation analysis of forestry, tourism, fishing, agriculture, education, restructuring, National Council of Science and Technology.

Establishment of the “Blue Room” as a forum or platform for people of all calibre to channel development ideas and also be able to share them with others.  

Analysis and recommending actions for public expenditure debt burden, debt management, domestic savings and resource mobilization.  

Budget for 2004/05:

Madam Speaker, I have to go to the details at the end of the page as I make my concluding remarks, but the committee made the following observations:

It should be noted that, funds proposed by the Ministry of Finance of a total of Shs 1,745,230,000 cannot cover the funds needed to recruit staff, buy the necessary equipment like computers and vehicles. 

The consultancy for situational analysis is to cost Shs 54 million, the NPA has not drawn the strategic plan for the Authority despite being in office for over one year now.  This will embarked on very soon after the recruitment, we are told. 

It was also noted that the expenses on medical and housing allowance is rather high, and there should be a way of reducing it. The committee discussed with them and advised them on how they can reduce it.

The planning function is not yet fully divested from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The ministry will retain the function of short term planning until the PEAP review exercise is completed. After the completion the planning function will be transferred to NPA.

The committee further noted that for an efficient and effective planning of the authority, there should be continuity of personnel as it was done with the National Forestry Authority and Uganda Revenue Authority. The planners in the Ministry of Finance should transfer their experience and expertise to the authority.  

Recommendations:

The budget proposed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development cannot enable the NPA to carry out its crucial activities programmed for take-off this financial year.  

The Committee proposes an increase of Shs 1 billion on top of what the ministry had proposed to make a total provision of Shs 2,745,230,000. The increase of Shs 1 billion should be sourced from strategic intervention funds.  

The NPA should - hon. Members, I want to clarify that the strategic intervention fund is to intervene in a strategic manner or in areas where you think there is affirmative action, but how can you intervene without planning. It is against this background, Madam Speaker that the committee recommends that this money be sourced from this area.  

The planning function should be transferred to NPA in order to function without interference. There is no way NPA can handle only medium-term and long-term planning without consideration of short-term plans. 

The National Planning Authority (NPA) should stagger the recruitment exercise of the extra staff due to budgetary constraints.  

The NPA should start the medical insurance scheme in order to reduce on the exorbitant medical allowance and rationalize resource utilization.  

The committee further recommends that the following activities be halted due to limited funds bearing in mind the current state of rent. The committee urges the Authority to rationalize housing allowance for the Secretariat.  

1. The office refreshment assistants are redundant and should be abolished or re-assigned to reflect what role is expected of them.

2. The advertising and public relations activities are not a priority and should therefore be suspended until resources can allow.  

3. All Board meetings should be held in Kampala to avoid wastage of resources. This will save over Shs 21 million.  

4. The hospitalization and burial expenses should be covered under the proposed medical insurance scheme.

5. The end of year party estimated for Shs 43 million should be suspended and scraped since the Authority is still young and priority activities poorly funded.  

6. Members of the Board and the Executive Director should hire their own security guards so that NPA does not meet the expense.

Madam Speaker, we were concerned about the importance of the NPA and the money we propose. We had a meeting with them and we wanted to focus on priority areas only.  

Conclusion: 

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends to the House that the following funds be appropriated to Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; 
Recurrent Expenditure: Shs 85,638,875,000; Development Expenditure:  Shs 177,516,821,400

Vote 108 - National Planning Authority (NPA) 
The committee recommends for approval of the august House the budget for the National Planning Authority - Vote 108: 

Recurrent Expenditure - Shs 2,195,000,000 Development Expenditure - Shs 549,630,000 making a total of Shs 2,745,230,000.

Appreciation:  

The committee would like to thank the Ministers and their technical staff for cooperation during the consideration of the ministerial policy statement.  The committee further appreciates the timely response to invitations for meeting by both ministry officials and semi-autonomous bodies under the ministry.  

The committee begs the House to adopt this report.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson.  First, I would like to certify that I have examined the report and it has been signed by over one third of the Members. So, it satisfies Rule 170(1) of our Rules of Procedure and you may proceed to debate it.  

However, again listening to this report, I am a bit troubled that a few of our committees are not doing their work because if you are to hear that the Uganda Telecommunication Limited (UTL) is run like a private company, you ask yourself whether there is still a Board of Directors and what is happening to it. When you hear that the Board of Custodian Board has not sat for - I do not know how many years, we ask ourselves what the committee responsible for these institutions is doing. That is my only comment about the report; you can debate it.  

MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to congratulate the committee on a job well done.  However, Madam Speaker, there are issues that I would have been happier with if the committee had also covered -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Incidentally, I forgot to say that everybody has three minutes only.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Point well taken, Madam Speaker.  For example, if the committee is concerned about the structure of the ministry and being top-heavy, what is the method of transmitting the committee’s concern to the appointing authority for necessary action? That is lacking.

Madam Speaker, yesterday I raised on this Floor the way the Ministry of Finance handles other ministries.  There is, for example, the question of the Ministry of Finance taking too long in giving clearance to other ministries to submit either cabinet papers or giving certificates of financial implication. A case in point is the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which has so many draft bills in process but which cannot proceed because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not provided certificates of financial implications. I think this is a matter, which is bogging down Government machinery. Finance should not be allowed to simply bog down other Ministries more so when they have been a party to the discussion of the proposals that are being submitted to it. I look at this as double standards because I do not imagine how a ministry would evolve a policy ready for Cabinet approval without the involvement of the Ministry of Finance, for them to start raising new issues and delaying and frustrating the proposed policies.

Secondly, I would like to get clarification about the policy of the Ministry of Finance in meeting statutory payments. For example, why are the pension arrears not being met when actually these are direct charges on the Consolidated Fund? Why are court awards not being respected and paid? Do they want to be embarrassed by people actually taking action and getting letters of mandamus served on the Secretary to the Treasury and being threatened with prison? I think this is something, which needs to be looked into. This financial year the Minister of Finance deliberately cut rent provisions across the board and yet there are private developers who had taken up loans in order to put up the properties that Government is occupying. How does the Ministry of Finance reconcile this with its policy of encouraging private developers?  

Madam Speaker, I know you would be very happy if I ended. We have talked about the ministry’s vision being ending poverty by the year 2017.  How are we going to monitor its progress? If it is on a continuum and now it is four years down the road, what have we achieved so far in the eradication of poverty? 

Madam Speaker, I feel concerned about the reported losses in Bank of Uganda. You recall we raised issues of even some irregular withdraws from Bank of Uganda which could not be reconciled with the Ministry of Finance. If this is now coupled with reported losses for the last three years, I think you are right, Madam Speaker, the relevant committees of Parliament should actually look into these issues and the taxpayers get explanations to these losses. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.22
MR RUHINDI FRED  (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like the previous colleague, I thank the committee for the good report. I rise on one major issue; that is, I want to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee how his committee has handled cross cutting issues. As you note, his committee and ministry are in charge of semi autonomous bodies among which is Uganda Investment Authority. There has been an issue of the merger of Uganda Investment Authority, Tourist Board, Export Promotion Council, has kept coming back to this House every year without any resolution. I am a Member of the Trade, Tourism and Industry Committee and in that Committee I proposed that there should be a joint meeting between hon. Rwamirama’s committee and ours so that this matter can be flashed out before we come to plenary. I wish the chairman of the committee could – You see the problem is, if there is no agreement behind the scenes, and this matter comes, there would be no agreement. We need those responsible to agree because the major problem has been, where should Uganda Investment Authority be housed? Should it be Trade and Industry, should it be in Finance? That has been the major issue. 

Another issue is the privatisation of flats in some areas of Uganda under the National Housing and Construction Corporation (NHCC). NHCC Limited, I am aware, falls under hon. Nasasira’s ministry, but you will bear with me that the key decisions in terms of privatising those flats are in the Ministry of Finance. When we come here there will be cross accusations that so and so is responsible, so and so is responsible. What I am actually advising is; why haven’t the relevant chairmen or chairpersons agreed to meet and flash these matters before we come to plenary, or has that been done? Thank you.

4.25
MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, madam Speaker. I also like to thank the committee for a good report. 

Madam Speaker, mine is on Entandikwa Scheme. According to the committee report, the recovery rate is very, very, low and yet this money was disbursed between 1996 and 1997. I am seeking clarification as to what the ministry is doing to recover this money, and who has got this money? 

Madam Speaker, this scheme was mismanaged; many poor people got this money and I know some of them may not be able to pay back. If they do not pay back, what are you going to do with them? 

I would like also to know what the Government is intending to do because some of these people have already died. How are you going to recover this money? So, I feel that something should be done either to call it a bad debt for some people or to try to get this money in trickles as they are getting now. But all in all, I feel this scheme was mismanaged in the past.  

Madam Speaker, my other point is on water. Water, as stated by the committee, is life. Already now the Water Sewerage Corporation is doing a very good job but at the same time this water is being utilized by a few people, mainly the rich. The poor people do not get this water to drink although it passes by their houses. The prices are high; a jerrycan of water is between Shs 50 and Shs 100. If this body is privatized, what is going to happen? The poor people are going to be strangled.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Member for giving way. The information I want to pass to my colleague, who is actually my former teacher, is that the cost of water by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation is actually Shs 1000 per unit, and the unit consists of 50 jerrycans, which means that is Shs 20 per jerrycan.  So, I do not know where you get the price of Uganda Shs 50 per jerrycan.  

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you very much, my former student. That might be what you considered to be the official price, but at the market price, those people who are in charge of these water pipes are charging that amount, which I am stating.  There is the ideal; there is reality -(Mr Tibarimbasa rose_) Madam speaker, I have very little time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You have given out the Floor?

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: I do not accept the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are receiving information?

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: No, you have given me a short time.

MR TIBARIMBASA: It is very brief –(Interjection)- no, he was a year-mate at the university. The information I am going to give, Madam Speaker, is that there is no change for Shs 20 in our currency so that the minimum exchange rate is Shs 50. That is why hon. Basaliza came to the figure of Shs 50.  Thank you.

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: I would like to thank my colleague for that information. I am pleading for the poor who are supposed to utilize this water, and I am saying that the poor people should be protected, and I support the committee’s proposal that this National Water and Sewerage Corporation should not be privatized.

Madam Speaker, lastly, I would like also to support the committee about splitting the ministry into two, one in charge of animal husbandry, and another one in charge of crop husbandry. Although the chairperson of the committee was talking about cows only, I know that is his major concern. But there are other animals like goats, sheep, pigs and the rest. But in the field there, the concentration is mainly on crop husbandry, and even those people who are trained to be in charge of animal husbandry, veterinary doctors, are now running to crop husbandry and they are neglecting the main sector, which I would consider to be animal husbandry.  Therefore, Madam Speaker, in order to have these two areas well run, we need to have two ministries.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not go further on the question of those ministries. We have a substantive motion, which will come after budget, on those two ministries. So, let us just agree on the principle, don’t go into details.  There is a motion we are going to have on splitting.

4.32
MR NELSON GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for 60 percent marks for the work they did; certainly it is above average. But I think the 136-page policy statement of the Ministry of Finance to be rebutted with 28 pages is a bit thick. I would have expected them to be slightly slimmer. I would have been comfortable with 13 pages in the normal way of rebutting. 

However, we must thank them for having made quite serious attempts of saying that time has come to start re-organizing the ministries for getting better work out of the Executive. For the Ministry of Finance to allocate itself Shs 177 billion as development budget and allocate the Ministry of Works Shs 340 billion, I think is an untenable scenario. We really want roads, we want infrastructure; how can a clerical ministry, moreover armed with computers, modern technology, start asking for Shs 177 billion as development budget? 

This scenario, Madam Speaker, is not tenable and we should continuously tell the Ministry of Finance that actually it is not allocating resources equitably to each ministry. I think if we had powers, we would actually slash the budget, but in view of the fact that our committee has done very good work, it did not come with a recommendation on this subject. We shall look forward to next year for the committee to do the needful, but this time we are going to pass this budget because of time and other things. Next time I think we should really tame the Ministry of Finance, I think it is not really being equitable in allocating resources to stimulate the Ministry of Works and that of Agriculture to do the necessary work.  

Madam Speaker, the other point, which made me stand up was that it appears that the Ministry of Finance –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, why are you so excited about the Ministry of Finance? Please listen, because it seems everybody is so happy to hear about the Ministry of Finance. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way.  Madam Speaker, there is a saying in Luganda that, “Omugabi teyeseera,” which means the Ministry of Finance is selfish and that is why it is taking the lion’s share.

MR GAGAWALA: Yes, but you see, Madam speaker, the key aspect in organizing the economy is the brains, which are in the Ministry of Finance. We expect the Ministry of Finance to play its characteristic role of stimulating each sector to cause the rest of the population to produce so that there are riches. But in a situation where out of an economy of Shs 13 trillion, the Ministry of Finance allocates itself Shs 200 billion for its own purpose, then we are losing the target. That is the point I am making. I am not arguing that they should not pay themselves adequately, but I am arguing that the allocation should be equitable; it should be really logical. In this circumstance, it is not logical.

Madam Speaker, what I would have liked the committee to tell us is that from the actions and interventions of the Ministry of Finance, the Fishery sub-sector is coming up like this. But the way I see things happening, we are coming to a point where policies, which were started in the 1990s, are not adding on more to trigger an avalanche of reaction. I think this is a question; we are almost stalling yet we have not yet jumped out of real poverty. We want people to jump from US $ 300 per year to US $ 600, then to US $ 1000. The Ministry of Finance is actually stagnating and I expected the committee to come out and tell them that “You are stagnating” and the Ministry of Finance must come out with very new radical policies to make the paradigm shift so that we can actually start jumping to the US $ 600 and US $ 1000 per year. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.38
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a series of questions for the Minister and probably he might seek the assistance of the Acting Attorney General.  Madam Speaker, the matter of Sebutinde Report on URA, I do not know whether it is still subjudice or whether this House can seek further clarification from the relevant Minister and Attorney General?  

One, is it possible for us to salvage anything out of this report notwithstanding the ruling from the High Court?

Two, could the hon. Minister tell me again with assistance from the Attorney General the legal status of SRPS. Where is its legal domain or domicile? Does it belong to UPDF, the Ministry of Finance, State House, or some other unknown organization? In the event of difficulties, who would be sued, who would be liable, who would be responsible?

Thirdly, I would also like to go back to Uganda Property Holdings especially on matter of management of Missions abroad. I would like to advise the ministry to keep their safe distance on this particular matter. Uganda Property Holdings can manage other parastatal properties abroad, but when it comes to Missions, property which enjoy diplomatic status, I think you have to be conscious because immediately you get into business of letting out a property, which belongs to a diplomatic mission, then you are liable to tax locally, and that can create unnecessary problems. In which case I would recommend that you leave the management of such a property to the Mission and Ministry of Foreign Affairs and keep the Ministry of Finance out of it.

Tri-star: Once again, I wish to know the legal status of this particular organization. I know they are foreign investors, but how does a foreign organization take Ugandan property without a lease agreement? These are anomalies; nobody can move into this country, takeover a Government property without an agreement. There has to be an agreement of some sort.

Again, how come the rent has never been paid, have they ever been given an invoice that is now due for this property? We want answers to these questions.

Last but not least on this matter of Tri-star, you need to work hard to save the face of His Excellency the President. His name is being drawn into this matter all the time, loosely, because he is the promoter of foreign investors. So some people are beginning to say, “Why is this organization so privileged? It must have some private connection with the family of the President.” Come out clearly to clear his name.

Tax relief: Why are we very reluctant to give local investors tax relief? When other people they come from outside Uganda, you give them quick tax relief.

UDB: We want to maintain UDB as a Development Bank and not a commercial bank for the purpose of serving as a conduit for soft loans to local industrial investors. But if you put it back into the category of commercial bank, most of our people cannot afford their money. 

Talking about money, Mr Minister, through you Madam Speaker, why is money in this country, especially capital, so expensive? We are trying to encourage our people to come out of subsistence agriculture to monetary or cash economy and we make the money too expensive. Why is fuel in this country more expensive than Rwanda, yet fuel passes through this country to Rwanda? It is because of the bad policies in the Ministry of Finance. You have put too much tax on fuel and as a result transport and production have become too expensive. Somebody with cheap milk from Mbarara cannot get it to Kampala, because of your transport cost because you have put very heavy taxes on fuel and –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, those are 12 clarifications; I have been counting - 12.

MR AWORI:  Actually I had 22 - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. I would like to give other Members opportunity.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The last but not least – These multi-lateral banks that we are dealing with us such as PTA are killing us. I will give you an example. We have a leading local investor in steel industry called Sembule. These people came in a heavy way and tried to kill him and you have not come to his rescue. The only person in this country with assets worth Shs 36 billion, you have not given him a penny to assist him out of his problems with PTA! Can you do it immediately?

Kinyara: How are you privatising Kinyara Sugar Works? Are you taking into consideration the interest of the people of Bunyoro who gave their land? What kind of percentage are you giving them?  I understand you are giving 51 percent of the shareholding to a core-investor who is a foreigner and yet the people who gave their land, you have never compensated them, you have never put it in liquid terms - How much are those shares worth in terms of land?  

Lastly, what has been the impact of the East African Customs Union on our tax situation? We are going to lose money when we get in this Union. How much money are we going to lose and how much money are we going to gain, could you tell me in two words, but not in as many words as I have used?

4.44
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for a balanced report. One thing I like about this report is that, it is thinking about the box, it is looking at the economy broadly, but also looking at the major sectors that actually contribute to the economy for instance agriculture.

On page 2 of the report, you look at the structure of the ministry, look at all those 13 semi-autonomous institutions; is the Ministry of Finance a super ministry to oversee 13 autonomous institutions?  For instance, what is the National Council of Science and Technology doing in the Ministry of Finance? Why can’t that move to say, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry where technology and industry matters are dealt with or the ministry related with science? What is the Uganda Investment Authority doing in the Ministry of Finance? There has been a recommendation that, that Uganda Investment Authority, Uganda Tourist Board and Export Promotion Board should all be merged and moved to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, then the Ministry of Finance can be left to focus on important things.

On page 4, the committee says, “The Ministry of Finance has no vision.” That is very, very serious.  In other words, we are being led by a blind ministry. Vision means seeing what is going to happen in future. If you have no vision, you have no hope.  It is a serious observation and the ministry should move very quickly to have a vision, which is in tandem with Vision 2025.

The committee talks of controlling inflation. Unfortunately, they said the Ministry has done well to control inflation but at what cost? Inflation hurts different people differently; the inflation is low because the food prices are low. In fact, sometimes food inflation is negative because our farmers are paid less than what they spend on producing the food. So, let us not kid ourselves. By having low inflation we are helping the urban people and hurting the rural people and yet agriculture is the backbone of the economy. So, much as we think we have low inflation, which is good, we are hurting the rural people out there, which is a very bad thing. We have to look at the inflation –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: You are talking about inflation and what comes to my mind is that we have two types of inflation: hyper inflation and mild inflation. We know what is dangerous to the economy is hyper inflation; mild inflation is good. So, which inflation are they talking about? I know as an economist that mild inflation encourages production and investment so, what inflation are they talking about?

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am afraid I do not agree with my colleague who has just asked for a clarification –(Interjection)- I was saying that I do not agree with my colleague who says that inflation per se is good. Inflation is defined as a general rise in prices. When prices rise generally across the board, from a pin to a razorblade, to meat, to vehicles, to fuel; that is called inflation and it cannot be good. 

I would also want to take to task the committee, who keep singing the Government song that inflation is continuously a single digit. For the last three or four years prices of everything have been rising by good percentages so you cannot at the same time talk about the single digit. Somebody needs to bring empirical evidence to this House to say why they are saying inflation is only a single digit when it has been rising by 50 percent, 30 percent, for almost all commodities. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: I must clarify this position, Madam Speaker, because the man has mixed up things. I wonder under what profession he is talking about inflation, but he should not confuse the House. I have categorically put it to you that there are two types of inflation: hyper and mild inflation, and each has effects. I can refer him to a number of monetary, economics books to update his knowledge such that he is able to reduce on the zone of ignorance as regards inflation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the honourable member is saying that in his view he is taking up issue with the reports of the committee over the last three financial years that there has been single digit inflation. That is what he does not want to hear. He says that everything is expensive and that everything has gone up, in cost. That is the way he understands it.  

DR NKUUHE: Thank you. Madam Speaker, my little understanding of economics, and I have asked a lot of the people too, when you are calculating that inflation, obviously you use certain parameters and it depends on what you put in the basket. But I have talked to a very renowned economist and he says Uganda could use a bit of inflation because he says what you regard as low inflation is actually that the economy is static and, therefore, people are hurting. So, we need to do something. We need a little inflation so that we can encourage consumption and so on, then we can move. Otherwise, we are getting static.

On page 8, the committee is recommending a culture of saving and a culture of banking. But I want to ask my colleagues: how many of us have invested in Treasury Bills? How many? How many of us are able to balance our bank accounts at the end of the month? We get two cheques; there is a big cheque and a small cheque. A friend of mind was saying what we call a big cheque is for him a small cheque because that is the one where they make deductions from. So, if you recommend that the country should have a culture of saving, you should start with yourself. At the end of the month, much as we know we go to the constituencies and they get the money from us, but definitely the Members of Parliament should live by example. I see a lot of Members of Parliament investing in micro finance institutions. Why should a Member of Parliament be investing in micro finance when there is a formal banking system? We invest in micro finance because we do not trust the formal banking system. In my view, that is undermining our own policies.  

Madam Speaker, we should practice what we preach and from tomorrow we should invest in long-term bonds or in those shares. If we did then the stock exchange would be working. The reason we need the long-term finance is so that Government can borrow to invest in long-term infrastructure, roads, railways and so on. You cannot borrow that money from the commercial banks; it is just not feasible. You need to borrow it from long-term financing institutions and yet if you are not putting in money, where will that money come from? The first people to put in the money should be the Members of Parliament and then we can tell our constituents to invest.  

I thank the committee for finally recommending the split of the Ministry of Agriculture because I can tell you, as somebody who keeps animals, if you want to fight poverty in rural areas, encourage your farmers to go into animal husbandry. If you encourage them to go into crops only they will die poor. I gave a goat project to my constituency and now they are praising me. Of course some are cursing me but I can assure you they are selling those cross breeds at a high price and they are growing very quickly. Let me tell you, the economics of animal production is that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nkuuhe, I have already said that we have a motion, which is pending before this House on the split of that ministry, so please, let us agree with the principle and leave the pros and cons until that debate. Now you are anticipating the outcome of that debate.

DR NKUUHE: No, I am telling of the good things about goats.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable member, the goats are very good but we need to finish this budget.

DR NKUUHE: With those few words, Madam Speaker, I thank the committee.

4.56
MR MATTHIAS KASAMBA (Kakuuto County, Rakai): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues and thank the committee for the well laid-out report about the Ministry of Finance. I have a clarification I am seeking as far as page 12 is concerned, that is the Micro Finance Outreach Plan. It is said that the components of Micro Finance Outreach Plan are intended to ensure well-managed, professional micro finance institutions, which are able to expand their services to under-served areas in the country. 

We are aware that under the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture there is a component for credit supply to the farmers. However, it is very unfortunate that most of the components have rolled out, like the NAADS programme, it has moved to almost 21 districts but the technology transfers they have trained the farmers to apply, there is no facilitating finance as far as micro-finance is concerned. The Ministry of Finance, and I am aware that the Ministry of Finance is part of the PMA steering committee, should look into rolling out the micro-finance facilities to ensure that farmers can access affordable credit. That will ensure that the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture can go ahead.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of revenue mobilization, sometime last year the port of Mombasa closed out importers who were bringing in goods using small unit cargo vehicles. Recently, the port of Dar-es-Salaam has also notified all importers who are using the port for transit purposes to stop importing using small cargo vehicles. It means most of the importers must use containers. In other words, all small businessmen who have been using between US $5,000 and US $3,000 have been cut off. Recently I have been monitoring Mutukula Customs Joint, it had raised revenue, mobilising up to Shs 2.5 billion every month and this had already made an impact. The Tanzanian Revenue Authority had already given notice that by 30th July no more importation would be allowed using small unit vehicles. Could the Minister of Finance clarify on how it is harmonizing its position with various revenue authorities and harbour controllers in Mombasa and Dar-es-Salaam?

MR KAKOOZA: When you compare with our neighbouring countries like Rwanda and Burundi, they are using the same port of Mombasa to transport loose cargo passing via Uganda. I do not know why Uganda is very reluctant about it. When you compare the importation of goods we use here, it is 65 percent and that is what we depend on for our revenue collection. So, Minister of Finance, you must deal with this quickly so that we benefit from it and not lose those small and medium-term enterprises that are importing through those ports.

MR KASAMBA: I thank you my colleague for giving information. The Ministry of Finance should seriously negotiate with the Mombasa harbour and Dar-es-Salaam harbour authorities to ensure that at least our small-scale importers are not locked out of the importation business.  

Finally, the committee has recommended that the planning function should be transferred to the NPA in order for it to function without interference. When is this going to take place? If it is to take place this year, how much money is going to be transferred from the Ministry of Finance to the planning authority? Currently under the Ministry of Finance and Planning there is already a planning function. So, how much is going to be transferred to the NPA so that the planning function is transferred, with resources, to the NPA? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.00
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Actually hon. Gagawala stole my point because I was the one bringing – Shs 177 billion for development expenditure for the Ministry of Finance, what is it for? What is the Ministry of Finance going to develop? What we need are roads, we need social services, we need water in our constituencies; these are social services we need. What is the Ministry of Finance going to develop? I appeal to members not to approve this figure.  

Madam Speaker, I remember last year I asked fellow members - I brought a question here about the heart machine, people are suffering, the children are going to India, there is no heart machine here; it costs just Shs 10 billion to put it in Mulago. The ministry says there is no money, every time there is no money, but we now come to Finance and there is money, Shs 177 billion, this is outrageous! It should be condemned with all the contempt it deserves. In fact it should be at least reduced by Shs 10 billion to bring the heart machine to Mulago. With that I will cool off a bit but without that I will fight it.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since so many members are really excited about this money and they are asking what the money is meant for, I am inviting the honourable members to get these books of which each of us has a copy. The book is entitled “The Draft Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure, Recurrent and Development 2004/2005 financial year”. When you get that book, you go to page R41 that is where Vote 008 - Finance, Planning and Economic Development, starts. When you get to that page you will find detailed, itemized provisions for this money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, since you are here, you itemize those so that nobody continues blasting your ministry for it.  

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I have the pleasure to do that. Members will be patient because these are 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 even 9; these are 10 pages. Should I go through all of them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes

MR RUKUTANA: The figures are clearly itemized. The committee scrutinized each and every item and they did not challenge them. Honourable members should not really, for the sake of – I want to say that the Ministry of Finance does not think singularly or does not allocate resources alone. There is an elaborate process of resource allocation and prioritization –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, just for the benefit of us members here, could the Minister give us just two items on capacity building and travel abroad, the figure in that book, under the Ministry of Finance?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, there are so many items of capacity building not only in the Ministry of Finance but in so many other sectors. We require different capacities for different activities. Like any other sector or ministry where we require building capacity, we provide for it but I was saying that if you want I could read through them. Mind these are ten pages and about 1,000 items. Should I read through?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is already in the Hansard that your ministry does not require this money. That is what the members have said, that you do not require this money. So, I am just asking you to give a few examples of where that money is going, and we record it in the Hansard.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, let me read the Heads. For example, item 01, Office of the Minister we have a provision of Shs 538,036,000 as wages, Shs 8 billion –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they were talking about the funds for development.

MR RUKUTANA: Development?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MR RUKUTANA: Okay. Item 01, we have a figure of Shs 8,735,743,000 as development fund for the office of the minister. We go to public administration, we have a figure of Shs 86,877,000; we go to tax policy department, we have a figure of Shs 58,130,714; we go to aid liaison, we have a figure of Shs 60,418,000; we go to treasury office of accounts, we have a figure of Shs 1,065,955,000 –(Interruption)

MR KAGIMU: Madam Speaker, the Minister is not helping us because when he says that for example in the office of the minister for development there are billions of shillings, what is there to develop in the minister’s office?

MR RUKUTANA: But the items are here, look at the books; all of us got these books long ago –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us do this. Honourable minister, you listen and then I will give you time to answer later. I think that is better.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In fact I prophesied that the minister’s information was not going to help. For example, if the Minister Nasasira stands up he will say, “I need Shs 8 billion to develop a road from Karamoja to Kotido”; this is what we want. We want empirical - we want water, we want services, not to develop an office of the minister. What are you going to develop? You have so many Pajeros, and what are you going to develop? You have air-conditioned offices; there is nothing more to develop –(Interruption)

MR MWONDHA: Thank you very much, hon. Member for Bukomansimbi, for giving way. I want to inform you that if two graduates came out of Makerere today and one went to the Ministry of Energy and another to Finance, in two weeks the one of Ministry of Finance would be driving, probably a Pajero, while the one in Energy would still be walking at a paltry walking allowance of some Shs 15,000.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much. So, Madam Speaker, I appeal to the House not to approve this money, the Shs 177 billion as development expenditure for the Ministry of Finance. It is outrageous; it is too much, it should not be approved.

Another point I would like to raise, I was reading the New Vision of 2nd August and they said Shs 2 billion was given to the Ministry of Education to be given to a certain primary school: Apir Primary School in Ayel sub-county in Apac District. When the Minister of Education went there she found that this money was not used. What the people at the district said was that, “We cannot construct classrooms because of insecurity”. So they brought that money back and it was given to the Ministry of Finance. The Minister said that, “At least you should have bought desks for the pupils, but you brought back this money, moreover those kids are suffering?” It is an area full of insecurity yet the Shs 2 billion was brought back. Do you know what happened to that money? It was re-allocated.

It went to the Ministry of Finance and it was re-allocated to security roads in Northern Uganda but school children are continuing to sit down. This is Apir Primary School in Ayel sub-county in Apac District. You can imagine! Who has jurisdiction over that money? Parliament approved that money for schools, the money goes and it is brought back; without the approval of Parliament, the money is re-allocated to roads when the children are sitting on the ground. This is terrible! They are very lucky that this did not happen in Bukomansimbi. I tell you, Madam Speaker, the minister would be fighting physically. (Laughter)

I would like to end – it is unfortunate the minister has gone out - the Minister of Finance should clarify this with the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. The Minister for Parliamentary Affairs went to Kenya recently and she met her colleagues and they discussed the constituency fund and the Minister came back with a report. Madam Speaker, in Kenya, for the constituency development fund they are getting Kenya Shs 25 million per year, that is about Uganda Shs 100 million –(Interjection)- 600? That may be too much for the Uganda economy –(Laughter)- of course when it comes to that they will say there is no money yet when it comes to the Ministry of Finance’s development it is there. 

Madam Speaker, those people get a Kenya Shs 25 million bursary; each constituency in Kenya is getting that money. We need this fund; I raised it, the Speaker said it is not urgent but I feel it is urgent. We need money for developing our constituencies. We are getting money out of our pockets and you cannot develop a constituency by getting money from your pocket. We need a special development fund. I wish the Minister were here; I think the Minister should give a statement on that. She should liaise with the Minister of Finance because they should look for the money. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.07
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I want to give a preliminary comment that I personally object to the idea of the constituency fund because it is an opportunity that any Government can use to say, “I gave money to hon. Kizige. If he has not done anything, there he is;” and yet Kenya Shs 25 million cannot do anything. But that is a preliminary statement.  

I have two submissions. On page 13 on the Entandikwa scheme – if I may be protected from hon. Avitus Tibarimbasa –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Avitus Tibarimbasa, I understand you are being very friendly to hon. Otto.

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, this Entandikwa scheme is the most miserable project the Government has entered into and fortunately or unfortunately my good friend, hon. Agard Didi, is now in the mud when everything is about to end. This is a situation where Government has failed to recover Shs 6 billion over ten years. I think this is so serious and alarming and we pray for our friend, Agard Didi. We would really love to see a report in a couple of years on your recovery rate, but I hear and I know most of the beneficiaries are key politicians in this country. Distribution-wise in this House, they would head towards the front bench. I do not know how we shall manage to recover such monies that have been allotted as political favours in the name of loans and credit schemes. 

I am also disappointed by the percentages and the way the money was distributed. Thirty-two percent is for Central, 27 percent Western and the usual Eastern and Northern Uganda getting 25 percent and 16 percent respectively. There should be a scientific explanation; otherwise it leaves the obvious political explanation in minds like ours. Of course, Government is the usual suspect if it comes to allocation of resources outside the East and Central regions.

Madam Speaker, I still insist the Government should stop and desist from practicing sectarianism in this country. It will not take us anywhere. It will only set grounds for retribution and I still insist the current Government is very sectarian – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Odonga Otto has made a very serious statement to the extent of saying that Government is sectarian. Can he substantiate? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, the matters you have raised are extremely serious. Unless you can substantiate, you will have to withdraw your statement.  

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, I want to lay on the Table a document, which I spent the whole morning researching on. But for purposes of leaving a clean name in the Hansard, these are some of the few indicators of the sectarianism being practiced by the current Government because the Budget is all about allocation of national resources; human and financial.  

Ministerial allocations, 40 percent come from Western Uganda where the President comes from. This is a fact. It is not an opinion. Central has 16; Eastern has 13, and Northern 9. In other words if you consider the details, those from Western Uganda can in fact have a Cabinet meeting because they will have quorum. We have 53 percent of ministers in a Cabinet meeting from the West and because they will have quorum -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you Madam Speaker and I thank the member for giving way. I would like to know what percentage of votes came from the North to the present Government. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I will not allow an answer to that question; it is not fair. Hon. Otto, you know we are talking about the Budget. Can you relate your sectarianism to the Budget?

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, for a budget to be perfectly implemented, it needs people who have special interest in some areas. So, when everyone almost comes from the same area these are some of the reasons why we have budget failures. I still insist, before I lay this document on the Table, on substantiating my argument of sectarianism. Even gender-wise, only 22 percent of women are in Cabinet positions. Out of 64 men there are only 15 women. I think this is chauvinistic, to a person who believes in gender like me. Besides that, the national objectives in the Constitution are very clear – although my friend the chemical engineer could have not got time to read them. They say that the composition of Government shall be broadly representative of the national character and social diversity of the country. So, this is what the Budget is all about. 

And on the National Planning Authority (NPA), I think we are just dreaming. If you think you can create a body that can guide a man with vision - because what is happening is that the NPA should have come up with a master plan on what the country should achieve in the next twenty years. And very many Ugandans like Prof. Latigo, hon. Augustine Ruzindana made contributions when they were constituting this NPA but you come to realize that the NPA is now busy employing security guards. These are all products of idleness. You know, when you cannot be important by the nature of your job, you just try to be important by the nature of just being important. 

They are even holding end of year parties worth Shs 43 million and yet they are only 26 staff. That means one person consumed Shs 1.5 million –(Laughter)- at the end of the year party. Unless there is serious political commitment from the side of Government and Ministry of Finance to empower the National Planning Authority, then they do not deserve any money.

As I sit down, may I lay on the Table the document that shows the sectarian tendencies being exhibited by this Government? And we pray, since this budget is passing before or after the reshuffle, that ample considerations are made so that the Cabinet can reflect the national character. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay this on the Table.

MR KAGIMU: Madam Speaker, I talked about the constituency fund and the minister, unfortunately, was not around. Who is working on it? She was in Kenya and she did very good research. Could she say something? When is she is going to make a statement? Could she say something about that constituency fund, the Minister in-charge of Parliamentary Affairs?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister is still here. When she is ready she will say something. You know the Member for Bukomansimbi has extremely high hopes about the outcome of your meetings with the Kenyan MPs. He wants to know when you are going to make a statement about the constituency fund. He is very anxious about it but – (Interruption)

MRS SSENTONGO: Can we know the source of the document that hon. Otto has laid on the Table? We need to know. We could also be interested to get that research.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister deal with the constituency fund and get it out of the way.

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to assure the hon. Members of Parliament that they should have hope. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Pardon? That they should have what? I did not hear you. Anyway, this is an evaluation but I think hon. Otto himself said he has done some research, so this is his research.  

5.18
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have got a few observations to make. The first one is about workers. I am also concerned about privatized enterprises. The workers have never been paid to-date and yet we are to off-load more, to privatize more. We are taking workers for granted and tomorrow we are likely to see an expression whereby we privatize companies, we terminate workers, we promise that we are going to pay them and there is nothing in the budget for them. 

I raised this issue yesterday when we had the conference about Uganda Railways, which is going to be concessioned. How are they going to pay their workers? They say that the money is going to be put in the Budget and yet today I have not seen any money in the Budget for the Lint Marketing Board Workers, it is not there; Coffee Marketing Board workers, it is not there. Most of the enterprises which were privatized, the workers have not been paid.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member that the terminal benefits for workers in enterprises, which have been privatised, the funds do not come from the Consolidated Fund. This money comes from the redundancy account of the divestiture account. It comes from the money, which has been raised from the proceeds of the previously privatized enterprises. So, that is not reflected in the Budget. 

But as I explained to the honourable member yesterday, since he has referred to that, Government policy is to ensure that no former employee of a privatized enterprise unfairly suffers because of that privatisation. We have no record of workers who have been terminated but did not get terminal benefits, except in cases where the workers and Government did not agree on the formula. Where the formula that is reflected in their contract is not accepted by workers and the workers challenge that formula, in such a situation - when the workers challenge the formula for computing the terminal benefits - we get an arbiter, or workers challenge that formula in court. Once the court gives a ruling that guides us, we pay the terminal benefits. So, the money is there, it is on the redundancy account and it is not reflected in the Budget. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you very much, Mr Minister, for that information. I hope you will pay them and those delays stop. But I am going to send you a team of workers who have never been paid, from the former Coffee Marketing Board.

I go on to NAADS. I have been reading about NAADS, I have gone on the ground to find out what NAADS does, and I have failed to get the difference between extension workers and NAADS. Maybe the little difference I have seen is that NAADS is demand-driven whereby a farmer has to go to an extension worker to seek the assistance or knowledge, but at a fee. The extension workers were giving free services but in NAADS we are going to pay for the services. You can imagine my father -(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: I want the honourable colleague to cease fire on NAADS and extension services until we present the report on agriculture because that is more focused and that is when clarification should definitely be sought. Thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I will cease my fire. 

I go on to – we used to have - I am still on agriculture. I am talking about agriculture, the backbone of this economy. Madam Speaker, we used to have people who were spraying coffee. Now all the coffee plantations are gone, the coffee wilt is spreading like bush fire. Yet still the farmers do not have money to even buy those herbicides we are talking about. Maybe it will also come in the report on agriculture? I hope it will and I will be given opportunity to contribute to it.

Let me talk about animals. I do not know whether it is also coming in that report but in reality we have a problem with drought, especially we people who come from Western Uganda and Karamoja; it is a very big problem. Cattle are dying; we hear of money in agriculture for digging dams. Why can this money not go to the Ministry of Water so that we know from which central point to go and complain? But now when you go to the Ministry of Water they say, “Go to the Ministry of Agriculture”. We need to look into this one very seriously.

However, I do not agree with the statistics of Botswana because in Botswana one person has three cattle whereas in Uganda four people have got one. So, automatically you see that really we consume more. We have got less cattle than in Botswana.

Madam Speaker, I am happy that for the first time the Committee on Finance has brought up the issue of Uganda Railways. This is a land-locked country, a land-locked country without access to the sea. The only route to the sea is Uganda Railways, which has been neglected for all these years. I am happy that now it is capturing the attention of the President, even the Parliament itself. To give you small statistics, the cost of goods in Uganda, 30 percent is a component of transportation whereas in other countries it is less than 15 percent. This is because we do not have a good railway network to the sea. 

Our roads - we have been blaming the minister that they are doing shoddy work but you have to imagine, the population of the vehicles has increased tremendously. Roads are being overloaded, that is why the lifespan of our roads has reduced tremendously. So, we have to look at Uganda Railways very seriously -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byabagambi, I am sorry to interrupt but many of the matters you are raising will be raised again tomorrow substantively in the report from the Committee on Works. I will give you an opportunity to speak tomorrow on this one.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I will not get the opportunity because I am a member of that committee. I beg you that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you shall be requiring the Minister of Works to answer questions today when his statement has not been made. Hon. Byabagambi, I know the matter is very close to your heart, but we will find a way for you to say something tomorrow.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I respect the Chair, Madam Speaker.

5.25
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to make three observations, one concerning the non-payment of employees of former UCB, yet we have been informed that Bank of Uganda should return money to the Consolidated Fund. I want to get clearance from the chairman whether these people should not get proceeds as regards their terminal benefits from the money, which is with Bank of Uganda. 

Two, is the issue of Uganda Property Holdings Limited. I would like to request the Attorney-General to explain whether this company is properly formed because sometime back, I think I was discussing this with the Minister of Finance, he hinted that he was trying to prepare a statute to come to the House to establish this body. So, this body, as hon. Awori has said, is finding problems in carrying out its work especially in Missions abroad because it does not have the serious mandate it needs to be effective. So, I would like to be clarified on that.

Lastly is a comment on the National Planning Authority. He said the structure gives it a five member full-time board. I remember reading in the press when the committee was meeting the Ministers of Finance, they reported that the chairman of the board and one of the commissioners, if I remember correctly, were dismissed. I expected the chairman of this committee to have briefed Parliament about what led to their dismissal, hardly a year in office, so that Parliament would be informed. Now, although we are talking of five full time members, the National Planning Authority may be having only three members on the ground. So, can we have the privilege of getting that information? What happened to the dismissal or disappearance of the chairman of the board and one of the commissioners? Thank you very much.

5.30
DR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for a good report. More so, there is a consistent recommendation from various committees of splitting ministries and it is good that you have said, whether the organization or what, you have said that it is a motion, which is in the offing. I am sure that motion concerns the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  

However, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development has also come up with similar recommendations and I think it is politically prudent now that the National Political Commissar (NPC) is here to take this message very seriously, why are committees consistent that they think Government should be re-organized and certain ministries should be created and given emphasis? It is in good faith, it is in the interest of Government that this message is taken and you remember that the Committee on the Budget, the Committee on Agriculture, now the Committee on Finance, has been consistent and they say the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should split so that livestock and fisheries are alone and crop sector is also alone.  

There is also the issue of re-organizing the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I think some of the concerns that have been brought up by the members are because some action has not been taken. Maybe the Ministry of Finance should also be restructured. In its present form it looks as if it is the entire Government. It is doing everything, it has got desk officers for all ministries and money must be sought through these desk officers, as if it is a super ministry. That is why members are complaining. 

I think the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development should be concerned with resource mobilization because the function of resource allocation and appropriation is ours as Parliament, therefore, they should not do it. But as hon. Kagimu of Bokomansimbi County says, money comes in and the Ministry of Finance decides that it should go to another sector. I thought that was our privilege as Parliament? Why do they do it? It is because of the amorphous nature of this ministry. So, if it is reorganized, maybe it may focus. Therefore, the National Political Commissar, who is here, should take note that while meeting the appointing authority, restructuring and reorganizing of Government is now if not yesterday.

Madam Speaker, I did attend the PEAP review workshop in Entebbe and my observation was very clear. Of all those who made presentations, it was the National Planning Authority, which had original work. They presented their original thinking. Other presentations you could see had some hidden work of the International Monetary Fund or the World Bank, but NPA had original work. They presented and said that Government should focus and put money in wealth creating ventures, which no other person in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had ever said. The National Planning Authority said it, put money in agricultural research, put money in agricultural extension, put money in roads, put money in electricity, and put money in mining. These are wealth-creating ventures. 

On the contrary the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not want to hear that. So - but my time –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, hon. Kasirivu for giving way and I thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give is that I am reluctant to be part of the members who will pass this budget of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is given only Shs 106 billion. It covers 90 percent of our population in Uganda yet the Ministry of Finance is going to get Shs 263 billion. What is the rationale behind this?  Thank you.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, hon. Mutuluuza. Madam Speaker, recently the Committee on Agriculture met Development Partners on their request and they offloaded their dissatisfaction with the behavior of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We put it to them and said, “You, Development Partners know that agriculture is the backbone of this economy and little money goes to the agricultural sector”. They said, “No for us we are giving you money but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sets the ceiling”. Now, who wants people in this country to remain perpetually poor? Could it be the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? No other person, I think. It is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, unless they defend themselves.

The issues of the input of Kasulu and Property Master, I am not happy about their input. At a later date I would want the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come up with information to this Parliament about it. There is information, true or false, which they must provide to us. Is it true that when Amin sent the Asians away there is money, which was paid for their properties? I understand the information is contained somewhere in the files in the Bank of Uganda, yet Government has continuously - people have repossessed properties and some of them sold them off and ran away. I am told the NRC, those of you who were in the NRC, attempted to investigate this matter but a report was never debated. Why should Ugandans be robbed? If the Government of that time paid and people turn around and repossess properties, then that is cheating.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want perhaps a correction of the committee report on the issue of Botswana vis-à-vis the income from livestock. The year 2003/2004 Botswana got over 200 million Euros from export of livestock, not US $15 million. So, I would wish the committee – out of three million head of cattle, the whole thing is management. 

That is why we are saying Government must recreate the Ministry of Livestock and may be listen to some of us who know a bit of this matter and then we shall move. 

5.38
MRS SYLVIA SINABULYA (Woman Representative Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I have one observation to which I am seeking clarification from the committee.  Under recommendations, page 23, under 11.2, bullet 4, the committee did make a recommendation that the tax base should be widened by penetrating the large informal sector which includes fishmongers, farmers and traders.  Madam Speaker, to me this is a contradiction to a number of observations which have been made by the committee.  For example, on page 5, the committee noted that the internal terms of trade favour the manufacturing sector and agriculture. The committee also made an observation on page 6 that poor farmers are inequitably taxed contrary to PEAP objectives. 

On page 9, the committee made an observation that whereas agriculture contributes 38.5 per cent; it is allocated inadequate resources in the budget.  I now want to find out why the committee turned around and made a recommendation to tax sectors which it sees as receiving very little resources from the Government.  For example, if you talk about fishmongers, we are talking about people with canoes on lakes; how much is in the budget for fishmongers?  You talk about farmers, how much is a farmer receiving in this budget?  If you look at programmes like NAADS and PMA, they have not even spread to the entire country.  If you talk about traders, we are talking about poor women in the informal sector who are borrowing loans at exorbitant rates.  If you look at page 7, the committee did talk about funds which are borrowed at one per cent and lent out at 17 to 19 per cent, and did make a comment that the beneficiaries to these loans are mainly foreign-owned big firms and few Uganda entrepreneurs receive these loans -(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give is that institutions like Housing Finance Company of Uganda, which is actually owned by most of these foreign companies, and DFCU Bank are the beneficiaries of this fund. They get this money at one percent and lend it between 19 and 25 per cent; and this money is going to go back to their countries because these are their companies, they control the majority shares in these companies although now they are offering some shares to Ugandans like DFCU.

MS SINABULYA: I thank my Colleague for the information. Madam Speaker, what I want to get from the Committee Chairperson is, what makes the committee think that Government should now tax these sectors whereas their report shows that these sectors receive very little from the Government?  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

5.42
MS OLIVIA WONEKA (Woman Representative. Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I also stand up to thank the Committee for their good report.  Madam Speaker, I stand up to seek clarification in two areas.  On page 6 of their report, Madam speaker, the committee is saying: “There is urgent need to add value to our products and look for markets for agricultural produce to combat the effect of poverty.  Lack of a “niche market” for Uganda’s agricultural products is not favorable to farming.”  I would like a clarification from the committee, Madam Speaker, what do they mean by a “niche market” –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What page?

MS WONEKA: Page 6, second paragraph.  Madam Speaker, as far as I know Arabica coffee from Mt Elgon qualifies for “niche markets” and the “niche markets” are actually there.  But as I speak now the coffee from Mount Elgon is slowly but surely dwindling because of pests and diseases, lack of inputs, and fertilizers. I urge Government to support the livestock so that we have genuine chemicals that farmers can access.  

So, talking of lack of a niche market; is there one market out there for Ugandan agricultural projects, or does the committee expect one big market and they are talking of lack of a market?  I know that for Bugisu Arabica coffee there is a niche market. It is the productivity which is going down, the lack of herbicides, pesticides and genuine fertilizers; if they were available to the farmers, I am sure the niche market would have gained space in this particular report.  

Madam Speaker, as we are here now the one research station, Buginyanya research station, that should provide the seed today for good Arabica coffee from Mount Elgon is in shambles. I speak now because tomorrow when my Committee of Agriculture brings this out, I may not be able to stand up and say it.  I would like to say that the niche market is there for Bugisu Arabica; we need Buginyanya research station to be put back on the market to address the coffee for the highland people otherwise it is perishing.  That research addresses the pest, it addresses the necessary inputs for the coffee; and for the people of Mt Elgon their livelihood is on that coffee.  Madam Speaker, something has to be done; the niche market is not lacking, it is there.  

Madam Speaker, when it comes to the third paragraph the committee is saying, “It was noted that Government has put in place intervention measures to promote marketing, research and value addition.” They sight PMA and I know that one of the principles of MPA is agro-processing and marketing.  Where are we at this point in time in agro-processing and marketing?  We are saying there must be value addition. I would like to know, Madam Speaker, this time what is happening to the industrial research institute in Nakawa?  

I will be happy to hear the answer from the Ministry of Trade and Industry.  What is happening?  We are talking of value addition; will it happen just magically like that?  Or shall we invest in those areas that are necessary for value addition.  Madam Speaker, I am sure fellow colleagues would like to know what is happening to the industrial institute in Nakawa.  Thank you very much.

5.47
CAPT. MATOVU DAVID (Kooki County, Rakai):  I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I have a bad throat members you will bear with me.  I also want to thank the committee for the good report and the Ministry of Finance for the good work really despite the challenges especially that this year they are giving us almost 54 per cent in the entire budget.  

However, I am uncomfortable, Madam Speaker, you know Government is like a doctor.  If you have a doctor who seems to know your problem but he is not giving you real drugs; I do not know what type of doctor that one could be.  To me, there seems to be chances of widening the tax base and even funding our own budget as Government.  But we are not doing enough as Ministry of Finance.  For example, agriculture as a key sector of our economy needs money definitely to produce.  But look at the high interest rates and the period, yet we have been told CERUDEB, centenary rural development bank, has some innovation of funding agriculture.  Imagine a local bank, why not Government?  In Kyotera we have a facility there it is called PL480 and it is funded by USAID.  You go there, get money to fund agriculture, you stay with this money for about 9 months, and the interest I think it is a bit fair.  You try this season if it fails you try the other one.  People are a bit happier.  So, how can the whole Government machinery fail to intervene in agriculture so that we push production?

The other one also, another lost chance which is possible, the free trade zone.  This was a policy issue on the previous budget, up to now Government has not picked it.  Minister of Finance, especially one for investment, one time made a commitment that this bill would be here to facilitate investors.  Like in Rakai we have some American friends who want to invest there, we have given them land, they are ready, they have their money, but just a bill coming here to set in motion and we see money to build our country; we are very slow.

The other one is Uganda Revenue Authority.  They want to put up a very nice office in Mutukula.  As hon. Colleague has said the collection now is up.  We are requesting Government that Mutukula prisons relocates inside.  District has given land nobody is interested.  Mukwano wants to go there and very many people want to go there and nobody is picking them.  So, I do not know, where is the will?  

My last one, Madam Speaker - hon. Otto has left the House- but I wanted to give you live example on the fact that having a minister does not necessary qualify you to have services in your place.  No.  Parliament works with Government to budget through the Budget Act.  I have liked Minister of Finance, Mr Ssendawula is from my constituency, Minister Mutagamba, they are from my constituency but –(Interjection)- give me chance- UPE money is given according to enrolment.  LGDP, all these according to some formula in the Constitution- I do not see any miracles these two officers have done which is outside –(Interruption) 

MR AGGREY AWORI:  Point of information.  

CAPT. MATOVU:  I can take it.

MR AWORI:  Madam Speaker, when you talk about national cake in my hon. Colleague’s language, sharing out of positions, we are talking about the people who sit around the table and determine policy.  That is where this consideration comes in.  As hon. Otto put it, out of this Cabinet actually a Cabinet of 42, there are 25 from one region, they can actually sit and make a decision.  They form a quorum.  Those are the issues we are worried about.  And I hope the next reshuffle this imbalance will be taken care of; Otherwise, they can give in and we can do better.

CAPT. MATOVU:  Well, Madam Speaker, that is his view; I have my view.  When we came here, after swearing in, I went to hon. Ssendaula’s place –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Will you take information from Katikamu?

LT JAMES KINOBE: Thank you very much hon. Captain.  Madam Speaker, the information I wanted to give the member holding the Floor is in relation to what my Brother hon. Aggrey Awori has just said.  I want to confirm what hon. Captain has said that having a minister does not necessarily mean how much you get.  Take for example Luwero is known as the political maker.  But whereas the north has LUSAF, it has all these other funds Luwero has none, yet everything would have been in Luwero where every good thing started.  So, I am telling him that this Government sits squarely and allocates resources according to needs and they are directed – Parliament sits and allocates them according to the percentages.  

In the local Government I have been monitoring the accounts even during this time when there is fighting, money still goes to the north and it is embezzled and they do not construct schools.  But this Government has never decided to stop the money from going to those areas despite the situation that is up there.  Thank you.

MR AWORI: My hon. Colleague could you tell me how come when we looked at Entandiikwa distribution from the hon. Chairman’s report, you saw the percentage of allocation of Entandiikwa.  It actually corresponded with allocation of ministries; the north got 16 and Central got 32.  What do you think?

CAPT. MATOVU: Lastly, all this information is there in Constitution, there is that schedule which shows the formula on how to access this money, then there is local Government commission, all this can help us.  But I still insist this does not happen.  Yes, because hon. Ssendaula told me frankly, I can be quoted on this, he said hon. Captain go back internalise the budget there is nothing I can do for you which is outside the budget.  Quote me on that.

My last one is about the Sebutinde report.  I want to request Government that sincerely we do not sweep this report below the carpet.  The IGG and police could pick it and they see how to utilize it.  I thank you.

5.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. Bright Rwamirama):  Thank you Madam Speaker.  First, I will start responding to hon. Ruhindi about cross cutting issues, and the issue of Uganda promotion board and investment authority.  Madam Speaker, through you, I want to inform honourable members that our committee does not like to report on hearsay.  You know there was a report which was made and I think it was subjected to further scrutiny.  So, when we get this report we shall report to the House.  

Privatisation of National Housing Corporation Houses: Hon. Ruhindi, our committee also has received information about irregularities. But following our inclusion in our report that when we get a statutory report we shall report to the House, I think it is better we report to you from an informed position to lay off any doubts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May be, Chairperson, the first issue raised by hon. Ruhindi concerned about export promotions board, Uganda Investment Authority and – may I know whether you are liasing with the committee on trade, because the committee on trade may come up with something completely different to report to the same House on the same matter?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Speaker, I share much of the information with the Chairperson of the committee on trade, and if hon. Mugambe is here - Madam Speaker, we share information to the extent that even when we have workshops we allow a certain number of them, and when they do they also allow some of our members.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry is planning a meeting for the three committees namely, the Committee on National Economy, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and ourselves to address issues like that one of the merger of the Uganda Investment Authority, Uganda Export Promotion Board and Uganda Tourism Board.  The reports are there, we shall consult them again.  Otherwise, our report will also come up with recommendations in those three bodies.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Thank you, hon. Mugambe.  But I also wish to inform the House that it is against the background that we got a recommendation of restructuring some of these ministries.  For instance, if you look at investment, why can’t investment go to the Ministry of Trade to avoid confusion, because some of the money that would go to Ministry of Trade, you find it in Ministry of Finance.  Last year, there was money for strategic intervention on trade and the value addition, something to do with trade and tourism and it was residing in a different ministry; and the budget for Ministry of Trade and Industry was only UShs 790 million, not even a billion.  

So, hon. Basaliza, I will not comment much because when I analysed your issues, you really tally with our committee.  Hon. Gagawala, the issue of justification for money, you have to see your policy statement and the draft to the budget.  

Hon. Awori, you had many issues mainly to do with politics, but the last one that I would like to comment on is resource allocation especially with Entandikwa scheme.  Honourable members, you see, central region got the highest, western region got 27 per cent, eastern region got 25 per cent and northern region got 16 per cent.  I think the most important issue, in my view, is how the money has been managed.  But if you go to the population issues, if you considered the population and you approach it scientifically, there was no foul play in terms of distribution.

Hon. Nkuuhe, I agree with you on inflation and I will use your argument to answer my sister later on.  Hon. Byabagambi, according to you, one cow is for three in Botswana and one cow is for four Ugandans.  But if you look at the ratio of gains, they do not correlate.  So, whichever way you look at it, Ugandans we are not getting much out of our cows.  It is true the figures we have are not current, but we are using these figures to justify that we are not getting much out of our animal resources.  

Hon. Tibarimbasa is concerned about the employees of former UCBL as contained in our report.  Really, our report is general and we have picked on these ones as examples.  But let me comment on the employees of former UCBL.  You know UCBL was sold under the Financial Institutions Statute and it was not sold under PERD, and we had to summon the Governor, Bank of Uganda, to throw more light.  But the information we have is that once the new owners came in, they subjected employees to contracts, and those who raised arguments would be dismissed; those who were paid at the beginning received their terminal benefits.  But when you enter into a contract, you forfeit the previous years of service and that is a very serious matter, and that is why the committee had to bring it to the House for attention. 

Dismissal of the Chairman of the Board of National Planning Authority, yes, he was sourced on competence we were told hardly a month he was chased, and the committee has asked the minister to explain under what circumstances he was chased; and we were told that he was chased on competence.  What our committee is doing, we are trying to get this man to come and give us a testimony.  Otherwise, short of that, if there were no complainant, which facts would we present?  But at the moment we are trying to find out how hon. Musumba, the Minister of Finance, chased a man that had been sourced on competitive basis and found competent and hardly a month he was chased. 

Hon. Kasirivu, I think we agree on the custodian properties; we also believe that there could be foul play.  The fact that the board is not regularly sitting and it reports directly to the minister once may be in a while that is why we want it to wind up; that is why we want them to hand over the property that will not be sold; that is why we want the sale to be by public auction so that everybody can see it as transparent. 

Hon. Sinabulya, thank you for those concerns.  But I want to tell you there are no contradiction; we have been fighting here for employment policy.  But let me tell you my dear sister the way the Government works is that when they give you employment the following day the tax man is there to tax you because when you earn you pay; and when you say it is hurting farmers and we were telling Government to empower farmers to bring policies that will increase their income and on the other hand we want Government also to track them.  That is what it is, there is no contradiction; on the other hand you empower somebody, and on the other hand you expect returns.

Hon. Wonekha, let me first explain about the niche.   A niche is a marketing concept.  It is that when you are selling products, or when you are marketing products and especially when your competitors are very strong, you must establish a small locality that you can satisfactorily supply your goods- (Interruption)- instead of spreading around and making no effect.  What the committee is saying is that, yes there is Arabica coffee, but we do not produce only Arabica coffee; there are so many things.  We have bananas, we are almost the third largest producer of bananas and exporters of none.  But we need to establish a niche and the only reason we cannot export bananas effectively is because our fingers for bananas are bent.  

The international standard is that they want a finger of banana slightly stretched.  So we need really to get technology like the Somalis.  Can you believe that the Somali, almost semi-desert as it is, they get much of their money from export of banana?  But look at ourselves with lorries breaking our roads with a lot of bananas and all over the place.   So we still need to establish a niche market and we are urging the executive to try and take responsibility of marketing our products, improve on the environment so that people can add value.  So we need a market niche for many things, not only for Arabica.  

I have nearly answered all questions.  The only person I did not answer is hon. Otto because he was referring to Government as being sectarian. When looking at the figures- but I want to inform members that sometimes it is very good to be rational- I have looked at these figures for Entandikwa, you can go to the report on our population.  I think our concern as a committee and the concern of Parliament really should be on the management.  If you consider how the north is torn by the war to the extent that 16 per cent went there, I think that was an effort.  So with those few remarks, -(Interruption).

PROF. KAMUNTU: This is additional information to the chairman’s provision.  I am a member of the committee and I therefore held back to contribute until the chairman has summarized.  But the two pieces of information which were controversial on the Floor, related to the size of vote 008 and the question of inflation, it would be useful for members if they look at this big book.  We have a summary of the vote 008 and in addition we have information relating to development expenditure.  

On the development expenditure we have a series of projects supported under that vote ranging from supporting micro-finance centre to the coordination, micro and small enterprise to the management, the economic and financial management project to economic policy research centre, facility assets management and Government governance for poverty eradication to UBOS, UNICEF projects to national enterprise corporation, procurement reform to private sector competitiveness, support for micro-finance to Government purchases, utility sector reform and so forth.  Of course, investment authority support for Science and Technology support for USAID trust fund and support for PAF Secretariat.  When you add all these monies they contribute a big size which appear to be abnormal, but it is partly because of these projects which are supported under the Ministry of Finance. I thought this clarification is very important.  

When looking at the report of the committee, Madam Speaker, the structure of the ministry has a number of autonomous institutions listed here.  Now the question which members can engage in is whether you can relocate these autonomous institutions, and if you did, whether on macro management viewpoint you would get better efficiency by relocating this into a different sector ministry than they are currently being run under the Ministry of Finance.  This is the issue we can debate.  But if you are really looking at efficiency criteria, it is not easily decided through the debate on the Floor of the House.
 
Second issue of clarification relates to inflation.  I know that there was huge debate here.  Maintaining inflation at any rate, measuring inflation, there is the consumer price index, which categorizes and lying inflation, which excludes food crops and headline inflation, which includes the food crop component in the index.  Now when you talk about controlling inflation under single digits, hon. members, it is commendable that Government has controlled inflation.  Because, inflation especially in Uganda is basically a function of Government deficit; therefore by controlling it or at least by the inflation being controlled it means Government is managing its deficit quite reasonably.  Because inflation hurts savers, it hurts people who have fixed incomes; it hurts the pensioners and it hurts the very solid base of society because of not controlling the inflation.  Therefore, when you control inflation, you promote investment and you protect the society, which is solid base.  To that extent, it is not easily determined; it is just like exchange rates.  You look at it; on one hand people who export and earn dollars would want the shilling to depreciate a little so that they can cover their local currency cost.  If the importers –(Interruption).

MR MUGAMBE: I wanted the speaker holding the Floor to go further and clarify beyond inflation.  I know you have explained where there is inflation, but I felt you should also explain to us when stag inflation occurs because may be we are experiencing stag inflation, that is why people are complaining.  Could you please clarify on that situation so that we do not only labour to control inflation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. members, when I asked the chair to respond, I thought he was winding up on behalf of the committee.  But now you are getting into the academic arguments of what is meant by inflation.  The people want what they can buy from their pockets; that is what they are interested in, not stag, hyper and galloping and this and that.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, once you rule –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am a little bit confused, I am seeking your guidance.  I had initially expected the hon. minister and the Chairperson to respond to our queries.  Now, the chairman of the committee has answered some of the concerns, and I assume that once the chairman has finished his presentation that is the end of the chapter.  Over and above that, Madam Speaker, at one stage, I think at the beginning of the session, you promised that the matter of appointing the Attorney General come from the state. Now –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, we are heading there; it is hon. Prof. Kamuntu who is delaying our work by giving a lecture in economics.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I would be the last person to lecture to distinguished Members of Parliament.  All I was doing is additional information to my Chairman so that this chapter is concluded and the minister can respond; it was just additional information that is all, Madam Speaker.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Madam Speaker, I was not talking about the inflation, but I wanted to give more information on the budget allocation. The Chairman left out one point - I am a committee member - the member said that there is an uneven distribution of allocation- the budget analysis means you compare the last budget and this budget.  If we compare the budget of 2003/2004, it was the northern region which took the part, and the recommendations we gave in that budget year we urged the Government that at least we should recommend where money can go to productivity.  That is why this report recommended that the central region takes the resource of allocations but not on the basis of sectarian.  This is the information I wanted to give.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I was about to make my concluding remarks, but I want to thank members of the House who participated in our report. I want to inform you, honourable members, that hon. Aggrey Awori is a very active Member of the Finance Committee and we have benefited having him aboard because he is very good at sourcing information.  So, I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, ideally we would have had the response from the minister, but since he is the mover of the motion and he will have to respond anyway on behalf of all the ministries, we think he will respond comprehensively to the debate.

Now, hon. members, there is a matter which was outstanding since last week. The leader of Government Business undertook that a statement would be made concerning the Office of the Attorney General this week.  So, can I now ask the First Deputy Prime Minister to make the statement on the issue of the Attorney General?

STATEMENT BY GOVERNMENT ON APPOINTMENT OF HON. AMAMA MBABAZI AS ATTORNEY GENERAL

6.24
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I will start with some few corrections.  First with my title, it reads, “Government statement by the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees” – you can add the word “Refugees”. I am Rt. Hon. I am not just honourable.  So, you can add “Rt.” on page 5, the second paragraph: “When he joined the Private – you add the word “sector”.  

Madam Speaker, Government Statement by the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, Rt. Hon. Rtd. Lt. Gen. Moses Ali to Parliament on the appointment of hon. Amama Mbabazi as Attorney General of Uganda on 24 August 2004 – 

Madam Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, the Prime Minister, who is Leader of Government Business in the House, has travelled abroad on official duty and he asked me to make this statement on behalf of Government.  

On 4 August 2004, the President by letter duly signed by him and addressed to hon. Amama Mbabazi, assigned Hon. Mbabazi the duties of Attorney General.  The letter reads, and I quote:

“This is to inform you that I have decided using the powers conferred upon me by the Constitution to assign you, in addition to your duties as Minister of Defence, the duties and functions of Attorney General of Uganda.  You will hold this office with immediate effect until otherwise advised.” The word “assigned” is defined by Blacks law dictionary, Sixth Edition, at page 118, to mean “to transfer” among other things, to another.”  Does the President have the powers to assign functions or duties to ministers?  

Yes, indeed he has that power. It is clearly spelt out in Article 113 (3), which reads as follows: “A Cabinet Minister shall have responsibility for such functions of Government as the President may, from time to time, assign to him or her.” 

The prerogative of assignment of duty to Cabinet ministers, therefore, belongs exclusively to the President.  

Last week, on the Floor of this august House, some Members wondered whether it was not necessary for the President to seek the approval of Parliament first before making assignment of duties of Attorney General to a Cabinet Minister. We submit that in terms of the constitutional provisions on the matter, this is not so.  Article 119(1) which deals with the appointment of Attorney General provides as follows: “There shall be an Attorney General who shall be a Cabinet Minister appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.”
  
Clearly the operative words in this clause are, “Who shall be a Cabinet Minister appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.”  

Who is a Cabinet Minister then? This is answered by Article 113(1) of the Constitution, which reads as follows: “Cabinet ministers shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament from among Members of Parliament or persons qualified to be elected Members of Parliament.”
  
Article 113(2) limits the number of Cabinet ministers to 21. It reads as follows: “The total number of Cabinet ministers shall not exceed twenty-one except with the approval of Parliament.”  

When these provisions are read together, it is clear that the Constitution limits the maximum number of Cabinet ministers to 21. The Attorney General is among the 21. Should the President once he has the 21 Cabinet ministers choose to reorganize the existing members of Cabinet without dropping any of them, he is free to exercise that prerogative.  

So, why did the Constitution provide for the Attorney General in a separate Article? The answer lies in Clause (2) of Article 119, which provides that: ”A person shall not be qualified to be appointed Attorney General unless he or she is qualified to practice as an advocate of the High Court and has so practiced or gained the necessary experience for not less than ten years.”  

It is again clear by this provision that the Office of the Attorney General is the only in Cabinet that requires professional qualifications. What the framers of the Constitution intended was that when the President appoints his or her 21 Cabinet ministers, among them there must be one professionally qualified to perform the duties of Attorney General. 

All this means that to perform the duties of Attorney General, one must be a Cabinet Minister who has the qualification to practice as an advocate of the High Court of Uganda and has so practiced or gained the required experience.

What has the practice been in the appointment of the Attorney General in the past? In 1996 when the first Cabinet was appointed under the 1995 Constitution, the former Attorney General, Mr Bart Katureebe, was appointed Minister of Justice and Attorney General. Parliament approved him as a Cabinet Minister. Subsequently, when the Office of Attorney General was separated from that of Minister of Justice, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was appointed. Mr Katureebe was assigned the duties of Attorney General without going back to Parliament to seek a special approval for the appointment nor did he take another oath of office.  

The second appointment we have had is that of the immediate past Attorney General, the late Francis Ayume. In his case, the President handled his appointment differently. His name was presented together with that of the Rt honourable Apolo Nsibambi, the Prime Minister.  

Why were they treated like this? In the case of the Rt honourable Prime Minister, Prof. Nsibambi, although his name was presented as minister obviously the intention was to appoint him Prime Minister. The President did not wish to treat him together with the rest of the other ministers. The President did not do this because of any constitutional or other legal requirement for him to do so. In the case of the late hon. Ayume, as the immediate former Speaker of Parliament and, therefore, number three for the national hierarchy, he was also given special treatment by the President considering that he was being lowered in rank to the Office of Attorney General.  

Had the framers of our Constitution intended that the Office of Attorney General be treated differently from that of other Cabinet ministers, they would have handled that office like other constitutional offices, which are treated differently. For example, the office of Speaker and that of Deputy Speaker are handled differently in terms of vacation of office under Article 82(7).  The Attorney General on the other hand is treated as the rest of Cabinet ministers under Article 116 on the question of vacation of office. Under the 4th Schedule of the Constitution, each Constitutional office is given its own oath. That of Attorney General is again treated the same as that of Cabinet ministers.

Let me conclude this point by reiterating that the Office of Attorney General is that of Cabinet Minister like any other with the exception that it requires professional qualification.

So, the next logical question is, does hon. Amama Mbabazi have the requisite qualifications to be Attorney General of Uganda? Yes, indeed he does. He is a law graduate of Makerere University in 1975. In that year he was appointed by the then Attorney General, as a pupil state attorney. After doing his Post Graduate Diploma course in legal practice at the Law Development Centre, he was confirmed as a state attorney and he enrolled as an advocate of the High Court of Uganda in 1976 and continued to work as a state attorney. In 1977, he was appointed Acting Secretary of the Uganda Law Council, a post he held for one year until he was appointed in the Libyan-Uganda State Joint Venture as Corporation Secretary. He held this position until after the war in 1979 when he was appointed Director of Legal Services in the Uganda National Liberation Army, Ministry of Defence. He held this position until 1981, when the liberation war started. While working for Government, like all state attorneys and other Government lawyers, it was not necessary for him to have a practicing certificate, as this is not required by law.

When he joined the private sector, he got his practicing certificate when he, together with colleague advocates in 1981 formed the short-lived firm called Kategaya, Mbabazi and Tumwesigye Advocates. He later renewed his practicing certificate in 1987, which has been renewed since then. He is and has been a member of the Uganda Law Society and the East African Law Society. He has been attached to the Bagorogoza and the Kaala Advocates as a legal consultant.  

Hon. Amama Mbabazi, has engaged in other legal related work including chairing a Cabinet committee to enable legal issues in Cabinet. He has represented Uganda abroad including successfully defending Uganda at the United Nations Security Council against accusations of illegal exploitation of natural resources of Democratic Republic of Congo. He has presented papers and addressed international fora on the restoration of the rule of law in Uganda. 

Together with others, he drew up the agreement for ceasefire in the Democratic Republic of Congo and he represented Uganda in the negotiations and drawing up of the Liberian Ceasefire Agreement in Accra, Ghana. 

He was part of the OAU team in Tripoli, Libya that drew up the Constitutive Act that established the African Union. The list is long and unnecessary to recite here as the point is already proven that, hon. Mbabazi, has gained the necessary experience required under the Constitution of Uganda to hold the position of Attorney General. Thank you.

6.51
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking your guidance. We have received a statement from the Government and I do not think I for one I am in a position to change the mind of the Government on the matter. However, in the event, some other persons are challenging the matter in the courts of law.  Unfortunately or fortunately, if the ruling is negative that indeed, he is not supposed to be Attorney General in a manner we have referred to, would we take that ruling as binding in the august House or can we say the procedures of Parliament are governed by - because he is a lawyer to Parliament. (Interruption). I am seeking the guidance from my Speaker; I do not seek guidance from my honourable colleagues, especially on the front bench.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I have not quite understood. Are you suggesting that notwithstanding this statement, there is a defect in the assignment of this duty to hon. Mbabazi?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I was troubled in my mind because I have seen in the media that some people are taking this matter to court and in the event, the court decision is to the contrary, shall we take the court ruling as binding or shall we say as in the past that the procedure of Parliament is governed by the procedure?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you see hon. Awori, Parliament at the moment really has nothing to do about this matter because this is a minister who was approved generally by Parliament and he has now been given additional assignments. In the event that the citizens take us to court, obviously we shall abide by the ruling of the court. But until that happens, I think we cannot prevent the honourable Minister from attending to those duties.

6.53
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I need some guidance because I intend to make a substantive contribution on this matter. I see there are so many irregularities in the Government statement. Some falsehoods because the records are very clear, some legal engineering - I do not know whether we first finish up with the clarification before we debate, or I can make my substantive contribution –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, proceed, that is why the statement was brought here.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I must say that I am constrained to make this contribution, not because I have anything against the hon. Amama Mbabazi. It has nothing to do with him as an individual. We are looking at the law, and whether it is hon. Amama Mbabazi being appointed in this manner, whether hon. Rukutana, whether hon. Awori as Attorney General or Mr Nadduli, we shall raise the same arguments.  

Madam Speaker, the appointment of the Attorney General is provided for under Article 119 and it says: “There shall be an Attorney who shall be a Cabinet Minister appointed by the President with approval of Parliament.” The situation would have been different if Article 119 said, and I ask all honourable members to listen to this: “There shall be an Attorney General, who shall be a Cabinet Minister” and it stopped there; then we should have gone back to Article 113. But once you bring in the second part of it, “…appointed by the President with approval of Parliament,” then it makes it different from – (Interruption)
	
MR OTTO: I sit on the Appointments Committee, and when we are approving a minister, we approve the person without any portfolio attached to it. Then the exercise of attaching the portfolio is done later. So, our role as Appointments Committee is to see whether someone is capable of being a minister or not. So, I do not know if you can refine this to the arguments you are raising.

MR KATUNTU: Correct, and when it comes to the Attorney General, then the Appointments Committee indeed now looks at the person whether he qualify under Article 119(2), because the appointment of an Attorney General is a joint one it is not only for the President. Parliament, before it gives its approval, must be satisfied that the person it is approving as Attorney General qualifies under Article 119(2).  

Indeed, when the late hon. Francis Ayume’s name was being forwarded to Parliament, they forwarded him to be approved not as a minister but as Attorney General and indeed when Parliament was forwarding back the name to the President, accepting the appointment - it is very clear, Madam Speaker and I have looked at those letters forwarding back the name of Francis Ayume to the President, “So, Parliament has duly approved the hon. Francis Ayume as Attorney General” not as minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think this matter may need us to get actually letters written by the Speaker because the name of the late Attorney General was brought as a minister. They were only three names. I think it was hon. Nsibambi, hon. Ayume and another person as ministers three of them, yes.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I think we do not have to debate this. The letters are there and they are in your Office; they should be laid on the Table because some have looked at them they are public documents. So, the only person whose name came, as minister was the Prime Minister because in the Constitution there is no position provided for as Prime Minister. That is why the name came as minister. But, I do not really intend to engage in this sort of thing because the documents speak for themselves.  

Secondly, madam Speaker, the statement on page 3 - in fact those documents would assist us and they will bear me out on page 3 the last paragraph. It says, “In 1996 when the first Cabinet was appointed under the 1995 Constitution, the former Attorney General, Mr Bart Katureebe, was appointed Minister of Justice and Attorney General. Parliament approved him as a Cabinet Minister.” Not only did Parliament approve him as a Cabinet Minister, but it also approved him as Attorney General. It never all approved him as minister. So, subsequently when the offices were separated, the hon. Katureebe had already got the approval of Parliament as Attorney General. He, therefore, could not come again for a second approval as Attorney General. This is really legal engineering and some of us are not ready to be part of this sort of thing.  

The second one it says: “The second appointment we have had is that of the immediate past Attorney General….” Indeed, he was approved as Attorney General; he was not approved as a minister. So that does not also bear out on the Government statement.

On page 4 third paragraph, Government is talking about the vacation of offices, under Article 82(7), of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. This is absolutely irrelevant! The Speaker and Deputy Speaker are not appointed by the President. How are they being brought in this statement? How are they related? Nothing.  Madam Speaker, I insist, this is purely legal engineering; let us do things the way we are supposed to do them.
  
The second last paragraph, “Let me conclude this point by reiterating that the Office of the Attorney General is that of Cabinet Minister like any other…” that is not true. The Office of Attorney General is a constitutional office provided for separately under the Constitution. And indeed, nobody takes a constitutional office without –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, thank you hon. Katuntu for giving way. I would like to know whether there is the oath of office for the Attorney General to make him special from other ministers. Could I be clarified on that?

MR KATUNTU: First of all, you are a minister yourself, you should have known. Two; before you take any constitutional office, you must take an oath and the Attorney General can only take an oath of an Attorney General not an oath of a minister of gender. Is a minister by virtue of being Attorney General, it is not the way round and I want to make this point very clear.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Constitution is very clear. Under Fourth Schedule all oaths are therein there is no oath for the Attorney General. Is it in order for the honourable Member to mislead this House that the Attorney General takes oath of the Attorney General when that oath is non-existent within our Constitution. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, have you looked at page 191 which states, “Oath of Allegiance” and pages 192-3, “Oath of the President/Vice President; Judicial Oath; Speaker/ Deputy Speaker’s Oath; Oath of Minister; Oath of Member of Parliament; Oath of Secretary to the Cabinet?” That is what is contained in Schedule 4 of the Constitution.

MR KATUNTU: Yes, Madam Speaker. Is it, therefore, exclusive? The oaths need not to be put in the Constitution but anybody taking the constitutional office takes an oath. Yes, he does. 

So, Madam Speaker, let us go to page 5 that says, “After doing the Post Graduate Diploma course in Legal Practice at Law Development Centre, he was confirmed as a state Attorney and enrolled as an advocate of the High Court of Uganda in 1976 and continued to work as state attorney.” Certainly, this is not true. Go and check out the records at the High Court, John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, was enrolled in March 1978. It is there; it is a public record. So, is this a typographical error, is this deliberate? I challenge anybody including the, hon. Amama Mbabazi - you see, Government is putting some of us in a very difficult situation. This is not the sort of debate, which we should be having on the Floor. 

Madam Speaker, I have a lot in fact I should stop on this one. I have a lot of problems with the facts following this but I do not intend to raise them now because it does not do well to some of us.  I respect my senior colleague in the profession, and going beyond what I am saying now with the facts I have, does not augur well. So, Madam Speaker, I beg you and I beg Government that we do not debate this statement because there are other things we should not bring really especially in public. But if Government so insists, we can continue but really I beg we should not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, you are really putting me in a difficult situation. You demanded for this statement and it has come. Now after making serious allegations, you are saying let us stop here. What do you want me to do?  

MR KAGIMU: Madam Speaker, recently the Attorney General appeared in the Supreme Court defending the Government in the other case of, Dr Ssemogerere and whatever. His Lordship, Kanyeihamba asked him, “Are you the Attorney General?”  He said, “Yes I am the Attorney General.” Now, I am expecting a ruling from the Supreme Court on whether, hon. Amama Mbabazi, is the Attorney General. That issue is going to be ruled upon in the Supreme Court. By debating this, are we not prejudicing the ruling of the court?  

A second clarification I am seeking, let me quote a bit from the Bible. In the Bible, Nahman was a commander and the slave girl told him, “If you want to be cured from leprosy, you go to Israel there is a great prophet.” When he reached there he expected the prophet to come out but he just told him, “You go and bathe seven times in the river.” Nahman was annoyed he said, “I am a big commander, you should have come out and called your God upon me.”  But then the little girl asked him, “My lord, the man has just told you to go and bathe. Is that difficult? What if he had told you something difficult, would you have not done it?” 

So, now I am seeking clarification, Madam Speaker. The Attorney General going in front of the Appointments Committee will take just ten minutes and they would approve him and it will be finished.  Now, what is all this fuss for? The man has the qualifications and has everything. There is nobody in the Appointments Committee who has ever been rejected. Now, why are we suffering? The man is being tortured psychologically, the papers are writing. The honourable Member is even digging out things. We are torturing the man psychologically; he is suffering. He has been in the press for a week. Why does he not go to the Appointments Committee for ten minutes and we bury the thing? Rule on that, Madam Speaker, please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, first of all, the matter hon. Kagimu has raised that the Supreme Court is due to rule on whether the hon. Mbabazi is the Attorney General, no one has taken that matter to court. So, I do not expect the Supreme Court to make a ruling on a matter, which has not been brought to it.  No one has gone to it to complain. 

But, honourable members, when I heard the opening statements from the Prime Minister, I think what the President did was to say that he has temporarily assigned the duties of the Attorney General to the Minister of Defence, and that he would hold office with immediate effect until otherwise advised. Now, what is actually the problem? I have not understood the problem.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, the problem is one. In my view, the duties of the Attorney General are constitutional –(Interjection)- this is not nursing -(Interruption)

MRS BAKOKO: Madam Speaker, is the Member holding the Floor, who was expecting to be an Attorney General and failed to be one and who has a wife who delivers and she is delivered by nurses, in order to stand here and say that, “this is not nursing” when he was the one anticipating to be the Attorney General and he was never appointed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I cannot rule on that one because I would be now entering the minds of all my Members and wondering which of them is thinking about being an Attorney General and being something else. I will not rule on that one.

7.00
MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, personally I want to thank the Leader of Government Business for this statement.  It has helped us to understand issues, and I think matters have been clarified. I do not envy lawyers and I do not miss being a lawyer because the profession of law depends on people’s interpretations. Somebody will have his interpretation and that is why we have good lawyers, better lawyers and extremely good lawyers.  That is why we also have bad lawyers, who lose and win cases. That is why we have the law council to handle law complaints and the rest of that.  

Madam Speaker, from my simple English in reading Article 119 (1) and I quote, “There shall be an Attorney General who shall be a Cabinet minister appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.” In simple English, when a phrase comes after another, the phrase that comes last is more important than the phrase that is stated first. So, by the Article saying, “There shall be an Attorney General who shall be a Cabinet minister appointed by the President…”, the first requirement is that one has to be a Cabinet minister appointed by President and then he can be an Attorney General.  

Madam Speaker, we want to look at the precedence.  I remember very well in 1996 when the list of Cabinet ministers was read, there were no portfolios attached to it. Ministers were read, not stating who will be a Cabinet minister and who will be a state minister. After the Appointments Committee approved all of them, His Excellency, the President assigned portfolios. This was also the case in 2001. It is only in this recent Cabinet reshuffle, where there were no major changes, that ministers were read with their portfolios and people appeared before the Appointments Committee with portfolios already assigned. So, I do not see anything strange in this.

Madam Speaker, this matter has been discussed. It was discussed the day it was debated, the day hon. Mbabazi made a statement here. I do not see any reason why we should continue debating this matter.  The people of Uganda should be rest assured that there is an Attorney General. 

In saying that hon. Amama Mbabazi was enrolled in 1978 and not 1976, I would have been worried if he had been enrolled in 1998 and not 1978 because 1998 would be less than 10 years. But where is the significant difference between 1976 and 1978 in as far as the relevance of the 10 years experience is concern? Therefore, I do not see any reason why somebody should be challenge that 1978 is not 1976 after all. Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Leader of Government Business for bringing this statement and I urge my colleagues, the Members of Parliament, to leave the Executive to do its work.  I thank you.

MR MBABAZI: Madam speaker, I rise on a point of procedure and in doing so, I just wanted to say that hon. Kagimu thought I was being psychologically tortured. Certainly not, I am far well above that. But, I just rise on a point of procedure because last week, we did indeed talk about this matter on two consecutive days. The first day I was not present. I came the next day and I made a statement here and the Speaker I thought made a ruling. He gave me the Floor to make a statement. Some people had objected saying that Government had promised a formal Government statement rather than for me to make one. So, the Speaker made the ruling, I made the statement and people asked questions and the Speaker said, “Okay, next Tuesday the Head of Government Business will present the formal statement of Government.”

But, he went further to say that the question of Attorney General could only be challenged in the court of law that it cannot be changed by vote or whatever in this House. So, I was wondering, therefore, seeking guidance the procedure now we are following if we are going to continue debating and maybe have a vote and make a determination of the issue or what exactly the purpose will be.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, there is really nothing for us to determine. If it were the Appointments Committee would be taking a vote on whether the honourable Member should or should not be a minister. But, I have never had a situation where this plenary sits to decide whether this is a good minister or a bad minister. So, as far as I am concerned, we have no decision to make, you demanded for information the information has come. Now, if there is anybody who is dissatisfied, please take the Attorney General to court and say, “This person should not be in office.”

MR KATUNTU: Yes, thanks very much, Madam Speaker that is true. But according to our Rules of Procedure, a ministerial statement attracts debate and that is exactly what we are doing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, you are growing hot and cold at the same time. You are the very person who said we should not proceed with this debate, but now you want the debate. You, hon. Katuntu of Bugweri, you are the one who has said we should not have the debate. Anyway, honourable members, it is a ministerial statement I think enough has been said about it. Let anybody who is not satisfied proceed to the High Court and sue the Attorney General of this country, and get relief from the High Court. There is no relief here in this Chamber over this matter. 

Honourable members, thank you very much for the work you have done. The House is adjourned to 10 O’clock in the morning to proceed with our budgetary work starting with the Minister of Works.

(The House rose at 7.09 and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 August 2004 at 10.00 a.m.)



