Thursday, 28 August 2003

Parliament met at 10.28 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, once again, I want to thank you for the way you have been able to handle the budget process, because it appears we are still on time. So, we will be able to complete the business of the Committee of Supply this week. However, I do not know what our position is, because we are remaining with the Presidential and Foreign Affairs, which we are going to handle now, but there is also the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee report. I am not aware of how far the latter have gone. There is also the Auditor General’s report, which will complete the exercise.  

I would oblige, if somebody could advise me about the position of the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee. If they are not ready now, or in the afternoon, we could deal with the Auditor General’s report. We shall see what to do with the report on Defence and Internal Affairs later. Is the report ready? All right! Let us proceed.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

THE MINISTER OF STATE, CULTURE (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement of personal explanation. It is made under rule 36(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, and honourable members, I wish to make a personal statement in response to an article carried on the front page of the Monitor newspaper of the 27 August 2003 entitled,  “Government loses US $4 million in double payments - Minister Bitangaro implicated”. 

This is not the first time that the print media has covered a story alleging that my law firm, Bitangaro and Company Advocates, in which I am no longer in active practice, pursued and obtain a payment of a claim against the Government of Uganda, which had already been paid to the client of the firm. The stories were carried in the East African newspaper, issue No. 431 February 3rd to 9th, 2003 and the Monitor newspaper of Monday, 3 February 2003.  

It was falsely alleged that my law firm and its clients wrongly withheld information from the court that they had already received payment of the claims, which were the subject matter of a High Court civil suit No. 18 of 2000, where the parties were Sour Fap Famous v Attorney General.  

By a paid advertisement carried in the East African newspaper for the week of February 10th to 16th 2003, Bitangaro and Company Advocates denied the false allegations and gave a detailed explanation as to the genesis, nature and verility of their clients’ claims; and the manner in which the claims were preferred to and litigated in the High Court resulting in judgment in favour of their clients.  

The matter has been resurrected in the Monitor story and includes allegations about my personal conduct in relation to the clients’ pursuit of their claims. In particular the story insinuates:

1. That I connived with officials in the Attorney General’s office knowingly to get courts of law to order double payments for goods the Government had already paid for.  

2. That I should have known that the clients had no case because it had been overtaken by time (limitation).

3. That I connived with Deus Byamugisha, Acting Director of Civil Litigation.

Mr Speaker, and honourable members, this is my explanation to those allegations. 

It is not true that Messrs Bitangaro and Company Advocates ever preferred, pursued a claim or obtained judgment in favour of their clients in the above cases resulting in double payment as alleged.  

The facts were that in 2000, when I was in active legal practice and managing partner of Bitangaro and Company Advocates, prior to my election to Parliament as a Member for Bufumbira South and my joining government, I was instructed by Sour Fap Famous and Industry of Construction Machinery and Equipment to claim on their respective behalves, from the Government of Uganda a sum of US $ 1,304,658,034 and US $7,743,750,089,000. 

These sums represented claims for payments of the principle amount in respect of purchase prices for goods supplied by the two companies to the Government of Uganda together with accrued interest thereon.  

In respect of the Sour Fap Famous case, our client had supplied lorries and spare parts to the Government of Uganda under an agreement dated 19 September 1986. The Government of Uganda was to pay for the goods in instalments: 20 percent down payment, with a balance of 80 percent payable over a period of five years in 10 instalments, together with interest at 8 percent on declining balances. The balance was covered by promissory notes issued by the Government of Uganda and guaranteed by Bank of Uganda. Government then paid 20 percent.  

Needless to say, government defaulted on payment of the balance and the promissory notes were disowned upon presentation. Our client advised us that the Government of Uganda made some belated payments towards settlement of the balance that those payments were made against the principle sum, together with accrued interest on the declining balances.  

Our client presented us with detailed calculations of the interest on accrued annuities, which had not been paid by the Government of Uganda up to 30 November 1999.  

Our client advised us that only the sum of US $900,000 had been paid over a period of three years between December 1988 and October 1991. By the time of the first payment in December 1988, the principle sum and interest had accrued to a sum of US $1,390,353,000. The aforesaid payment eventually reduced the accrued principle sum and interest thereon to US $624,249.98 in October 1991. From then on up to the time we received instructions to sue, the Government of Uganda did not pay any further sum resulting in accrued principle and interest thereon of US $1,264,576. Interest was accruing in accordance with the contract on all unpaid balances.  

Accordingly in January 2001, upon instructions, our firm sued the Government of Uganda for monies due under the contract, together with accrued interest amounting to US $1,304,658.34; with further interest thereon at the contractual rate, interest on the decretal sum and cost of the suit.  

In the plaint filed by Bitangaro & Company Advocates, our client clearly pleaded in paragraph 6(b), and I quote: 

“The plaintiff shall contend at the trial hereof that it duly presented to Bank of Uganda each promissory note on their respective payment dates but to date the Government of Uganda has only partially honoured its payment obligation of the principal and accrued interest under the contract and against the said promissory notes, leaving unpaid balance amounting to US $1,304,658.34 due and owing to the plaintiff”.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, our client openly acknowledged to court in its pleadings that it had received partial payment. It made its claim in respect of unpaid balance of the principle and accrued interest. The question is: would a claim for interest amount to a double payment? Would the payment by the Government of Uganda be applied to the principal amount regardless of accrued interest? Was the provision of interest on declining balances, which was stipulated in the contract, a redundant provision? 

Should the unpaid creditor who had performed his obligations and who ought to have been promptly paid by the Government of Uganda in installments of a period of five years up to 1991, have forfeited a claim for interest? Should the unpaid creditor have lost to the Government of Uganda, which defaulted on its obligations?  

Honourable members, our client opted to go to court to recover the unpaid balance and interest. There was no double payment, nor was there non-disclosure. The Government of Uganda admitted that there had been partial payment on the terms of the contract, but sought to rely on the legal defense of limitation.

On 30 November 1999, before I had ever met our client or been made aware of its claim, the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Gerald Ssendaula, wrote to our client acknowledging Government of Uganda indebtedness thereto.  

Consequently, the issue for trial by High Court was whether the suit was time barred, and the legal consequence of hon. Ssendaula’s letter. It was not the issue of whether Government of Uganda was indebted to our client or not.  

The High Court ruled that the effect of hon. Ssendaula’s letter was that the defense of limitation was no longer available to the Government of Uganda and the suit was not time barred. The High Court was obliged to make this ruling as it is bound by a previous decision of the Supreme Court of Uganda.

It is therefore not true that I should have known that there was no case as alleged in the Monitor story. 

It is also not true that after I sent a notice of intention to sue the Attorney General’s Chambers they replied, which revived the case. It is the letter of hon. Gerald Ssendaula of 30 November 1999, which acknowledged the debt, and not the Attorney General.

This issue of connivance: I want to categorically state before this House that there was no connivance between any member of Bitangaro and Company Advocates and officials of the Attorney General’s Chambers, including Deus Byamugisha. My law firm was engaged in a claim of recovery of sums due and owing to them, arising out of a breach of contract by Government of Uganda. Please note that the IGG investigated a complaint made in this regard and found that there was no evidence of fraud.

I joined the Cabinet in July 2001. By that time I had ceased to have any active participation in the affairs of my law firm, which was and still is managed by my partner, Peter Nkurunziza, with whom I entered into partnership in 1997. He is a Senior Advocate of the Courts of Judicature, well experienced in handling clients’ affairs. My joining politics did not mean the law firm ceased to exist or was barred from practicing law. The steps taken by the firm on behalf of their client after obtaining judgment were such as any prudent lawyer would take to recover monies due to his client. I had no role to play in the matter.  

The article was written without my input and was intended to tarnish my name as an individual. I intend to afford the Monitor newspaper an opportunity in a court of law to substantiate the allegations.

I intend to lay on the Table the following documents, to demonstrate to colleagues, honourable members and sundry that I have nothing to hide. The documents I intend to lay on Table, Mr Speaker, are the following:

1. A letter from the Minister of Finance addressed to Fap Famous. 

2. The judgment of court in the matter. This will prove that the money that was paid in this month was within the terms of the judgment and not outside the judgment. 

3. A press release of Messrs Bitangaro and Company Advocates, which was actually in the East African newspaper, explaining our role. 

4. The Attorney General’s explanation in the matter in the (press release). 

That marks the end of my personal explanation, and I thank you for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, honourable members, as you know, a personal explanation or statement does not attract any debate. 

MRS MATEMBE: I know, Mr Speaker, that personal explanations are not debated. However, there are certain other important issues that could go with such personal explanations. This is not the only matter involving the company. There are quite a number of cases where government has lost, and the IGG’s reports revealed some connivance here and there. That makes the matter very important for this House to debate. 

Since the matter has come up, I want to ask whether it is possible - at a later stage not now - to suspend the rules so that we can discuss these matters in detail.

THE SPEAKER: The rules are very clear about when you can suspend the rules. However, when you say, “there are many cases”, I must say I am not aware of them. You said that the IGG is handling these cases, yes, it is very good if the IGG is handling these cases. He will make a report to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which will consider it and report to us. That is the procedure we shall follow on this matter. We cannot take a position on a matter that has not been brought to us.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

i.THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/03.

ii. THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/04 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/04

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mrs Salaamu Musumba): I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to first of all lay on the Table two reports from the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs: a soft copy and a hard copy of the same, so that the House can at a later stage look at it.

Mr Chairman, I want to make a correction, because there have been changes in the way the structure of the budgets have been done. For this year, missions abroad have been provided for separately, on page 1. I would like to add another bullet, Vote 201 to 227 – Missions Abroad, that is the title.  

In accordance with rule 154 of our Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs has considered, analysed and reviewed the policy statements of the Office of the President, State House, Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and now wishes to present this report.

In the performance of our activities as a committee, we have visited the premises of the office of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Office of the Prime Minister, the Movement Secretariat and the Uganda Aids Commission.  

The committee also met with His Excellency the President, the Prime Minister and all ministers of various sectors together with their technical people.  

The committee registers its appreciation to the Executive and all the officials who worked tirelessly, with a smile, to give responses to the committee’s numerous questions. I want to inform you, Mr Chairman, that there were very many questions. 

The committee, however, did not consider the policy statement on Vote 135 – Mass Mobilization. As the House is aware, the offices of the Movement political leadership fell vacant on 11 June 2003, on expiry of their five-year term as specified in section 36 of the Movement Act, 1997. The committee will, therefore, only make comments and recommendations in the legal confines of section 13(4) of the Movement Act, 1997.

Mr Chairman and honourable members, as you have had opportunity to read this report. I want to summarise it. I hope you will bear with the committee that we do really have a big scope of ministries to handle. I thought it would be in the best interest of this House and the Ministries we oversee for us to do a good job for them.  

The committee gave an overview that the Presidency derives its mandate from Articles 98 and 108 of the Constitution. We have categorized the scope of the Presidency and this includes: the President, the Vice-President, 22 Ministers, 25 Ministers of State and 149 RDCs.  

There was a restructuring exercise by the Ministry of Public Service and it did recommend a new structure for the Presidency and this includes: the Presidency, Cabinet Secretariat, Directorate of Information, Directorate of Economic Affairs and Research, Directorate of Ethics and Integrity, and Security organisations.  

The Uganda Aids Commissions falls under the President and so does other statutory bodies like the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation, the Broadcasting Council and the Media Council. We will be able to report about these ones later.

In the area of the Office of the President, the mainstream office, its mandate has from year to year been changed. We drew the attention of the Minister to the fact that there can only be one mandate of the President. So, it should not be that every year they do present to us another mission, vision and objectives. In our view their mandate is “to provide technical and administrative support to the Presidency for the efficient and effective discharge of their constitutional duties”. 

We would like to make some observations on the administration of that office. The Office of the President is responsible for directing policies regarding government office accommodation and setting standards for state regalia, for example the official portrait of the President, the Vice-President, the Ministers, the national flag and the East African flag.  

However, the government offices that we visited had no visible standard at all. The flags were of all colours, the portraits ranged from 1996, and we think it is wrong for a state not to look like one. Actually, if you walked into many of these offices, you would not know whether you are in a private office or in a state office. So, we think that this is a big omission and we feel that this lack of statehood is a danger to the entire state of Uganda.

The Office of the President is also responsible for organising national functions, and these functions are three: Independence Day, Heroes’ Day and NRM Victory Day. We have been celebrating them for so many years now but they have taken a bit of money and they continue being a big recurrent cost. We think that they should be given a deeper meaning so that we change the format in which we observe these national days.

The National Honours and Award Chancery has not been set up. We enacted a law on national honours and awards in 2001, but since then there has not been a single activity. We think that is not right because when we passed the law, it was for a purpose.

We then looked at the area of Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). The RDCs function as part of the Presidency, and the Constitution provides for only 56. What we have here is 149. So, we want to make recommendations in that area because the Constitution only provides for 56 RDCs. Article 203 provides that;

 “There shall be for each district a Resident District Commissioner….”

We also looked at the qualifications of many of the RDCs and they do not comply with the provisions of Article 203(1). Hence, we would like the Minister to do something about it because the Constitution provides that this will be a senior civil servant, or have the stature of one. Many of them do not have that stature. 

We also looked at the performance of RDCs and we noted that in many incidences it was unsatisfactory and their output cannot be measured.

We went on to the area of Presidential Advisors and we found no legal provision anywhere, or any administrative provision for these. However, we note that they are important. Their number, however, as of now, is half that of Cabinet. They are 33, compared to a Cabinet of 67. So, we think that is an imbalance. 

The work and terms of service of these advisors is not regulated by any legal instrument, and this makes it impossible for the committee, which has to pass their money, to measure their output. 

We also noted that Presidential Advisors and assistants, the 33 of them, to a large extent only add to the bureaucracy and undermine the operation of the line ministries. We think this is wrong because the Constitution provides that Executive power will only be exercised by Cabinet. That is being bypassed by many of the advisors because they trespass on the work of the Ministers.
  
Recommendations:

• Government departments should be housed decently. No effort should be spared in providing a permanent home for every ministry or department and the Office of the President should set the standards for this.

• We also recommend that new official portraits of the President, Vice-President and the other ministers should be commissioned immediately. Within the next three months we should see statehood at its best. We are giving a timeframe because we think that this is an easy job to do, only that it is not paid attention to.  

• We are also recommending that war museums to commemorate Heroes’ Day and NRM Day would do in place of annual parades and festivities. Because the history of the Movement struggle should be captured and institutionalised and the parade will not do that. So, we think you could change the design of this so that posterity can capture this part of our history.

• Resources should be provided to operationalise the National Honours and Awards Act, 2001 because some people will die without being honoured if this is not effected immediately.

• In the area of RDCs, Mr Chairman, we are recommending that the Government retains only 56 RDCs, one for every district, in compliance with the Constitution. 

• Government should retire or re-deploy the 95 Deputy and Assistant RDCs, as a consequence of complying with this constitutional provision.

• On Presidential Advisors, the committee recommends that advice to the presidency should be institutionalised through panels of experts instead of the present individual advisors.  The benefits for this will supercede the present arrangement. 

• A 50 percent reduction in the number of Presidential Advisors and Assistants.

I will now move on to security agencies. These were set up by the Security Organisation Statute, 1987 and the ones that were set up are ISO and ESO. Their mandate is:

• To collect, receive and process internal and external intelligence data on the security of Uganda.

• To advise and recommend to the President, or any other authority as the President may direct, on what action should be taken in connection with such intelligence data.

That is all they are supposed to do, and so they must be guided by that. They have indicated to us what their focus was in the last year and we note that:
 
• In the performance of their duties, the security organisations greatly trespass and interfere with the duties of the Police. They have not drawn a line between the two.

• The performance of the security agencies is hampered by inadequate funds, which right now stand at Shs 1,000 per capita. Every Ugandan is being secured at Shs 1,000 per year, and we think that is very low.

• There is poor coordination of work between the Police and security agencies.

• The political intelligence, that particular component of their intelligence, is poorly managed and the personnel there are actually incompetent. They are not capable of running political intelligence with responsibility because it has been turned into a rumour mill. We have drawn the attention of the Ministry to this because it is wrong. It will cause us more problems.

• Due to shortage of funds, there is an outstanding gratuity arrears bill of Shs 22,400,000,000 and the affected people have taken the Government to court. We think this should be retired early so that it does not attract the conditions that the honourable minister was explaining before I took the Floor. 

• Efficiency of the security agencies is being undermined by lack of appropriate office accommodation. It is difficult to co-ordinate this work because ISO is located in one area, ESO in another and they are losing out on the synergies that they would build if they were working together and sharing information tools.

• We are also noting, for the avoidance of doubt, that Heritage Park is the property of the security organisations. 
 
Mr Chairman, the committee recommends that:
 
• In the face of heightened global terrorism threats, adequate budgetary provisions should be made for the effective performance of ESO and ISO.

• Outstanding arrears should be retired as this may compromise the security of our country.

• Streamline and professionalise the security agencies through appropriate training.

• Better office accommodation for ISO and ESO should be provided, to enable them manage, coordinate and control their activities more efficiently.

The Directorate of Information:

Mr Chairman, the former Ministry of Information is now just a Directorate of Information under the Office of the President. However, its mandate remains the same: to provide and maintain national infrastructure to collect, analyse, broadcast and to store information for national unity and development. 

This directorate operates Radio Uganda and Uganda Television. It also oversees the operations of state print media, the New Vision. 

Government has in the recent past commissioned FM radio stations in Kampala, Gulu, Lira and Karamoja to improve coverage. The Directorate has also benefited from the Ministry of Health’s HIV/AIDS programme, which has attracted some investment in the area of information. 

We also want to inform the House that to-date 117 FM private radio stations have been licenced although only 68 are operational. The Broadcasting Council has also licenced private televisions, independent newspapers, cinema halls, theatre halls and video halls, but this has not been captured anywhere. The Ministry does not tell us how many they are. We wish to note that in the next policy statement you include this so that we can see the entire scope of what you do.

Mr Chairman, the committee noted that:

• It is important for the state to own its own media in order to effectively communicate, promote peace, unity, and good and efficient governance. For a developing country like this, there is no way you could substitute this for anything else.

• The perennial under-funding of this Directorate has dis-empowered it, hence reducing its effectiveness especially now that they have to operate in a liberalised mass media industry.

• The Radio Uganda and UTV infrastructure are in a pathetic state of disrepair.

• The efficient and effective performance of this directorate has been greatly interfered with by Presidential Advisors.

• In spite of being located in the Office of the President, this directorate has no organisation linkage with the Presidential Press Unit and the Vice-President’s press unit, which are better funded and well equipped. As such, the synergies and capabilities of these units have only served to marginalise and dis-empower this directorate.

• The Directorate is not effectively participating in the formulation of the National ICT policy and this may reduce the Directorate’s ability to address the information component of the policy, especially in the area of pornography. 

If I may add something, a national ICT policy is being formulated and government is paying more attention to the communication and technology bit but not the information component of it. Yet we think that that component should be actually dealt with by the Directorate.
• While the Directorate has budgeted for the collection, analysis, and broadcasting of information, no request for the secure storage of information has been made for this financial year. Stored information, as you will all know, becomes part of our history and heritage and its secure storage must be treated as a matter of state security. 

We have got information that most of the information that was stored about the Idi Amin era is now missing. There is no secure storage of it. We only want to reassure ourselves that all is well and we would like some money put into this. 

• The potential for generating money through announcements and advertisements has been reduced due to the cumbersome procedures of payments that cause public frustration. However, in spite of this bureaucracy, the Directorate has contributed Shs 1,220,000,000 in the last financial year as non-tax revenue.

This directorate has been reflected as a parasitic one, that is why we want to draw the attention of the House to this. Actually, this directorate is not parasitic, as it does contribute to the GDP.

• There is undue interference in the Directorate’s activities especially when directing procedures of operating private media. The closure of private media houses has not been backed by any legal framework that promotes confidence in a free/liberalised market of the media. So, we have asked the Minister to take leadership in this area. 

In some places - we have heard - the Minister of Defence or any other operative just walks in and stops operations without procedures and we think that is wrong. I think they also know it is wrong.

• The efficiency and effectiveness of this directorate in overseeing the private electronic media is hampered by lack of the functional relationship between the Uganda Communications Commission, which gives the licences for frequencies to radio operators, and the Broadcasting Council. So, the lack of coordination in this area is causing a lot of frustration in the media industry. This should be streamlined.

Coverage:

• In the area of coverage, we note that the Directorate has only made it to 60 percent for UTV and 70 percent for radio.

• In this area, there has been a lot of waste of resources especially for the HIV/AIDS radio component from the Ministry of Health. We also think that Karamoja has had a raw deal because the FM radio there is not operational and there is a lot of money that was sunk into importing the equipment. It is lying idle in the rain and we think this waste must be stopped.

• The coverage of national events is being limited to radio broadcast only. The Outside Broadcasting (OB) Van stopped operations about three years ago. And because of the perennial under-funding of this crucial directorate, live coverage of events is not possible in the year 2003 when it was possible in 1971.

• We also note that live coverage of parliamentary proceedings is not being done either by Radio Uganda or by UTV in spite of us amending the Rules of Procedure of this House.

• Film processing equipment and facilities to edit, produce and store information, which comes in form of voice, motion and still, have not been maintained and upgraded for many years now. Their capability and capacity have consequently been run down and yet this is very important to capture history. 

We think that some investment should be made, because these facilities did exist. Instead of relying on the New Vision for taking pictures and storing your information, it is important that the Directorate takes charge.

• We have also been told that the Government has suspended the licensing of private radio stations. 

I will quickly run through the quality. The committee observed that the quality of programming is poor and that there is time wastage on the state owned media, of which 60 percent of their airtime is only devoted to music, dancing and anything that can be used to pass time. We think that is a very big waste. 

However, the committee is happy to note that in the entire industry, UTV and Radio Uganda are the only family friendly broadcasters. You can sit with your family and be sure you will not be embarrassed, and we want to commend them for that.  

So, the committee recommends as follows:

• The Directorate should hasten the formation of Uganda Broadcasting Agency to make it a self-governing information agency in the area, like the British Broadcasting Corporation. If it does this, it will re-engineer itself. 

• The Directorate should also provide operational procedures and standards to guide the entire media industry: private and public.

• We also recommend that Uganda Communications Commission and the Broadcasting Council rationalise their responsibilities to effectively guide and manage a competitive, efficient and effective electronic media industry.  

• In the area of coverage, the committee recommends that the Directorate should aim at 100 percent national coverage through accelerated expansion of the broadcast network, via satellite, short wave, medium wave and FM.  These efforts, however, should be recast to maintain an efficient network – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable Member, do I understand you are now on page 10?

MRS MUSUMBA: Yes, Sir. The pages, Mr Chairman, are not 60. I am taking time on the Directorate of Information because it has never received due attention from this House, the Executive –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it is not my concern, but – (Interruption)

MRS MUSUMBA: I am not going to read it all because I am aware that the appendices start on page 35. There is no need to worry. We want the Directorate to set nationwide standards of information broadcast, and we recommend that it makes arrangements with private broadcasters to dedicate a percentage of their airtime per day to relay national news so that the country can listen to some standard news once a day. 

What is happening now is that every district, every village has limited itself to their local FM station and so there is no national character in whatever is being done. We would like to ask that arrangements be made so that you relay national news. Whenever we listen to the BBC or Voice of America, we are listening to standard information. We think this is necessary for building national unity, for every geographical area to receive some standard information. 

Mr Chairman, the rest you can read for yourself, it is about building infrastructure. 

On page 11, we would like also the Directorate to explore possibilities of international broadcasting like it was in the early 1970s. This would serve areas like Congo and Southern Sudan, which rely on us for information. It would also get us some money. 

On the quality, Mr Chairman, we recommend that more resources be provided to improve the quality of programming and makes its state-of-the-art media by government. 

We also would need to re-skill the staff in this directorate because they think and feel that they have been relegated to second-class civil service. So, we need to re-skill them to prepare them for a competitive market.

The Directorate of Ethics and Integrity:

Mr Chairman, this directorate is four years old and it has made some achievements but we would like to note that:

• The conceptual framework of this directorate is narrow in scope, which has limited its operations. 

• Its work has not been felt mostly at the district level. This directorate was not able to tell the committee whether corruption is on the increase, on the decrease or has remained the same. So, we want them to satisfy us next session, that they know what is happening in that area because it was set up to demonstrate the national resolve to fight corruption.

• This directorate could expand its scope to cover areas of appointments, administrative integrity in government, procedural integrity, institutional integrity, moral integrity and personal integrity. 

It should also extend to professional integrity. So, we would like it to expand its scope to cover all these things because they are big impediments to investment and to efficient running of work. 

• There have been a number of commissions of inquiry but their reports have not been made public and we think this defeats the purpose for which they were set up. We want this directorate, therefore, to expedite public access to these commissions of inquiry’s reports and we would also like to see appropriate action taken.

I will now move to the Directorate of Economic Affairs and Research.

It supports the presidency in decision-making in the area of economic issues. Mr Chairman, the committee has noted that this directorate has not captured the niche of its mandate. Its present scope of activities appears like a duplication of the Movement Secretariat, Office of the Prime Minster and other government departments. As such, the way this directorate is presently conceptualised and implemented adds no intellectual value to the Presidency.  

The DEAR also has no administrative infrastructure and capacity to effectively monitor national, regional and international economic trends to enable it forecast economic problems and opportunities in order to advise the Presidency.  

We have noted that the Presidential Economic Council has been re-instituted to draw in the knowledge and participation of non-state actors in generating and re-directing economic policy.  

We also note that the directorate needs to develop capacity to feed back into the entire government system, information for strategic planning.  

The committee recommends that this department is indeed a strategic one, and it is necessary in supporting the Presidency to efficiently and effectively manage the economy, especially in dealing with the very fast and dynamic global economic environment. So, this department must be re-engineered and re-focused to meet this challenge.  

We recommend that government makes sufficient investment in this strategic function for timely decision making.  

The committee recommends that the directorate should work closely with the National Planning Authority to provide timely information for strategic planning purposes.

The Cabinet Secretariat is actually the centre, which provides administrative support for the efficient and effective performance of Cabinet. We want to note that the Cabinet Secretariat manages the routine day-to-day operations of Cabinet.  However, they lack modern facilities to manage and store their materials. 

The Cabinet library has not updated its stock of literature for a very long time. So, we recommend that the Cabinet library be upgraded into a modern resource centre to enable the Cabinet to benefit from the world wide web of information and knowledge of contemporary governments and governance. Right now it looks like a senior common room in a university.  

We also recommend that the Secretariat should be re-tooled and re-equipped so that it serves the purpose of adding knowledge to the Cabinet and making it competitive internationally.  

I now move to Vote 002, State House. The primary mandate is “to provide at all times support to the Presidency in order to facilitate the efficient and effective performance of their constitutional and administrative responsibilities and to cater for the welfare and security of the President, Vice-President and their families”.  

The committee wants to note the following:

There is no demarcation between the stated mandate of the Office of the President and State House. The apparent duplication of duties distorts the budgeting process. 

When I was writing the report I wondered whether I was dealing with State House or Office of the President, because the overlaps are too many and they are difficult to sort out.  

State House’s budget has overstepped its primary mandate of taking care of the welfare and security of the President, Vice-President and their families. They require legal and procedural guidance on how to proceed in these two areas.  

We have also noted that the Vice-President has not been provided with sufficient logistical support to perform his duties adequately as envisaged by the Constitution.  

The committee noted that due to limited working space at Nakasero State Lodge, State House has been compelled to rent expensive office space at Okello House, Bauman House and Plot 12 Malcolm X in Kololo. The rent for this, I must add, has shot up to Shs 744 million, which is not even provided for this financial year.  

State House is renting scattered offices for the Presidency in different locations of the city. This has increased the cost of securing these facilities. Therefore, it is increasing the cost of running State House.  

We noted that an office at Plot 12 Malcolm X was purchased for the First Lady at a cost of Shs 240 million. It was renovated at Shs 200 million, and now requires fencing of another Shs 200 million.  

The committee noted that due to increased security threats, Nakasero State Lodge has been fortified, cordoning off all public roads. This has caused great inconvenience of All Saints Church parishioners.

For the last four financial years, Mr Chairman, the money budgeted for the renovation of State House Entebbe has been diverted to other use. So, state house Entebbe continues to be in ruins as a consequence of these acts of financial indiscipline. 

There is no official residence provided for the Vice-President. This office and its occupants have continued to operate virtual offices in their private residencies. 

We also noted that there is a total of 14 State Lodges, which have been left in a permanent state of disrepair, forcing the President to camp in military establishments or hotels whenever he makes upcountry tours. I have listed for you the number of State Lodges so that you know them. Some of them are in your constituencies, and you may not know them. We want to note that Morulinga State Lodge in Karamoja is in the last phase of construction.  The committee will report about these state lodges in the course of the year.  

However, I want to add that the above require Shs 850 million for renovation, which is not provided for this financial year.  

There is a presidential jet and a helicopter for the President. However, insurance costs have not been provided for in this budget and it is very dangerous for the President to move around in uninsured machines.

The last point I want make about State House administration is that State House maintains loose employees in various activities. I am calling them “loose employees” because they are not contracted and they have not been shown in the organisational structure. These are the people who work in activities like cooperatives, which are not provided for anywhere. We wonder where they get their monies. So, we would like to be informed later, about the structure, which provides for these organisations that do this work.

The recommendations are as follows: 

From the stated mandates of the Office of the President and State House, it is difficult to demarcate the functional and administrative differences of the two. As such, the Presidency should consider consolidating Vote 001 and Vote 002 so that its activities could be streamlined. That would also rationalize the cost effectively.

Parliament should, as a matter of urgency, make a law that guides the Presidency in executing its mandate and operationalise the provisions of the Constitution. It is also of paramount urgency to define and regulate the scope and activities of the First Lady’s role in state matters. Mr Chairman, right now the President is exercising Executive powers, which he draws direct from the Constitution. We believe they should be stepped down and more guidance given on how he goes about this.

On matters related to funding, the Vice-President’s official residence must be provided for by State House and not the Ministry of Public Service. We have administratively relegated the Office of the Vice-President to the civil service, and we think this is wrong. It must be corrected within the course of the year.

We also recommend that in preparation to host the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in the year 2005, Government must urgently find money to reconstruct State House, Entebbe. The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting is always attended by Her Majesty the Queen, who will not stay in Lake View Hotel or any other place. It would be very good for this country to have appropriate accommodation when the times comes, and preparation must start now, Mr Chairman.  

We also want to recommend that the Office of the Vice-President be provided with not less than 30 percent of the total allocations under votes 001 and 002. As you will see later, the budget provided for the Vice-President is almost the total budget and that causes a big disparity in that office. So, we would like to do it in a percentage form of 30 to 70 percent, for a start it is not bad.

I am adding, Mr Chairman, that a supplementary of Shs 1,377,948,000 to ensure and maintain the presidential jet and helicopter, be provided for; and Shs 850,000,000 to repair state lodges also be provided for as soon as the money is available.  

I also want to add another recommendation. State House should not have a free hand in inflating the personnel that work under it. It should find regulations and contract jobs that make it possible for us to oversee what they are doing.

I now want to turn to African Growth Opportunities Act (AGOA). It is page 18. We note that since its inception, the President has nurtured this activity so that it receives expeditious attention to make Uganda take maximum benefit of this opportunity.  

We have also noted that the placement of African Growth Opportunities Act (AGOA) outside the mainstream Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry has greatly dis-empowered and stunted the parent ministry.  

Out of this African Growth Opportunities Act (AGOA) initiative, we are now able to realise US $1,000,000 per month. So, by the end of 12 months, the benefits will be US $12,000,000. We have also noted that 1,000 AGOA girls have been trained and employed and that is good.  

Local technical capacity to understand the character and requirements of the American market is being built for many items, including handicrafts, gum arabica and organic products. We think this capacity can be replicated elsewhere. 

The African Growth Opportunities Act (AGOA) desk in State House should be relocated back to the parent ministry, to institutionalise this capacity that has been incubated in State House.  

We also recommend that the experience of African Growth Opportunities Act (AGOA) should form a platform for this country to study and advise on the character and requirements for operating in other markets like China, Asia and the Middle East.  

We also recommend that the knowledge generated from African Growth Opportunities Act (AGOA) should be disseminated in the private sector so that the private sector can stop being parasitic and become dynamic. We believe that it is in the national interest that that is replicated so that our industrialists, manufacturers and private sector is able to know and be advised on how to deal with a dynamic and highly ‘disposable’ market out there. 

We were also inclined to think that if the problem is personnel, the President has one choice to determine who will be the Minister of Industry. If it is the desk of African Growth Opportunities Act (AGOA), let it be the Minister. If the Minister is not good enough, let the Minister retire, but let us build institutions that will give us maximum benefits of all these initiatives.

I now move on to what you call State House Scholarships, but we have called them scholarships. Mr Chairman and honourable members, the scholarship scheme has been a subject of debate and speculation.  

The scheme came about as a spontaneous response to the educational needs of war orphans. The President has explained the rationale of this scheme from time to time.

However, Parliament has also continuously recommended that the Ministry of Education manage this scheme, with no compliance from the relevant authorities. So, we would like to note that a total of 1,498 students at various levels of education are benefiting from this scheme. 250 of them are at university level, 93 are registered for diploma courses, 110 are in their senior six vacation, 793 of them are in secondary schools, and 272 are in primary schools. 

We have also noted that the list of beneficiaries continues to be a subject of speculation. In spite of all the promises to provide this list to the committee or at least a sub-committee, no member of that committee has officially seen this list. I want to inform the House that the President did direct that the list be made available to the committee and this morning a list was presented to me. I was not able to deal with it because I am not the committee. 

We shall deal with the matter in the committee and we will be able to report back to the House. So, the committee recommends that the scheme be transferred to the Ministry of Education, after it has adequately reviewed the matter and a special report made to this House.  

Mr Chairman, we have always got to know from the President that needs of these children cannot be packaged in bureaucracy, which is correct. However, we know that there are seven million children under the Ministry of Education and they are working well. So if we took 1,500 of them, it would only strength the Ministry. 

I now move on to the subject of pledges, and the budget line for this is donations. We note that there are pledges amounting to Shs 4.2 billion accumulated arrears of presidential pledges all over the country. So, we want to note that it is necessary that we dispose of these pledges and start a new leaf, because it has become an annual event to talk about them. We should find ways and means to dispose of them. The committee will be working with the Budget Committee and other chairpersons to help the Presidency dispose of these outstanding pledges.  

However, a list of these pledges has not been made available to the committee to enable it advise this House on its scope of geographical coverage. So, the committee is not able to advise but the principle of it is understood and we would want to dispose of these pledges.  

The committee, therefore, recommends as follows:

The Presidency be provided with what we called a “slash fund” to help the Presidency exercise some discretionary powers in giving assistance without the encumbrances of bureaucratic red tape. We would like the Presidency in the next budget to provide for this, so that we do not lock his hands in this honourable activity, which he does from time to time. In a developing country you cannot pretend that that will not happen. So, we would like to make it easier for him and run away from the donations that have become a pain.

We would also like to recommend that when the list of outstanding pledges is made available to the committee, we should then be able to advise on the ways and means to rationalize and immediately dispose of these pledges.

Mr Chairman, I am going to the area of the Presidential Guard Brigade. The Presidential Protection Unit has now become a Presidential Guard Brigade.  

The committee notes that the size of the Presidential Protection Unit is growing out of proportion, notwithstanding the growing threats of terrorism. So, we would like to recommend that:

1) The Presidential Protection Unit should be rationalized to provide for a manageable force under State House.
2) We also recommend that the Armed Forces Bill should provide for presidential protection and clarify their roles, linkages and chain of command among other things, which are necessary to backup protection.

Mr Chairman, for a long time this House has questioned why this committee reports on the Uganda Aids Commission. From time to time we have been seeing this activity reported by the Social Services Committee. 

I want to remind the House that the Aids Commission was set up by a Statute in 1992. I have taken the trouble to outline for you the functions of the Uganda Aids Commission on which we based the evaluation.  

The committee notes that the Uganda Aids Commission is responsible to the President in the performance of its responsibilities as spelt out in section 2 of the UAC Statute.  

We also want to note that the Uganda Aids Commission has excelled in providing administrative infrastructure that effectively monitors the participation of a network of state and non-state actors in the care, control and prevention of HIV/ AIDS countrywide.  

We also want to note that the Uganda Aids Commission has finally started the construction of a permanent home in Ntinda with the support of donor partners.  

The committee recommends that the Uganda Aids Commission remains under the Presidency to continue offering effective leadership in the prevention, control and mitigation of the consequences of the epidemic in Uganda, without losing the momentum already achieved.  

The Uganda Aids Commission should be commended for providing leadership on the continent and indeed internationally, in every aspect of AIDS control, including ARV drugs and vaccine trials.

Mr Chairman, I now move to the Office of the Prime Minister, Vote 003. We made an overview that this office was created –(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  At the beginning of this sitting the chairperson indicated to us that she was going to lay on Table two reports, the soft copy and the hard one. 

Mr Chairman, you know very well that we went with this big report and internalised it because we are supposed to handle two committee reports today, and we need to seriously debate this one. Therefore, do you not think it would be procedurally proper for the chairperson to summarize the remaining bit? As we talk now, she has just moved through half of the report. Could she summarise so that we get time for debate and also time to prepare for another committee report? I thank you. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I prefer it to be summarized, the major recommendations read out, and then members comment on it. This was the understanding I had with the chairperson. I think she is trying to do that.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Chairman, thank you. I am greatly concerned because matters relating to this committee could lead to misunderstanding. That is why I am labouring to ensure that we get to a common understanding of the issues, so that the debate is fruitful. 

But if it is the desire of the House, I could try to move on so that you pass the budget. (Applause). But in my view, Mr Chairman, that would be a disservice to the nation because you do not know the basis upon which –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, try to summarize.

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you. Mr Chairman, I will only make one observation that the Office of the Prime Minister is actually the technical arm of government. We have visited their offices, which are not good, but you will read for yourself. 

I would like now to go to the comments we have made. We note that the Prime Minister has effectively and efficiently performed his functions and excelled at punctuality and attendance of Parliamentary proceedings. This should be emulated by all of us.

Mr Chairman, we also note that the position of the Prime Minister was never envisioned in the 1995 Constitution. So, as far as we are concerned, this office operates in a legal vacuum. The committee is at great pains to determine whether it is a ministry, an office or a rank. We do not know what it is.  

We have also noted that there is no functional relationship or linkage, vertical or horizontal, between the Prime Minister and the three deputies. So, these are ranks. One day the rank is in education, the other day it is somewhere else. As a recommendation, we need to constitutionalize this office and post. 

Parliamentary Affairs:

The Parliamentary Affairs Office supports the Prime Minister to effectively do his work. However, we note that from the stated function of the office of the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, the output mentioned could as well be attributed to the Clerk of Parliament. (Laughter). We only want to say that I think this ministry was set up to whip or to be understood as a whip. If the conceptualisation is wrong, then expectations will be wrong. 

We would like to recommend that the Minister works closely with the Commonwealth Office – the one in London - to improve the effectiveness of her office following an established model, the Westminster model of Parliamentary tradition. That way, her office will add value to Parliament and to Cabinet.

Mr Chairman, we also propose that for purposes of Parliamentary audit, the Government should report back to Parliament on the course of action taken on all Parliamentary resolutions. (Applause).    

We also recommend that in the performance of her duties, the Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs should advise the Presidency to indicate the legislative programme when he is delivering the State of the Nation Address. 

The Minister should also ensure that the structure of the address gives a performance account of the previous year and a forecast for the next year in all aspects of life. Right now, we are not able to tell whether it is a budget speech, State of the Nation Address or any other speech; they all seem the same. We think the Minister could help here.

Disaster Preparedness:
 
We want to note the following:

• That there is no national policy on internally displaced persons.
 
• HIV/AIDS is a big threat to internally displaced persons.  

• Karamoja has continued to suffer perennial food shortage in spite of all reported interventions.  

• We also note that OXFAM has continued to support the establishment of an early warning system in Uganda.

The committee recommends that: 

1. A law to guide the management of refugees and internally displaced persons should be brought to Parliament as soon as possible; and 

2. The Department of Disaster Preparedness should link very closely with other agencies to deal with the HIV/AIDS threat in these areas. 

In the area of refugees, there is a policy matter here to be noted: refugees in Uganda are accommodated in settlements and not in camps. This entails allocating land to refugees, which encourages them to settle permanently in their host areas. That stops them from being refugees.  

We also note that refugees in some instances received differential treatment, which creates a lot of tension among the host communities. 

We also note that the security concerns of the host communities are not adequately addressed in some areas, even in Kampala here where from time to time we have heard complaints from hon. Ken Lyukyamuzi, relating to this.  

The committee therefore recommends that government and the United Nations resolve the refugee status and refugee requirements in the face of increasing pressure on land in the host areas. 

We recommend that policy guidelines and procedures be streamlined to take care of the economic and security concerns of host communities.  

Department of Karamoja Affairs: 

It was set up to address the special social, economic and security needs of the area and its neighbourhood. This department mobilizes funds and coordinates the development programmes in Karamoja. You can delete the next line in the report because we went on to note a few things about Karamoja. 

Karamoja as a region remains a national, regional and international problem. A comprehensive and systematic strategy to solve this problem should be developed.  

We also note that arms proliferation in Karamoja Region provides a breeding ground for terrorism.  

The committee highly commends the professionalism and capability developed in Karamoja Data Centre.  Information generated by this centre will potentially transform Karamoja if used appropriately. 

Therefore, we recommend that more resources be provided for this office for accelerated development and for the security of Karamoja Region. 

We also recommend that the Karamoja strategic plan 2004-2009 be presented to the committee as soon as possible so that we can support its funding.  

We recommend that the international community should participate in securing Karamoja and in the control of small arms trade in that area. 

We recommend that the professional capability developed by the Karamoja Data Centre be replicated as a planning tool in all districts.  This may also form part of the database available to National Planning Authority. I want to inform the House that the best resource for planning has been developed by Karamoja Data Centre. So if you find time, please visit them.

Luwero Triangle:

Luwero Triangle has been with us since 1986, and the committee notes that the Luwero war debts remain uncleared due to the perennial under-funding of this department. 

We also note that the rehabilitation and construction of the massively destroyed infrastructure remains unaccomplished, 17 years after the war ended in Luwero.  

The committee recommends that Shs 1.5 billion of the outstanding arrears be retired without any further delay. Let us close this chapter and let Luwero retire. 

We also recommend that war monuments be built and form part of Uganda’s living history of the liberation struggle launched in this area.

We recommend that the department should be transformed into a development activity. Lessons learnt and capacities built should be transferred to the respective districts.

Northern Uganda:

This portfolio supervises Acholi land programmes, NUSAF, NURP I Tele-Project and Restocking. You will read about that. 

The biggest recommendation we want to make here is that this ministry should be located in the North. It should have an office in the North; it should not be a satellite office. There should be a resident minister in Northern Uganda, like it should be in Luwero and in Karamoja. 

We want to inform the House that the rest of the activities in this department are moving well under the able leadership of the Minister and the newly recruited Director of NUSAF.

Kasese Task Force:

The committee discovered a taskforce on Kasese in the Office of the Prime Minister. We discussed it because we had never known that it existed, until we visited the office. 

The taskforce is doing a good job of providing land, demarcating, surveying and distributing it to the landless people in Kasese. However, we have been told that it is now being transferred to the Ministry of Lands. Our plea is that it should not form part of the backlog. It should be quickly retired so that we reduce land tensions in Kasese, because I think we have enough as a country in Kibaale and other places.

Rural Micro-finance Support Project (RMSP):

This is under the office of the Prime Minister. It is now operating legally as a company. We want to make the following recommendations: 
1. Because money provided by RMSP is the cheapest on the market, its outreach should aim at equity rather than demand. The project is demand driven, but demand could come from one region and that would cause inequalities in resources.  

2. We also recommend that they should avoid the risk of compounding the marginalisation of already poor and vulnerable communities in Uganda, which cannot meet or cope with the demand indicators in the project. 

We also want to inform the House that the project is working well and that later, we will be able to provide a report on it. 

Mr Chairman and honourable members, I want to now move to Vote 006, Foreign Affairs. I will skip all the information we have provided for you in the area of how the Ministry is administered and how it is managing international relations. I will go straight away to what we are recommending. 

If you have read through, you will note that this ministry has suffered marginalisation, trespass by other ministries, poor funding; it has been marginalized in every aspect! However, we are glad to note that since the last financial year, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is regaining its position and is able to compete diplomatically with other countries.  

Therefore, we recommend that for the proper administration of our embassies abroad, 30 percent of all the collections on visas be given as Appropriation-in-Aid. This will help the embassies run effectively and efficiently, because right now all the funds are sent to the Consolidated Fund and then they have to wait for the releases. And as you know, moving from Kampala to Moscow, to all those places, by the time they reach there, there is a lot of stress. So, this is a small administrative adjustment that we would like to propose.

There are also shortages for which we would like a supplementary to be made available urgently for this ministry. The Ministry needs a total of US $3,155,106 for the immediate repair of 11 mission properties, which are in total disrepair. 

The Ministry also needs approximately Shs 1 billion to furnish the Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters building, when it gets completed. As you see, whenever you pass near the Ministry of Finance, the new structure that is coming up day and night is going to be the new home for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It was given as a grant from the Chinese people, and if you recall, this is the second grant towards that activity. The money from the first grant was diverted by the Ministry of Finance. So, we would like to make a request to the Ministry of Finance to provide Shs 1 billion for the furnishing of that headquarter building when it is completed in June.  

We also want to recommend that US $423,000 be provided to prepare this ministry for E-governance. In dealing with the world now you must be modern, and we believe this should be the starting point for Uganda. I want to commend them because they are far ahead of every other ministry in E-governance readiness.  

We want to recommend that in the on-going rationalization of Uganda’s membership to international organizations, the accumulated arrears amounting to Shs 10.5 billion should be made available. We are losing as a country on the benefits of full paid-up membership. When we pay arrears, we are wasting money because we are not even in position to be elected for any post in those organizations. So, we cannot give any policy direction, or contribute.

We also recommend that Uganda’s foreign policy should be generated democratically, with Parliament playing a very active role to promote the principles of international peace, security and prosperity for us. 

As of now, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has not complied with the requirements of periodically reporting to this House on treaties and conventions assented to, wherever they are. This year they have been kind enough to give us a list, Appendix 4, of all these treaties and conventions that they have assented to.

We also recommend that just like public policy and national policy on other things, foreign policy should be disseminated to Ugandans, especially when we take stands. All these policies should be owned by Ugandans, and all these things should be debated by this House. This recommendation should be followed; at least we should be seeing fruits of it this financial year.

Finally, Mr Chairman and honourable members, I want to report on Vote 135, Mass Mobilization. The committee was able to visit the Secretariat and observed the very poor and unhealthy work environment in which the Secretariat operates.  Actually, I think it is wrong for any government premises to be located in a basement - where many of the people who work in the Movement Secretariat are. 

The committee recommends that the Movement Secretariat offices should not occupy the basement, where many officials are actually holed.

Mr Chairman, as was indicated at the beginning of this committee report, the committee was not able to proceed with analysing the policy statement on Mass Mobilization because these offices of the political leaders fell vacant without their knowledge. (Laughter).  

However, in exercising our responsibility to the public officers seconded to the Movement Secretariat, the committee wishes to recommend that the wages of public officers seconded to the Secretariat continue being provided for under the Vote-on-Account, until the legal issues surrounding the Secretariat are resolved.  

Mr Chairman, in conclusion, I move that Parliament approves the sums of monies as presented on page 42, for the Office of the President, State House, Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Uganda Aids Commission, Missions Abroad and Embassies. The information is available to you. 

Mr Chairman, I also recommend the withholding of the budgetary estimates of Shs 1,977,140,000 for scholarships under State House, and Shs 1,562,918,000 for donations under State House because, as I explained, we do not have any evidence on which to base approval.

Further, I move that the areas that require supplementary budgets as indicated in this report should receive priority attention from the Ministry of Finance if and when the possibility arises this financial year. I thank you, Mr Chairman and honourable members. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much. First of all, I must thank the chairperson for this good presentation. I must thank her and the entire committee for the good report. The format is very good and the content is very good. So, thank you very much. (Applause).

MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Chairman. Allow me to thank the chairperson and her committee for the good and elaborate report. Allow me to also recommend that this type of report, in addition to that of the legal and social services committees, be a guide as committees prepare their reports.

Mr Chairman, I have a few comments to make particularly about the decision-making process in the Office of the President and State House. Most of these decisions seem to have diversely affected the economy and the management of public affairs. I note that the budget for State House has greatly increased. If you look at its mandate, however, you can see that it has unnecessarily increased. So, the recommendations of the committee should be taken seriously.

Secondly, I note that many decisions that have been taken have resulted into messing up a number of departments, such as the Department of Trade. Also, some of the decisions taken are illegal and unconstitutional, and therefore the expenditure as a result of these decisions is nugatory and unnecessary. 

I ask that the committee, when they look at these decisions, to further come up with detailed recommendations. For example, Mr Chairman, the creation of many districts as a populist tool has drastically increased expenditure, and this expenditure –(Interjections)- you know that the decisions, which were taken by the Executive to increase districts, have made everybody, every clan and every tribe, want to have a district. This has increased expenditure beyond what we can actually manage.

Secondly, the appointment of more RDCs contrary to the Constitution –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am seeking clarification from the member holding the Floor. I would like to know whether he knows that it is this Parliament, which finally approves new districts. Is he implying that Parliament is also becoming sort of populist? I would like to be informed.  

MR SABIITI: Mr Chairman, I remember using the word “populist”, and because of that at times we have tended to take certain decisions, but it is basically as a result of the initiators of the policy, the Executive.  

Mr Chairman, I also note the increased number of RDCs contrary to the Constitution. Worse still, their appointment seems not to take into account the qualification and experience of these officers.  For example, certain RDCs in different parts of the country have education level that are not in conformity with what was recommended in the Constitution. 

The Constitution does not give mandate to appoint assistants and deputies, and most of these are actually appointed on patronage. This has cost the country heavily. In my district, for example, we have two or three, and most of them should not actually be RDCs - if you looked at their qualifications.

Fourthly, I will comment on the appointment of Presidential Advisors. In my opinion, we have so many well-trained, experienced, technical people in many institutions of government, and they are there to advise the President. But because of political patronage, we have continued to have many advisors and this has a direct effect on the expenditure of the state.

The security agencies, ISO, ESO, CMI, have taken over the functions of other departments like CID and the Special Branch. This creates double budgeting, because you find that these organizations get money for some purpose. The Police get money for the same function and this increases expenditure. 

Mr Chairman, for example there is the creation or expansion of PPU to a semi-autonomous army, which in my opinion is contrary to Article 208(4). Surely, if the President is the Commander-in-Chief, he has access to any soldier in any unit, so he could summon such a person or such a unit to come and help. But creating PPU as a person, it looks like a personal army! 

I really ask this Parliament to seriously look at this matter because we have seen in many countries, like Zaire and Somalia, where these personal armies have tended to cause a problem. So, I request that we ask His Excellency the President to look at this matter seriously, so that the Presidential Protection Unit continues to be small.

Lastly, I agree with the recommendation of the committee that funds for the Movement Secretariat, other than for the technical staff or civil servants, should be put on hold because in my opinion, Article 70 has not been properly implemented. This secretariat is supposed to be broad-based, inclusive and non-partisan. Therefore, since the offices of the political leaders have expired and they were partisan, I recommend that money be held so that when they open up, every party gets its own secretariat. Mr Chairman I agree with the recommendations of the committee. I thank you very much.

MR THEODORE SEKIKUUBO (Lyemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I will be brief. I will look at page 7 where the committee comments on the security agencies. They recommend that these agencies should be well facilitated, and given better offices. 

Mr Chairman, I have a problem with that. We have tended, on many occasions, to use these security organisations as dumping grounds for the retired RDCs, retired politicians, MPs et cetera. These should be specialized bodies with well-trained people, of whom we should be proud of as Ugandans. We are on many occasions adulterating them from the mainstream military. The UPDF is appointed there, I think this is disorganizing the career path of the officials in these organizations. We should allow them an opportunity to grow and excel in their fields of training and operations. These should be institutions, which will stay forever and not be gagged and displaced at will.  

Mr Chairman, I was surprised to learn that there is the Kasese Task Force, which is responsible for allocating land to the landless people. They are even encroaching on the natural resources of this country, the Queen Elizabeth National Park. How about us who do not have this privilege?  

Yesterday, we learnt that there is a land fund being operationalised to cater for the people in Kibaale. Many former landlords there are being paid and the tenants are acquiring land. How about the rest of the country? Why do we carry out such piecemeal action? This is not sustainable and not satisfactory. 

I am looking forward to the day when the people of Lwemiyaga will benefit from the land fund, or even when land is apportioned for them to settle. Mr Chairman, I have looked –(Interruption)

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, honourable member holding the Floor for accepting this information, and I thank you, Mr Chairman. 

I wish to inform the member holding the Floor that actually the landless people of Kasese have been forced to encroach on Queen Elizabeth National Park because 63 percent of the land of Kasese is occupied by government projects. Some of those projects are not performing at all, like the prison farms. So, when they are chased out of the prison farms, then they have no choice but to go and settle in other projects of government, pending a re-settlement policy from government. So, they are the responsibility of government. 

Finally, the Rwandese refugees in Kasese and the Sudanese have more rights than the people of Kasese. They have been allocated land and they settle comfortably in Imuga resettlement land at the expense of the natives of the area. Thank you very much.

MR SEKIKUUBO: Thank you honourable colleague for that information. But my concern was: why do we make these interventions on a piecemeal basis? 

I am a member of the Tourism, Trade and Industry Committee and such information has not come to our attention. Where did you get the authority to de-gazzete part of that national park? Mr Chairman, the way we are handling matters and business leaves a lot to be desired. I wish to maintain that in Sembabule, in Lwemiyaga, we have 7,892 people who have no land. Can we just storm the national parks and forest areas? No! I think we should address this in a uniform and harmonized manner.

Mr Chairman, sorry about the intervention and interruption, but I want to make another point that came to my attention. The committee said they were not able to proceed with analysing the mass mobilization policy statement because the offices of the political leaders fell vacant, and they were also not there. 

I am wondering where these directors, whom I saw the other day falling over themselves in attendance to the visiting FRELIMO Secretary General, were? I saw them; what were they doing? Where was the National Political Commissar? No wonder he is not even around here to defend his budget. Where was the Vice-Chairman of the Movement? 

Even the chairman himself, is he abdicating? Having been made to put on a kanzu, is he abandoning his cause? I have seen him very diligent in matters where he is most touched, in Bwera, in Gulu, now I understand he is in Kasese. He is very vigilant, I am sure. He is now in Soroti, I understand. Is he abandoning the sinking boat? I do not think that we should be made to abuse our majority here in Parliament, to always look on as things go on. Really, we need seriousness, Mr Chairman.

Mr Chairman, I would like to talk about the scholarship money. I appeal to the committee to reconsider this because the lives of the children are being cut off midway with no fault of theirs. If there is any other institutional problem, let us handle it institutionally. 

For these donation funds, I am happy that a trust fund is being prepared to cater for that. We could possibly handle that in due course. But for those children, we should not make them suffer as victims. It will be part of us; history will judge us harshly if we proceed. Possibly, the streamlining can come in due course, but for the sake of their future and for the sake of the future of this Parliament and the children from Teso, Acholi, Luwero and all those affected areas, I appeal humbly to fellow Members of Parliament to ensure that we allow this vote to pass. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

LT JIMMY KINOBE (Katikamu North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. First of all allow me to thank the committee for such a nice and interesting report. I am one of those who received the report yesterday as we adjourned. I read it overnight and I saw that the committee made many recommendations.  

I intend to debate this report but before I proceed to attract your attention to either support or oppose the recommendations, I also read through our Rules of Procedure, which apply when this House is in the Committee of Supply. I refer specifically to rule 119(10). It says; 

“When the House is in Committee of Supply to consider annual or supplementary estimates –
 
(a) upon the completion of consideration of a vote, the Chairperson shall put the question that the amount proposed be provided under the vote.”  

I believe we are in the process of almost doing that. After the general debate, we shall consider the vote. When you read further, rule 119(10)(c) says that:

“the Committee shall not attach a condition or an expression of opinion to any resolution approving a vote.” Having read that rule and the report, more specifically the last bit -(Mr Sulaiman Madada rose_) this is a procedural question and I want the Chairman’s guidance -(Interruption)

MR MADADA: I also want to add information to that procedural question. On the same point, when you go to (10)(e) it says; “the details only of the financial provisions proposed to be made by a vote shall be debated, and it is not in order to debate the policy implied by the vote.” That is the additional information. 

LT KINOBE: I thank the honourable member for the information. Mr Chairman, I read that rule alongside the proposal of the committee on page 43, where the chairperson in her motion said that Parliament should withhold budgetary estimates under Vote 002. 

We can also read that recommendation alongside the committee’s discussion in the report. First of all, go to page 20 of the report, the paragraph immediately below paragraph 3. It says; “The committee recommends that the scheme be transferred to the Ministry of Education after the matter has been adequately…” They say “after”, and I consider that a condition, even before we proceed on this matter.  

If you read further on Page 21, the recommendation immediately above, “when” is a condition – “When the list of the outstanding pledges is made available to the committee, we shall then…” I also consider that a condition being attached to that vote. 

When you go on to Page 41, the paragraph above the conclusion says, “Wages to the public officers seconded to the Movement Secretariat continue being provided under the Vote on Account until…” Note the word “until”; I also consider that a condition.  

Mr Chairman, you have just talked about debating in the interest of time, and it has been our practice to give limited time to members to debate during this stage. Considering that some of us may even continue wasting time to address a matter, which is inconsistent with our Rules of Procedure, I am seeking your guidance on the position of those recommendations vis-à-vis our Rules of Procedure. After your pronouncement, I beg you to give me an opportunity to make a substantive contribution. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I think the points are clear; they are expressed in our rules. I have also read in the report where the committee was sympathetic to public officers in the Secretariat, and its recommendation has been that they be paid from the Vote-on-Account. But it is clear that the moment we pass the budget, we pass the Appropriation Act, which we shall do in one or two days’ time. So, the question of Vote-on-Account does not arise. The recommendation for supporting them from the Vote-on-Account would be meaningless.  

It is true that when we pass these votes we do not attach conditions, and the budget cannot be passed in phases. Next time, maybe we shall be considering supplementary budgets rather than the budget itself. But this is a recommendation of the committee. You recommended this so you consider the report and then either accept the recommendations or not. It is up to you really -(Interjections). Yes, I have said so, but then these are recommendations, so you do not beg the committee not to do this or the other. 

The committee has finished its work and presented it. We referred these estimates to the committee and this is what they have been able to do. They have told you they were unable to deal with the policy of mass mobilization because the leaders were not there. Now it is a question of what we do in their absence, having not considered this. This is really up to you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Chairman and honourable members. The rules as pointed out by hon. Kinobe are very pertinent, and they are mandatory. To remedy the situation, we have reached a gentleman’s agreement with the committee. We shall take their concerns as pertinent, regarding the lists of the beneficiaries of the bursaries and the list of the donations. It is actually in our interest that the committee scrutinized them. So, we have agreed. 

Therefore, I was going to move a motion for an amendment of the report. We should agree, without attaching a condition that the figures are passed. But when it comes to releases, we will not effect releases until the committee has satisfied itself on the lists and on all matters they want to satisfy themselves with. We are also proposing to give you a time limit.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, once Parliament has passed the budget, it is up to you to put it in force, being supervised by the Auditor General.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Lastly, Mr Chairman, as you clearly pointed out, according to Article 154(4) of the Constitution, once we have passed the Appropriation Bill, the question of Vote-on-Account will not arise because the budget will have been passed. So, it is true that after the Appropriation Bill has been passed, you cannot talk of Vote-on-Account.  

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, in light of the procedural issues that the hon. Kinobe has raised, and in view of the fact that the debate is continuing and people may touch on things that run counter to the Rules of Procedure, I beg to move that those provisions in the report that set out conditions as outlined by hon. Kinobe be deleted. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, can you justify your motion?

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, if you go to page 41 of the committee’s report, the last paragraph says; “Wages to the public officers seconded to the Movement Secretariat continue being provided under the Vote-on-Account until the legal issues surrounding the Secretariat are resolved.” 

You have already advised us that this runs counter to the law and our rules, so this should be deleted. Even the conditions set out about the passing of money for scholarships being stayed until the report from State House is considered by the committee should be deleted, so that we continue with our debate without these encumbrances.

MR AWORI: Mr Chairman, two days back I raised a similar question but in a tacit format. I asked: “can one make an amendment to a committee report?” I asked you and you made a ruling.

THE CHAIRMAN: I said we could not amend a factual report of a committee. But when it comes to a recommendation, and you have been given the set of facts on which the recommendation is based, you are entitled to agree with the recommendation or reject it. Let us hear from the chairperson.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Chairman, I do understand the trouble the House may be having in dealing with the facts presented in this report, yet they are based on laws that we have passed in this House.  

I have also been educated on that part of the rules, because I am chairing the committee for the first time and I am happy to be informed. But I want to caution us not to take uncalculated risks in deleting this. Because as a committee, we can present to you facts on which we have based that position. The only choice we would have is to say, “do not pass that vote”. But we have been very kind in some of these proposals we have made, and the facts on which they are based are legal. 

I would be very cautious to change the tradition of this House and we move without being guided properly. I think it would be unfair to the committee to delete any portion of our report, because it is based on proper tools of analysis. I do not know what precedent we would be setting, but in my view it would be very serious and dangerous. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable chairperson, you recommended that the public members of staff in the Secretariat be funded from the Vote-on-Account. Do you think the Vote-on-Account will run parallel to the money in the Appropriation Act?

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Chairman, my expectation from this House is that you will make proposals to solve the problem, not to compound it.

DR OKULO EPAK: I seek further clarification, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Clarification from whom?

DR OKULO EPAK: From the Chair, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Chairman, there are other recommendations in the report, which can be considered in light of our Rules of Procedure. Where are we supposed to approve a vote against a situation where the law governing the establishment and operation of that organization is not there; how will the Auditor-General grant warrants for expenditure of an illegal body? This is a bit tricky.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, clarification has been sought from me about an illegal body. I think the report was not talking about an illegal body; the report was talking about the expired term of the officers and, therefore, there is no illegal body. Otherwise, if it was an illegal body and then it recognizes the public officers there, that would be a contradiction. I think the Attorney General can assist us in this.

DR OKULO EPAK: I was under the impression - and we were told - that the law to establish the Secretariat expired.

THE CHAIRMAN: No.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, CULTURE (Mr Sam Bitangaro): I wish to make a clarification. The law establishing the Secretariat is the 1997 Movement Act, and it is a creature of statute. So, it is still in place. What expired is the term of the office bearers. I hope I have made myself clear on some of them. Thank you.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, the issue raised by my friend, hon. Kinobe, is pertinent. However, I think we are jumping the gun. Rule 119(10)(c), which he read, deals with a situation when we are in the process of passing or approving that vote. We have not yet reached that stage, Sir. 

At the moment we are making comments on the report. But when we come to passing those areas of the report, which deal with that particular vote, it is important that we address our minds to this particular sub-rule. I thank you, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, that is correct, but you know this is a report recommending the passing of votes. Is it recommending that in a vacuum? And we are well aware that eventually I will read the figures here then the rule will catch me.  

MR WACHA: Sir, that is my reading. A recommendation cannot, as of now, be handled until we come to address our minds to that recommendation.

THE CHAIRMAN: Agreed, but we are in the Committee of Supply. We are dealing with supply. We sent these estimates to the committee to scrutinize and advise us, and now they are advising us. Will they now abandon the advice when it comes to passing the figures themselves? So, this observation was made in the spirit of guiding us when we are debating this report, that the kind of recommendations that were given are contrary to the Rules of Procedure.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, hon. Wandera moved a motion and I am wondering whether we are contributing to that motion, so that I am able to contribute and we dispose of it.

THE CHAIRMAN: I was moving to that when they started raising points of clarification, but the motion is still on.

MRS HYUHA: So, can I be given an opportunity to contribute, Mr Chairman? (Laughter).

MRS ZZIWA: I am seeking clarification, Mr Chairman. I am a member of the committee and I appreciate the situation in which we have plunged the House into. I want to find out, in view of the fact that the term of the Movement Directors has expired but their positions still exist, could the House now move in such a way that we approve the monies for the positions of the directors? Then at an appropriate time, the relevant authority will be able to appoint the Directors who will benefit from the monies. I want some clarification.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the estimates are for institutions. You can allocate money when the position of a minister is vacant. The question of legality is about who receives this money. The Auditor-General will question the authority receiving the money.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to seek clarification. I am a member of the committee and according to rule 154, political officers are supposed to appear before sessional committees and we are supposed to examine their policy statements. 

In line with that, because of legalities, these people were not able to appear before the committee. Therefore, I want clarification: is it okay for us to proceed at this stage when they did not appear before the committee?

THE CHAIRMAN: There have been situations when the House has gone on to proceed and approve a budget because the committee has not finished their report. So, it is not a question of the political leaders not appearing. A report has been given expressing the inability to comment on that vote because of the absence of political leaders, so what do we do?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, from a layman’s approach, and I represent the ordinary people, if you read the Constitution, Article 154(2) attempts to throw light on how you should spend public monies, and where you have doubts the Constitution should prevail. 

We are quoting provisions of the Rules of Procedure, but the committee has openly expressed a point of concern related to the public funds and Article 154(2) attempts to give you direction. It says: 

“No moneys shall be withdrawn from any public fund of Uganda other than the Consolidated Fund, unless the issue of those moneys has been authorised by law.” 

It is that law that has expired, so how do you proceed?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, those who want to contribute to the motion moved by hon. Wandera, go ahead and contribute.

MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo):  Mr Chairman, I stand to support the motion by hon. Wandera. (Applause). When I looked at the observations of the committee on page 20, in No. 2 they are telling us that under the State House scholarships, we already have 1,498 students benefiting from the scheme. Out of those students, 250 of are in the university, 93 are registered for diplomas, 110 are in senior six vacation, 793 are in secondary and then 272 are in primary schools. 

When I looked at their recommendation on page 43, Mr Chairman, I got disturbed. Well knowing that these students are already in school, they go ahead and recommend that we withhold the budgetary estimates of Shs 1.9714 billion for scholarships.  

It may be right that they wanted the list, which was not given, but some time back in 1998, the Committee on Social Services requested lists from the Minister of Education, hon. Apolo Nsibambi then, who managed to give us the list of these scholarships. We scrutinized them, and our concern then was that the beneficiaries were not spread countrywide. We recommended that the President address this.  

To the best of my understanding, it is like many of us who are politicians and we receive our emoluments here; I am free to sponsor anybody in my constituency and nobody can challenge that. Mr Chairman, basing on that and on our Rules of Procedure, I cannot support this condition. I would suggest that we delete it and we debate freely. 

Given this –(Interruption)- I have been given limited time, maybe you will have your time. Yes, I am entitled to accept information or not. Mr Chairman, you have wisely advised us on how to proceed. After we have passed these votes, I do not think we shall have a Vote-on-Account. Therefore, –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: I thought the funds being talked about in this report are public funds. The funds talked about are not President Museveni’s. It is the money drawn from the Consolidated Fund. Therefore, when she compares this with her money, which she uses to sponsor students, surely that is irrelevant. So, I am clarifying that this money is not personal money but public funds, and therefore, Parliament has a right to scrutinize it and decide where to put it.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, as Members of Parliament we also benefit from public funds, but certainly this money goes to the Presidency. My major concern is that these students are already in school, and therefore, when we set a condition of withholding it becomes very unfortunate. 

I am concerned; matters concerning education touch my heart. I have always been very objective in this Parliament, a “no” is a “no” and a “yes” is a “yes”. Mr Chairman, I strongly oppose this condition and I stand to support the motion by hon. Wandera. I beg to support.

MRS WINFRED MASIKO (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I find the report of this committee quite ridiculous! I would like them to have looked at the reports of the Committee on Social Services, and also the Committee on Legal –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, the honourable member holding the Floor says she finds the report ridiculous. I am a member of the committee and I think we have done a great job, irrespective of some small issues that you can disagree with. Now, can I know whether it is in order for the honourable member to say the whole report is ridiculous, when she probably disagrees with only a few issues in the report? Is she in order? - (Interjection)- Is it even Parliamentary? That is what the chairman of the Movement Caucus is asking. Is it Parliamentary?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, my assessment was that it was a good report. I said the contents were good and the presentation was good. That was my assessment and I still stand by that, but I cannot make an assessment for any other person. (Laughter).

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for that wise ruling. If only I was given time to quantify why I thought that it was ridiculous! It would be a good report, but certainly some provisions are ridiculous. For example, for a committee to recommend that even after the budget, we can use the Vote-on-Account to pay public officers, I find that very ridiculous! 

Allow me to also –(Interruption)

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Chairman, I do not think I want to commit the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs to that judgment. In our view, this matter can be thought out within a day, when the Vote-on-Account is still continuing to operate. So, we used our words selectively, in the understanding that the problem is not too big and it can be solved. Unless we are being informed that the problem is too big, it cannot be solved within a short time. 

Our proposal is to the effect of managing time. Is it possible that after we have debated this, we can solve the problem quickly and we come back with some implementation? That does not make the proposal ridiculous, in my view. Thank you.

MRS MASIKO: Mr Chairman, you will allow me to express –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, instead of making controversial statements or assessments, let us debate the motion.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The reason I support hon. Wandera’s motion is that the committee itself, on page 20, recognized that the presidential pledges have been debated from time to time, it is an outstanding issue and it is in arrears.  

If the committee recognized this and it is aware that all of us have been in this House complaining about this issue and it is a big problem, I find it very difficult to convince myself that they found it right to recommend that this money is not given to this very ministry. They know very well that this is a problem that has been brought up many times on this Floor.  

I can give an example of these pledges. The President at one time pledged a vehicle to the diocese in my district. That was about seven years ago, but up to now they have not got enough money to purchase it. It is a very difficult problem for most of us who are being asked, “why is this pledge not being honoured?”  Therefore, when the committee does not give money to this effect, I find it difficult.

Mr Chairman, the suggestions they have made should be deleted because even when you look at some of the recommendations on page 20, they just said the President should be provided with a “slash fund”. This is an interesting idea. I was a bit hesitant to say that this report is in line with other reports because with other reports, they would recommend something and go ahead and make sure it is budgeted for or catered for. But this committee will suggest something and it does not show anywhere in their budget - it is not provided for anywhere. I find that some of the things they recommended would have been ideal, but they are not followed up, and therefore I find their report lacking.

You realize that the committee has also gone ahead to talk about scholarships. This issue has been well put by the chairperson of the Social Services Committee. I think the committee did not have the population at heart. They did not consider how defective their recommendation would be if we accepted it. The poor children, the poor orphans, people who are needy, need to be helped. 

Unlike other committees, which were struggling very hard to cater for the different ministries and departments under them, this committee actually - I do not know whether it intended it - is freezing the ministries and departments under it. That is why I find it very difficult. 

I want to see the committee struggle to get more money for their departments because the work their departments have is pertinent, and the departments are huge. Therefore, I find it very deviant from some of the issues and outlook of other committees. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I strongly support hon. Wandera’s motion. In any case, we have seen that legally, they did not consider the mistake they had made when they were drawing up these recommendations. Now that they have seen them and have been helped by the House to realize them, I think they should drop them immediately and we go ahead and approve the budget and move our country forward. I thank you. 

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this motion. I rise to support hon. Wandera’s motion for four reasons:  

One, to maintain the conditions that have been attached to votes in this report, as already pointed out by hon. Kinobe, would offend our Rules of Procedure, more specifically rule 119(10)(c), whose provisions are very clear. I do not think it is proper for this Parliament to offend the Rules of Procedure it has set itself for.  

Secondly, the committee in providing facts in its report inadvertently omitted one fact. On page 41, the committee is saying that the budget of the Department of Mass Mobilization should be withheld pending the legal issues surrounding the department. I have information, which is documented, that when this matter came up in the committee the opinion of the Attorney General and the Solicitor General were sought and these opinions were copied to the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. With your permission, let me just read one paragraph of this opinion -(Interruption)- yes, I can read the whole of it if you want;

“The Movement Secretariat is a permanent organ of the Movement, which runs the day to day activities of the Movement whenever the Movement Political System is in force. Legally, the state must provide funding for its activities.  

Parliament is, therefore, obliged to consider and approve the Movement Secretariat policy statement in general, and its budget in particular. The Constitution and legal existence of the organs under the Movement are permanent. Permanent status should not be confused with a term of office of the leaders of the said organs. 

The Movement Act, which in my view is a legal and Constitutional Act, stipulates a five-year term of office. As you are aware, the five-year term of office of the leaders of the Movement organs expired on 11 July 2003. The same will retrospectively be extended when the Movement Bill is enacted.” 

From the above opinion, the legal issues surrounding the budget of the department of Mass Mobilization have been resolved and therefore they should not bog the debate on the budget.

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the honourable minister who was holding the Floor for giving me way. I think the controversy about the legal matters surrounding the existence of the NRM Secretariat emerges out of the PPO and constitutional case No.5, which gave its ruling on the 31st of March. 

When you look at the entire judgment, one of the issues was that for the last number of years the Movement has not been running this country as a system, but it has been running this country as an organ. It, therefore, makes us morally not sound at this point in time to arm one organ at the expense of others. I think that is why the committee thought it fit that the position, which has been given by the Constitutional Court, be adhered to unless there is something said that is different. I would like some clarification on that.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of procedure. The issue in question is before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. I can hear the House already debating it before the committee has presented its report. I think that procedurally this is not correct.  

Secondly, as far as the committee is concerned there are two issues, which it had to consider. The first one was whether we could extend the term of office for the office bearers. 

The second one was a proposal to defer the elections. Substantively, the Attorney General’s opinion holds and, therefore, we should not deliberate on this. I propose that this House should consider this vote, subject to a decision. I thank you.

MRS MUSUMBA:  Mr Chairman, I want to thank the hon. Adolf Mwesige for that information. It is not new and we are not denying that we got that information, but we are guided by the law in our hands. I want to read for you the terms of Movement organs, section 36(2);

“On expiry of the five years prescribed in subsection (1), the office of Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and National Political Commissar and that of the secretary of each of the other organs under the Movement, shall become vacant - (Interruption)- yes, that is why I am reading it. This is what I am reading.  

MR MADADA: Mr Chairman, I would like to know whether the chairperson is in order to lead us to another debate on whether the Movement is in existence or not, when we are discussing the budget. Is she in order to derail us from the Committee of Supply, by introducing a new motion on the Floor?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the chairperson is trying to assist us to understand the problem and then resolve it. The question of vacancy has nothing to do with appropriating money. If the office is vacant, therefore, the person will not get the money. Although the money will be there, the Auditor General will have to be satisfied that the person who is receiving the money is entitled to that money. That is a different question.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Chairman, please allow me to make this point. When an office falls vacant, whom do you deal with, as a committee? Under our rules we were supposed to deal with the political leadership, which did not exist. It would have been in the interest of the Government to appoint somebody to defend that budget, which the Government did not do. So, we could never have invited anybody in the names of National Political Commissar (NPC), to present the policy statement whose office had fallen vacant. Thank you.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I am not going to labour to answer the chairperson of the committee because you have ruled on the matter. I am happy the Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee also agrees with the opinion of the Attorney General. That should really settle the matter.  

On the question of the offices of Resident District Commissioners (RDCs), first of all, the President has prerogative powers to appoint Deputy and Assistant RDCs. The holders of these offices in my opinion hold contracts, which are valid. To attach a condition that “before this budget is approved the Deputy and Assistant RDCs should be retired”, in my opinion this is unfair because these people have terms of employment and the contract is between them and the appointing authority. 

Their contracts have got legal implications, which in my opinion this Parliament would not be able to own because it is not privy to the appointment. I think the committee can make its recommendation for review, maybe by the Government. However, to say that these people should be retired as a condition, in my opinion it is wrong. The contracts and terms of service are between them and the appointing authority.

There is a proposal to transfer the office of AGOA and scholarships to other government departments. I would like to refer to Article 99(4) of the Constitution. In that Article the President is empowered to exercise his functions, either directly or by delegating those functions to ministers or officers subordinate to him. All ministries and government departments, in my opinion, are really offshoots of the Presidency.  They derive their mandate from the President. 

The President, therefore, has the prerogative to assign some of his functions; he has the prerogative to withdraw some of the functions, and he also has the prerogative to recall the mandate of a ministry. The President can decide, even tomorrow, to become not only the President of Uganda, but also the Minister of Education. I do not think anybody would legally question that. He could also decide to become the Minister of Education or the Minister of Trade, because all these functions are derived from his mandate. 

Therefore, for us to say that AGOA should be transferred to the Ministry of Trade and scholarship should go to the Ministry of Education is in my opinion really improper. We cannot question the mandate of the President to perform functions, which he thinks should not be conferred on a department and the Minister whom he has appointed himself. 

With those contributions, Mr Chairman, I beg to support the motion of hon. Martin Wandera that conditions in this report, which have the effect of offending our rules, should be expunged. I thank you.

ENG. ONEK: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to support the motion for one reason. These children who are being financed are innocent children who found themselves in a position where we, politicians, now would like to really use them.  Where do we put them?  I would strongly like to support the motion that the scholarships continue.  

First of all, if we are to begin questioning how the choices were made, we could as well demand the list of those employed in Uganda Revenue Authority and the list of those in the Cabinet and then begin to rationalise all the choices in these positions, or whoever is where. In my view we should allow these scholarship to continue. However, I will support the committee’s recommendation for the purpose of regulating those funds that the Ministry of Education takes charge of these scholarships.  

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. Hilary Onek, for giving way. Mr Chairman, much as I sympathize with the plea that has been made to us, I would like to seek some clarification. In this country colossal sums of money have been sent to the Ministry of Education under UPE. There are even large sums of money supporting scholarships in primary schools. What kind of children are those when there is free education under UPE? Could we get some clarification on that, because they are many? 

I appreciate the scholarships for those who are in universities but for those in primary schools, whose children are these that cannot go to UPE schools?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, let us see how we proceed.

ENG. ONEK: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank hon. Wadri for the clarification. That is where the question of managing these funds comes in. The Ministry of Education will probably place those in primary schools, where it will be more efficient to get that education other than managing it through the President’s office.

I would also like to support the motion to do with the Movement Secretariat. That is an institution, which is there, and the legal aspect is not in question now. I would like to support that the budget be approved and the issue of who is in the office will come later. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): I rise to oppose the motion by hon. Martin Wandera. I want to show you other conditions the committee has given in this report, which you might need for the proper functioning of the Government. 

On page 14, committee recommendation No.2, which is a condition that government must make sufficient investment in strategic functions for timely decision-making, is shortsighted. For Parliament to say that such conditions are not binding and yet the committee is wishing the country well is not proper.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the conditions that they are proposing are affecting the passing of the vote. It is not general improvement but those are conditions that are attached to the vote.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I was just developing my argument. I wanted many other conditions but with your guidance and indulgence, I would go to this particular recommendation of holding the money or the wages for the Movement Secretariat. I do not understand how you put furniture in a house that has been condemned! How long would Members of Parliament take to pass money for a particular institution whose credibility is at stake? It is still the same Parliament to put in place those particular organs. 

Mr Chairman, the wisest idea –(Interruption) 

MRS VICTORIA SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to misguide the House that the Movement Secretariat is not in operation? We know that the Movement System of governance is here up to 2006.  

THE CHAIRMAN: The honourable member is just disagreeing with the opinion of the Attorney General, which is his right.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The point I wanted us to get is that the opinion of the Attorney General should not surprise anyone, because that is his constitutional role. So, for one to come to this House and narrate the Attorney General’s position as the dogmatic truth or part of the Constitution is indeed very challenging. The challenge is for this Parliament to extend the terms of office for people in the Secretariat and give them money. Why are we putting the cart in front of the horse? 

I, therefore, recommend that if there is any urgency or political emotions and sentiments, then we should start thinking of the retirement package of those in the Secretariat because this Parliament may not extend their terms of operation. The only problem with this report is that a lot of information has not been quoted. Thank you so much.

MS KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that question be put on the motion by hon. Martin Wandera.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question on hon. Wandera’s motion to delete any conditions attached to the votes of the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KIBAALE WAMBI (Budadiri East, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Now that a question has been put, I would like to contribute to the committee’s report. I will be very brief. My concern has been drawn to page 27 of the committee’s report. 

One of the issues is about the disaster preparedness division in the Prime Minister’s office. This is supposed to put in place a minimum early warning system of impending disaster, as a means of mitigating and/or responding to disaster. 

Mr Chairman, about settling displaced people as result of disaster, my concern has been that in the last week or so, disasters occurred in the areas of Mt Elgon and we have lost over ten people. To date the Ministry in charge has not taken any appropriate means to that effect. I am wondering which displaced people they are talking about? Are they talking about people displaced by earthquakes in Kasese, people displaced in the Northern part of our country, or those people displaced by the Karimojong? If we talk of all kinds of disaster, I believe this should include the people of Sironko and Mt. Elgon. 

This ministry is supposed to put in place early warning systems and disaster preparedness. It is unfortunate that sometime back the Ministry concerned made announcements for people living in mountains to come down. We told our people and they came down. We waited and there was no disaster. This time when there was disaster the Ministry never gave any early warning systems and we have lost people. I do not know what type of early warning systems these people have in place.

Lastly, the disaster preparedness component is supposed to build local capacity. I am wondering if this has happened because if it had then the disasters that have hit the Mt. Elgon area could probably not have taken place. 

Mr Chairman the NUSAF project includes Sironko District. I would like to know from the Minister concerned or from the Leader of Government Business what has happened to Sironko people. They have not been sensitised and from the report they say Sironko people are included. We have heard announcements that some places are busy receiving allocations of goodies and monies for executing this project.  

The last part, which is very serious to my people, is the Kasese Task Force. May I know from whoever is concerned with this: how will the people of Bugisu and the people of Kigezi also get access to such a task force so that they may know the procedures and arrangements for them to access some land, which is being given out, because they are also landless? Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, do you not really think – it is now 20 minutes to 2.00 p.m. Let me have two people from this side: the hon. Member for Arua District and hon. Odur, and then I will get just two from the other side.

MRS ANIM ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): I thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for letting me contribute to this report. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the well-analysed presentation and job. I would like to raise some comments about page 42. 

On page 42, under the office of the Prime Minister, when you critically go through it you find that the office of the Minister of Northern Uganda Reconstruction is totally not allocated for. I would like to know whether the funds in this office will be allocated out after the passing of the budget or is that an oversight? 

Mr Chairman, on that note I would like to talk about NUSAF though the budget was not allocated. I want to find out what they did with the funds, which were allocated in the previous years. Given that in this financial year there is no budgetary allocation for that sector, what is going to happen? As my colleague from Sironko mentioned, NUSAF funds have not been clearly seen on the ground. I would like to confess here that even in the districts, which are already labeled, those activities are not clearly labeled. 

We want the Minister to clearly tell us what happened. After the passing of the budget, what has been taking place and what will happen next? I will request the House to let the Minister or the Ministry of Finance clearly tell us what is allocated in this sector. That way we shall also approve the funds, together with the rest of the budgetary allocations in this sector.

I would like to make a comment on the refugee policy. We are passing budgets year in and year out in this sector of disaster preparedness and refugees, and we have not seen any mark or move to put a refugee policy in place to secure the people of Northern Uganda. I come from a district, which is totally stricken by refugee activities. As I am talking now, refugees are floating in our district with uncontrolled guns and therefore there is rampant killing in these towns. We cannot trace the history of insecurity in these districts –(Interruption)

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Mr Chairman, hon. Anim Angupale is saying there are people trotting around the district where she comes from, with guns? Sometime back we read in the papers that SPLA was in abundance around that area. Are these the people; who are these?

MRS ANGUPALE: I thank you very much, my colleague, for raising that. That is why I am stating that we need a refugee policy in place so that we can identify whether these are aliens or they are refugees. They should either go to the camps or be identified as the SPLA so that there is clear demarcation among the people entering the country – (Interruption)

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): Thank you, Sir. I want to thank the speaker for giving me the Floor. I want to make a clarification. What she is talking about should not be linked to refugees because all refugees in the country do not have guns. All these years they have been in the country, they do not have even a single bullet. I think she is confusing these refugees with some other people, whom I do not know at all. Therefore, the House should be informed now officially and authoritatively that the refugees in the country are not carrying guns.

Secondly, the refugee policy is there, Cabinet has already passed a Refugee Bill. Very soon we are bringing it here in the House for you to make it a law. So, we need a bit of patience. If there is any other matter on the refugees, which my sister is not aware of, then we can meet in my office. Thank you.

MRS ANGUPALE: I thank you very much, honourable minister. With due respect, I do not want to preempt this before the House. I felt it would be very important when we discussed it with you in the office. However, I would like to inform you that currently on the border between Koboko and Sudan, whenever the Dinkas are crossing into Sudan, they are given guns to protect themselves, which guns they are supposed to remit at the borders when they are entering Uganda again. 

But tell me if there is a businessman, with personal interests, who can cross from anywhere, not via Koboko, to Uganda. What could happen before that? Let us be serious on issues, which can lead to insecurity in this country. This is a very serious issue. We need to address it because Ugandans who enter to Kaya, they send these guns from the SPLA soldiers so that they protect themselves. But it is not controlled. They end up coming with them across the borderlines and they loot people and kill the civilians of Uganda.  Honourable minister, you take note of that. I am properly informed because I come from that area in which the refugees move with guns. (Lt Gen. Moses Ali rose_)

Mr Chairman, my time is limited –(Interruption)

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: Mr Chairman, I want to appeal to my sister hon. Angupale that these people who cross from Sudan into Uganda, through Kaya, are not refugees but commuters. I do not even know their names; and I do not know how they are dressed. If they pass into Uganda with guns, that is not my responsibility. We have the Police, we have the UPDF at the border, these are not refugees, please! 

Refugees are those in the camps who are vetted. You must be vetted before you become a refugee. These are not refuges, these are just people coming in and out. I am equally concerned about the security of this country anyway. That is why I am now here.

MRS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, honourable minister. That is why I am saying we need a refugee policy in place so that I can differentiate between a refugee, an alien or a commuter. Honourable minister, even you will realise that in Masindi the RDC’s vehicle was hit by the refugees. That is a clear example. I think that is a serious case and I do not need to add more.  

Mr Chairman, I am left with only one comment to put forward. It is on the Uganda Aids Commission. When you look at the budgetary allocation, the development estimate is over Shs 22 billion, and the statutory is Shs 1.2 billion. I would like to thank the committee for allocating that. However, I did not like the chairperson’s recommendation that the Commission on Aids should remain under the presidential budget while the AGOA should go to the Ministry concerned. I would like to say that this statement is very controversial.  

The Ministry of Health directly controls HIV/AIDS activities. The people who implement anti HIV activities are the doctors. When the sector on health moves out, we go into these hospitals to see AIDS victims and the people who are answerable to the Social Service Committee are the doctors. Right now you hear that there are funds, which are allocated by this government for AIDS victims. It is monitored by the doctors, because it is under the Ministry of Health. Does it give us proper justification when it is under that sector and yet implementers are in a different sector?  Under what scenario did that one occur? Which rationale did you people use to transfer the other AGOA thing and leave the AIDS Commission under that sector while implementation is in another sector? I thank you.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Chairman, and thank you hon. Angupale for letting me give this piece of information regarding AIDS. AIDS is a universal catastrophe. When we in Uganda started fighting it, it was like we had started a world war. That was the magnitude of the problem. It was cross cutting. It is economic; it regards health, it is social and it is everything you can think of. 

I am glad I was a Member of the Cabinet, which decided that the AIDS Commission be in the President’s office. And President Museveni was a passionate believer in the determination to fight AIDS. He offered himself to this country and to the rest of the world to fight AIDS - I will not say single-handedly, Mr Chairman. Therefore, at that time it was absolutely logical for the AIDS Commission to be in the President’s office so that it receives that high profile and clout that it needed both internally and internationally. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I would like my sister to appreciate the fact that the AIDS Commission was in the President’s office for good and valid reasons that still obtain today. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we had two more people from either side, and now it is coming to 2.00 p.m. This issue is related to what was said earlier when we were dealing with the question of scholarships and what not. A provision of the Constitution was quoted, which gives powers to the President to design where certain things are run. This is connected with the same provision. It is the President to decide where to put this or the other. So, if he has decided, he is within the constitutional powers. Although we can advise, in this particular case, the committee has studied this matter and has recommended that it is better the Commission stays where it is.

MRS ANGUPALE: Mr Chairman, I thank you very much but I was raising this issue so that I get proper clarification or justification for its location in that sector. 

Mr Chairman, AIDS attacks the living body and the people who treat it stay in a different sector. As I am talking now, this CHILD project, which is in the districts, the people who manage it are doctors and the money is being swindled anyway - (Interruption)- I do not entertain chorus questions. If you want, you get the Floor and talk before the House. Why do we encourage chorus talks as if we are in the classroom? I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR ANAG-ODUR LAKANA (Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me an opportunity to debate this report. I wish to thank the committee for the report that is well written, as the Chair itself has recognised. 

I would like to start with page 21, the Presidential Guard Brigade. In my opinion, this could easily be one of most important topics to be discussed in this report because the unity of the army and the general understanding of the armed forces, constitute one of the most important conditions for peace and tranquility to a nation. 

It has been observed that the Presidential Guard Brigade has become very big. It is approaching almost a division in strength. This is a worrying trend because creating a personal army creates anxiety and uncertainty in certain quotas of the armed forces. I think this must be avoided. 

Then, I strongly support the recommendation of the committee on this subject. As a word of advice, personalising a section of the army can guarantee a personal agenda. Many examples of Mobutu and others can testify to this unnecessary situation. 

Secondly, on this matter, if it is the way it appears, we are creating a guard, which is separate and different from the UPDF. It will appear that the Commander-in-Chief himself has no confidence in the army, which he leads. It does not give a serious implication because others will be equally not trustworthy.

The issue of the State House scholarships has been debated on this Floor many times over. I only wish to agree with the committee and I think it is important for us to have clear criteria for selecting the beneficiaries and the –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Chairman and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I stand to give information about the Presidential Guard Brigade. I had heard hon. Sabiiti make reference to this but I did not intervene then because I did not think it was necessary. But the honourable member is making the point that the brigade is a personal army and so on and so forth.  

Allow me to clarify that the Presidential Guard Brigade is not a personal army. Obviously, I have absolutely no idea why anyone would come to that conclusion. The brigade is a specialised unit. We have many other specialised units like the marines; even the air force was like that before we created a fully-fledged air force. We have the artillery and the air defense. We have created, under the UPDF, specialised units to do special duties and the Presidential Guard Brigade only happens to be a specialised unit whose duty is to protect the President of the country. There is nothing personal about it; it is created for the protection of the President of the Republic of Uganda.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to thank the Minister for giving way. A few days ago the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs was in Soroti - and the visit was widely publicised in the media. The President himself said the Presidential Guard Brigade is his own army. Are you trying to refute what was written in the press or aired in the electronic media? That is the clarification I want from you.

MRS ZZIWA: I am a Member of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs and I was in Soroti along with my colleagues. I want to say that what was quoted in the press is not true. The President never said that the Presidential Guard Brigade is his army. It was never stated in that meeting. The Ministers are available; they could be cross-examined for purposes of accuracy.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Chairman, I wish to be tempted to believe that what the Minister of Defence is saying is correct. Because as a nation, we would abhor the day we come to that unfortunate situation, because the consequences could be serious for the nation.

I was on the issue of the State House scholarships, and I was saying it is important for us to establish clear criteria for the selection of the beneficiaries. The management must be transparent, the names must be public and everybody who is interested should be able to know who these beneficiaries are. Because as it has been debated here, these are beneficiaries of public funds and it is important for us to know who they are. I also wish to agree with the committee that in fact these funds should be transferred to the Ministry of Education and Sports, which will host it very effectively.

Mr Chairman, the question of the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). We have been told that the President would wish to reduce the number of public officers, especially those who are not really necessary. There are too many RDCs and I was surprised when the Minister of State in the Vice-President’s office suggested that these people should not be relieved of their duties. I think the recommendation is that they should be deployed. I was surprised because some of these people, it has been stated, are not even qualified. Why should we keep people who are not qualified in certain jobs? 

The main point is, it is better for us to have lean organisations, which can deliver, other than just having people for political convenience.

Lastly, we are going to approve the Bill on the Movement Secretariat. I am sure we are going to do that. But I want to appeal to this nation that let us be mature, let us be nationalistic, let us be visionary because it is not going to pay Ugandans any dividends to do things for convenience. To me the most important thing, which this government should have done, should have been to speed up the opening up of political space so that every political organisation, which qualifies and registers, would benefit from these funds. But just to give funds to a secretariat to work for the NRM organisation is not fair. It is not nationalistic, it is not statesmanship, it is selfishness, which I think should be condemned; and we should correct this situation immediately. Mr Chairman, thank you so much.

MS NAMUSOKE KIYINGI (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wish to thank the committee for the good report. I go straight to page 4, where the committee talks about Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) and recommends that they be reduced. I have no problem with the reduction but only if that reduction is going to lead to efficiency. The problem I see is that government is the biggest saboteur of RDCs’ performance and this is because RDCs are not facilitated. 

They are sent to the districts and they are put in an office with hardly any tools to work with, and no capacity for them to move about. These RDCs are then dependant on the local government councils, which councils they are supposed to be monitoring to see whether they are fulfilling the Government programmes on the ground. Surely, how can they perform? So, government itself should see the importance of these RDCs beyond mere electioneering. 

When elections come they become so active. They are told who to support and who not to support, and then after the elections, they are part of the whole system of – especially if the leaders that are elected are the ones that they were told not to support. Then the whole process grinds to a halt. These people will not be able to do the work of monitoring.  

I was watching television just a few days ago, there is an assistant RDC, Mpimbaza Hashaka, he is moving around his area putting the local government to task and requiring them to be accountable. But I am sure he is doing that out of his own effort and because he is working in a small area where he can even move on foot. But those upcountry RDCs cannot do anything because they are not facilitated. I agree the number is big, but even if it is reduced, if they are not facilitated they will not be able to perform.  

Mr Chairman, I want to go to the next point, about our advisors. I am glad the committee notes, in point No. 7 on page 4, that they tender advice to the Presidency on a day to day basis. I am glad if they do that. Because sometime back, we heard complaints from some of these advisors that they take as long as a year without meeting the President, let alone advising him. So, if this has changed, I am glad to hear that. 

Lastly, Mr Chairman, I go to page 17 where there is talk of funding the First Lady’s office. Recently in the papers there was a news item to the effect that government was to renovate or to buy an office for Janet Museveni. That is what they said, and I waited for the Government to come out and clarify that this was not an office for Janet Museveni as a person but for the First Lady. 

Since that clarification did not come - at least I am not aware that it came - now I am left to speculate like any other Ugandan. If this is a government office, let it be clear that this is a government office. And come the year 2006, when the current President’s mandate expires, the office will go either to the next First Lady or to government. Let government clarify, so that people stop speculating that government is buying an office for an individual.  

I think government needs to come out clearly; is it a government office or is it for an individual, Madam Janet Museveni, as the press put it? Please clarify so that Ugandans know. This is not a lot of money, but of course if somebody looks at it as money going to an individual, then the story is different. I wish to ask government to clarify.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS VICTORIA SSEBAGEREKA (Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me a chance to contribute to this very important committee report. I would like to take you to the beginning of page 7, point No. 4, which says; “Political intelligence is poorly managed by incompetent personnel.” 

I think this is a very strong observation. These people are dealing with classified information. It is because of their hard work that Uganda is enjoying the peace we are enjoying. I feel the committee should at least give fair criticism to this organ.

Two, I want to talk about the Directorate of Information and about the too many FM radio stations. I would like to say that for us who live in the rural areas, we find it very difficult to keep up with the FM stations that are mushrooming everyday. I wish there could be broadcasting that is of a national character, where people could take their ebirango, mobilization announcements and all. I would like to request that the Uganda community public address system be also allowed to operate in rural areas, because these are tools that the poor can use to make their own announcements in their own villages and areas.  

I want to conclude by saying that looking at this report, I feel that the President as a mobilizer of most of the funds that come to this country is a fountain of honour. The committee has not been very kind. They want to pluck all the powers of the Presidency and base them in other ministries. I feel the President has a presidential prerogative to have some money for him to operate. 

If my Chairman of LC V can have a budget for bursaries and scholarships, if the Buganda Government can have bursaries and scholarships, why not a President who was elected by the people of Uganda? Why can he not exercise that presidential prerogative? I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS AKWERO ODWONG (Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for your consideration. I want to first of all seek some clarification from the chairperson of the committee. In her own words, she said that the Presidency currently exercises a lot of power and there is need to step down. I just want her to give some clarification on this statement. 

Then secondly, I wish to take this opportunity to thank the Department of Disaster Preparedness. I know there are financial constraints, because we know that the numbers of the internally displaced persons are on the increase. Maybe let this House know that currently in Kitgum, there are over 273,753 internally displaced persons, and that is over 85 percent of people living in Kitgum. They are currently in camps. 

I should straight away say that in Lamwo County, in a sub-county called Agolo, there are 3,087 displaced people. In Lukumu, there are 18,434 people displaced. In Ogiri sub-county there are 8,824 displaced people. In Padibe east there are 13,778 displaced people. In Padibe west there are 12,230 people displaced. In Parabe Game there are 11,564 people displaced. In Parabe Karo there are 12,600 people displaced. In Paroga sub-county there are 16,000. In Madope there are 9,000 people who are displaced. 

In Chwa County in Kitgum town there are 44,000 people who are displaced. In Mucween sub-county 14,600 people are displaced. In Akwanga –(Interjections)- Members, I beg your indulgence, I just want to let you know. In Akwang sub-county, 11,270 people are displaced. In Rwagoro sub-county, 13,061 people are displaced. In Kitgum Matidi, there are 12,000. In Omiya Nyima there are 17,000 displaced people. In Labowa Mida, 10,000 people are displaced. Labowa Layamor 8,9000. In Namukola, 14,000 people are displaced and in Olom sub-county, 22,000.

Mr Chairman, I must apologize for taking two minutes, but I thought it is imperative that this Parliament gets to know the number of people that are affected. So, when we talk, it will be on the basis of these facts. I got these facts from Kitgum District Disaster Management Committee.  

Last but not least, I would have expected the committee, in its recommendation on the Department of Disaster Preparedness, to come up with a recommendation that government provides more funding in the wake of the escalating numbers of internally displaced persons. Otherwise, thank you very much, honourable members, for all your support.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much honourable members. I will call on the Prime Minister to respond to matters affecting his ministry. Let me start with the Minister for the Presidency, and then the Prime Minister. I did not hear any query for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, but I will give you two minutes.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Maj. Tom Butime): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Two minutes is quite a lot to thank the committee for a brilliant report, and of course, thank the hon. Wandera for that amendment.  

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs thanks the committee for this very good report as far as Foreign Affairs is concerned. I want to remind the House that on page 39, you will find the contributions by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. As far as grants, soliciting investments, tourism and trade and industry are concerned, we contribute about US $2.7 billion per year. That is plenty of money for this country, and the Ministry of Finance should begin to take us seriously.

I am extremely pleased that the committee found that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has the best E-governance in the country. That is wonderful. It is a very beautiful observation. I would like to thank the members of the committee for finding nothing to query in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Everything is above board, and I thank you.

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the committee for having spent quite a lot of time examining the head of the institution of government in Uganda. The way they have been able to dissect it and put on table all the issues, assures the country that this fish, Uganda, is actually taken and anybody should try and buy it.

I have also to thank the members for the support you have given us in the debate. As I do not have many things to answer to, I just want to clarify a few issues so that the members can rest assured that actually the intentions of the head of government and the Presidency, are all good for this country. You can see from his own lifestyle that he is not a “lifyist”. He does not spend money going to the Riviera, but he spends where there is a problem in order to solve the problem.  

While I do not want to contradict my colleague, but the President is the first diplomat and foreign relations man of the country. So, whatever we have achieved - the increase in our budget, which was Shs 44 million in 1986 and has now risen to over Shs 2.7 billion - is a landmark of the efforts of our President.

And the conditions in which he is executing his work are not even ideal. I have been very encouraged by ensuring that this hard work, which is mainly to try and clear the institution of the Presidency so that those aspiring to take over definitely, will find it different. They will not be faced with the problems that bothered the pioneers.

All the issues, which I wanted to clarify, have been clarified. But I want to make the people understand the issue of RDCs. One, the RDCs are well equipped in terms of qualifications. Out of the RDCs I have, four have got master’s degrees, 46 are graduates and the balance are diploma holders. They do not only have those paper qualifications, but they also have the art of actually mobilizing the people, which not everybody has. 

The RDCs are the people whom we have been able to send in very difficult positions. We have lost some of them, like my protégé, Ocaya. He was one of our best RDCs and he died in action. He was shot while he was moving to Gulu. Please, these people are really sacrificing.  

The hon. Kiyingi has actually confessed that government does not provide anything to these people. Despite that, they are the fellows who represent the political centre in the population. I appear to be a new person in this game, but I am an old person in the game, only a new person on this post. And as you know, encyclopaedias are rare; they are not handbooks. I could be an encyclopaedia and I could be around there. I am taking all the recommendations, all the concerns to see whether we can be able to transform the Presidency and make it an institution, which everybody will be proud of. 

The President and the Government had already taken action on one of the questions about the RDCs even before the recommendation, which was made by the committee, had actually been raised. So, there is no need to do that. All we are waiting for is a new list of RDCs and we see how we can be able to deploy them. Actually, there is nothing new; that one has already been taken care of. 

Even for the Presidential Advisors, all steps have been taken care of. So, actually, on that I will have nothing to report at the next session because it has already been taken care of, but it had not yet been announced.  

I also want to tell you that you should not condemn this institution of the RDC. In the new re-organisation, they are the only people representing the centre within the population. They are intended to work as an early-warning system for the activities for which we send money down, and they are going to do so. I am now the prefect and I have been in all those fields. I have been in the field and I know what is to be monitored. So, definitely you will see some change.  

I want to give you one simple example; this year you are voting for Shs 568.4 billion as recurrent expenditure for the districts, and Shs 741.5 billion for development expenditure. We have not had an inbuilt system to follow up that money. The only fellows who are going to be assigned this job are these people. They will not audit, but at least they will tell me that the school that was supposed to be constructed at such a place for such an amount has not been built, or has been built wrongly. Once we get that information, then the internal system can go and check on them.

I also want to disabuse the idea that actually they are the ones who are stealing all the money; they are not. The money allocated to RDCs and advisors is only Shs 3.7 billion. Without them you could easily lose Shs 1.2 trillion, and all you will then have left to do is to come here and have a postmortem, as the district officials come and bring their books. So please, let us always find the money. 

This is an argument, which has been mainly spearheaded by people who do not want us to get stable. Because here you have a President elected by the population, now these are his only, direct representatives among the population. That is his style of management of government. When others occupy it, they will also introduce their style. They may not change the form, but there will be a style. His style is to have representatives within the population in form of RDCs, people who are known, that he could ring up, and who can contact him if there is anything. 

They are also centres. If the population has something, which they would otherwise not be able to follow through in the bureaucratic method, they can approach honourable so and so and they are sure that the idea will be taken to the top. The idea will be taken into consideration along with the institutional information, and a sane decision will be taken. That is how the President gets informed.  

This is a style of work. It has worked and it has delivered. I do not see why we really need to condemn the system, because we are here as a testimony that the system has worked. Many of us are here because of this system. It is an open system; it is not closed. I want that to be clarified.

Then on the pledges, I want to say that actually, there has been a reduction. We have been telling the President, “Do not go beyond this”. In the breakdown from 1990 to 1998, when we took over government, you will find that the pledges were almost Shs 3.6 billion. When you take 1999 to 2000, they dropped to Shs 201 million. In 2000/01, they dropped to Shs 280 million, and in 2001/02 it was as low as Shs 86 million. In 2003, there was a slight increase to Shs 160 million. So, you find that we are actually phasing this out. 

The other issue is the backlog, which was incurred before 1999. We are conscious of it, there is nothing about it. We only need to rest assured that actually we have got very good intentions to maximize –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving way. I could not sit on a mountain of a problem when the Minister relevant to the problems of Luwero is on the stage.  

For over three months the people of Luwero have been camping in my constituency. I would like to get assurance from the Minister in charge of the Presidency that these people are going to be paid in the course of this financial year.

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Thank you for seeking that clarification. I can only say that you must know the size of your cloth. In the budget, which we are passing, only 52 percent is able to be collected from our own revenue. It is those in the leadership who trot around to try and get the other 48 percent, to ensure that at least we are able to maintain a budget for our country. So, it is our wish that we should not have debts, but our means, unfortunately, cannot enable us to meet them. But they acknowledged that these are debts and we are trying to work to ensure they are paid.  

The question of Defence has been clarified, so I have nothing to say about it. I can only say that I cannot underscore the fact that we have been able to enjoy peace. There are a number of people who actually do thankless jobs. Even among heroes, the greatest are not those who carry medals on their chests, but the unsung heroes. 

Many of our workers, including the information gatherers, actually do it under tremendous difficulty. If at all what they were gathering is not intelligent enough, I am sure you would have already seen it on your bodies. It is true we are building structures because we did not have them before, and structures cannot be built in 17 years, let alone from the time when this Constitution came into power. It will take time, but we are on the right course.

Last but not least, I want to thank the members for this tremendous encouragement. All this support you have given me is an honour, maybe because this is my first presentation to Parliament! (Applause). I know that with more encouragement I will be able to squeeze the best out of myself, to make sure that your future and the future of your children is okay. Thank you very much. (Applause).

THE CHAIRMAN: Let me give three minutes to Lt Gen. Moses Ali to say something about refugees.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to inform the House briefly on what is happening to Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in the country.  

In Acholi region, just two weeks ago a visitor from the United Nations, a representative of the Secretary General of thee UN, went to Gulu and Kitgum to assess the situation of internally displaced persons. That person is called Dr Deng.  

In Gulu the situation is relatively calm. However, the children on the verandas, as you have heard, will soon be resettled. We have received some money from the European Union to resettle these children in Gulu, Kitgum, Pader and other affected areas.

In Kitgum, next week we are going there with the World Food Programme officials. I invited Members of Parliament to join this team to go and assess the situation and see how best this problem can be solved. It will help in solving some problems, as the Member of Parliament has said. Next week people are going to see this on site. 

Similarly, in Pader, I must say we are very grateful to the Ministers of State who visited this area last week, and we are getting their report very soon.  

In Lango region, two days ago there was a meeting between the World Food Programme and Disaster District Management Committee to assess the requirements of the internally displaced persons as a result of the recent attacks. Next week food will be sent to Lira or Lango region. 

In Teso, indeed there are many NGOs there. The President, as you know is already in Teso, but foodstuffs have already been taken and more will be sent. The Government of Uganda has released Shs 234 million to buy more food. The Red Cross has given out many non-food items. There is an NGO called ADRA; it has sent items worth Shs 353 million.  

In Mbale and Kapchorwa, we are aware of the landslides and floods that are affecting the people. The office of the Prime Minister is preparing to move to these areas to assess the situation so that some assistance could be given.  In Karamoja, we still have the usual drought; in the affected schools, feeding will continue as already stated.   

I must say that Kyenjojo District had come out as exemplary in supporting the internally displaced people of the North by contributing 100 bags of foodstuffs from their district. (Applause). I think that is a good example, because if you go to mourn you cannot just go empty handed. Where are you going to get the food to eat, you who has come empty handed? So we must follow the example of Kyenjojo District that while you are mourning you should not mourn empty handed. You should send cassava or something like that so that you are seen to be participating. We must thank Members of Parliament from Kyenjojo for giving them these ideas.

Recently, I received about 840, big tarpaulins - one of them can carry 50 people or if they are children, even more. I also received 7,000 blankets, 100,000 textbooks and 200,000 pens. I would like to give these items to the Acholi, Lango and Teso regions to take care of their children and other beneficiaries. But the tarpaulins, once given out, will belong to the District Disaster Committee. It will remain at the district. Nobody should go and claim it, so if we find it in your place it may be a problem. 

Mr Chairman, there are many disaster problems. We cannot answer all the questions in one day. I urge and encourage my colleagues to visit us in the offices so that we can discuss calmly, not with emotion, because nobody has planned for disaster. Thank you very much.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the members of the committee, the chairperson and the committee for their incisive comments. And our interfaces have been very warm indeed. I also want to thank all Members of Parliament for your contributions.  

May I make a few remarks? First of all, regarding the First Lady, I think we should pay tribute to her because she has done a lot to solicit for funds for orphans, widows, children and women. (Applause). 

The committee has paid tribute to the technocratic Premier. I want to thank you very much. But let me say this: I owe this success to teamwork and also to your assistance. I am very grateful for this recognition. I hope that when I meet my creator, this will be my epitaph -(Laughter)- that “he has effectively and efficiently performed his functions and excelled at punctuality and attendance of Parliamentary proceedings”. Let that be part of my epitaph. (Laughter).

Regarding the post of the Prime Minister, we must slightly re-phrase it because here it was said that, “It is existing in a legal vacuum.” Let me say that under Article 113 of the Constitution, when the President appoints someone a minister and assigns functions to him or her, when he is doing so, he says, “You are the head boy, or you are the Prime Minister”. But the committee rightly said that such an important post should expressly appear in the Constitution and it should not depend on the whims of a head of state. It should be institutionalised, that is what we say, in political science, so that it acquires value and autonomy. The Government has already considered this matter and it agrees with you.

In the State of the Nation Address the legislative programme was not mentioned. I did draw this matter to the attention of His Excellency, the President. I am sure the matter will be cured so that we know how many Bills you passed, and the legislative programme. This appears on page 26.

A number of points have been made that a law to guide the management of refugees should be in place. Cabinet passed the Bill on management of refugees in Uganda. So, I am very pleased to mention that it is with the First Parliamentary Counsel. It will be here probably in October, depending upon her capacity to take into account our instructions.  

An issue was raised about the relationship between the Premier and the Deputy Premier. The relationship is very clear because they are answerable to His Excellency the President, the Vice-President and the Premier; this is a vertical linkage. Regarding the horizontal linkage, they are members of Cabinet who interface with other people. They also do perform a lot of important duties, for example, they represent His Excellency, the President, the Vice-President and the Prime Minister when they cannot carry out their function. In addition to that, they have a post attached to them.

Honourable members want to know when we shall have a resettlement policy. We need a framework to handle this matter. It is a technical matter involving availability of land, schools and other facilities. We are handling it professionally. I wish to inform you that by June 2004, it will be in place.  

Members were also saying that we should have guidelines and procedures to take care of economic and security concerns of host communities. This is already in place.  

Regarding Luwero Triangle, Prof. Kiwanuka in his submission made it clear that it is going to go beyond payment of war debts. A question was asked: “What would happen to those people who have camped somewhere else?” There is a verification committee, and it has been discovered that some of those people were paid. I think those who were paid should be arrested and those who were not should be paid –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the Prime Minister for giving way. This is a very serious matter because the story of the Luwero people now camping in my constituency greatly impacts on the success of the protracted war, which was fought by the Movement. As person who is also the custodian of these people, these are Ugandans; they are not from Kenya or Tanzania - it is not enough for those people to be condemned when government lacks the data to prove them wrong. Let government read out the names of the people who have been paid so that those who are seemingly cheating can be taken to Luzira. 

Mr Prime Minister, it is also absurd for some of your ministers to create stories, which cannot be justified, about these people. We might also react and support their dignity.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Let me say that we shall publish a list of all those who were paid. I want to encourage those people to go back to Luwero where they will be verified contextually, and you will be surprised. The Minister in charge of the sector did mention even the names of the wrongdoers.  

With regard to Northern Uganda Rehabilitation -(Interjection)- -(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) No, Sir, I do not intend to give way. I have made my comment and action will follow. It is only those Kiganda dogs, which just keep on barking. I bark once and bite. (Laughter). 

A point was made that many people do not understand NUSAF. This is on page 32. Let me say that on 7 April 2003, at Fairway Hotel, all ministers affected by NUSAF participated in a very important function where issues of NUSAF where mentioned. On the 8 April 2003, all MPs affected by NUSAF participated in a workshop. When NUSAF was being initiated we invited you for an international conference for all stakeholders. It is a bottom-up arrangement. If they do not understand it, we shall continue interfacing with all those who are affected until it is properly internalised. I request that those who attended stand up and say, “yes, you involved us and we have continued with districts -(Interruption)

MRS KULANY CHELANGAT: I seek to know from the Prime Minister why Kapchworwa and Sironko are not in that programme and yet there was a directive from the President that these two districts be included.  Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I want to assure you that we shall not disregard you. The Chairman is saying that I should conclude. I had a few comments to make, but I must abide by the timeframe given to me. There are many things to be said, but let me reiterate my appreciation of your contributions. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much, honourable members. This morning we received a report on the votes, which were in the report. I should have included votes on the Missions abroad, but they were not mentioned. There is a Vote on Uganda AIDS Commission, the committee also considered it and made recommendations.  

One thing I want to clear is that the same vote was repeated in the Ministry of Health. We agreed that depending on the proper home given to it, the Vote would be either transferred or it would remain where it was approved. The committee has recommended that it should remain where it is. We shall not deal with this Vote because we have already approved it.   

My task is to put the question that we adopt the report as amended. I want to put the question –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, the clarification I want to make is on Vote 107 - Uganda AIDS Commission. It is true that for quite sometime we have been approving the monies of the Commission under the Ministry of Health. But if I recall well, the amount of money we approved last Friday for Vote 107 was Shs 76 billion, which to me does not tally with the figure I see in this report. When I looked at the column, it appears they have not indicated the monies for recurrent expenditure; they have only indicated monies for development expenditure. So, does this fall under the other Vote? 

However, I want to support your idea that since the committee has recommended that the home of the Uganda AIDS Commission remains the President’s Office, we would be very glad if the Vote, which we have been approving under the Ministry of Health, is transferred to the President’s Office. That is my submission, Mr chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the figure in the vote we approved was higher than the figure that is here. So, they are better off remaining with the other one than with this one. I want –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, before you put the matter to the vote, I have strict instructions from the people of Lubaga South to seek clarification. I would like to know whether when we pronounce ourselves, we are doing so on the contents of the report as amended. If so, do we assume that the Mass Mobilization Vote will stay as it was originally? If that is the case, I am not party to it and I am moving out. (The hon. Member for Lubaga South thereupon withdrew from the chamber.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question in favour of adopting the report on the votes.

(Question put and agreed.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members. I have seen many reports in the last Parliament and in this, and there is tremendous improvement in the format, content and presentation. (Applause).  

Vote 001 - Office of the President:

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 34,612,698,000 under Vote 001 - Office of the President, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 34,612,698,000 under Vote 001 - Office of the President, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 2,974,529,000 under Vote 001 -Office of the President, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,974,529,000 under Vote 001 - Office of the President, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 002 - State House:

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 27,398,087,000 under Vote 002 - State House, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 27,398,087,000 under Vote 002 - State House, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 16,713,340,000 under Vote 002 - State House, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 16,713,340,000 under Vote 002 - State House, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 3,213,114,000 under Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,213,114,000 under Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 60,170,820,000 under Vote 003 - office of the Prime Minister, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 60,170,820,000 under Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 8,887,167,000 under Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,887,167,000 under Vote 006 – Ministry of Foreign Affairs, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,077,800,000 under Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2003/04.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 135 - Mass Mobilization:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,423,939,000 under Vote 135 - Mass Mobilization, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 467,000,000 under Vote 135 - Mass Mobilisation, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 201 to 227 - Missions Abroad:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 21,331,062,000 under Votes 201 to 227 - Missions Abroad, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 500,000,000 under Votes 201 to 227 - Missions Abroad, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, when the Committee of Supply considered the report of the Committee on Works, Housing and Communications, there was a typographical error on the figure, made by the Office of the Clerk. A lower figure was passed in respect of development expenditure for the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. Instead of Shs 396,611,622,000 a figure of Shs 106,054,032,000 was passed. I now beg to move that that error be collected and that the Committee of Supply expresses itself on the correct figure, which is Shs 396,611,622,000. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think it is clear.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is true. You recall very well that by the time we were presenting our report, the Minister of Finance was actually absent and the Minister of Works, Housing and Communications stood in for him. So, the error could not be put right. But since we have now got more funds, you can be assured of better services this financial year. I thank you.

Vote 016 - Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 396,611,622,000 under Vote 016 - Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the following Votes and passed them without amendments:

• Vote 001 - President’s Office
• Vote 002 - State House 
•  Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister 
• Vote 006 - Foreign Affairs, 
• Votes 201 to 227 - Missions Abroad, 
•  Vote 135 - Mass Mobilisation, and 
• Vote 016 - Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications; with an amendment. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. (Applause). 

Today’s proceedings were again followed by our guests from the Parliament of Zambia, and we also have our students from Guardian Secondary School, Kyadondo East constituency. They are 38 students, together with their teachers. You are most welcome to your Parliament.

We have business to transact in an hour’s time apparently, so we adjourn for one hour. At 4.00 p.m. we shall receive the report from the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee. Proceedings are suspended.

(The House was suspended at 3.15 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.21 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/04

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, could you present the report, please?

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Simon Mayende): Mr Chairman, honourable members, I have the pleasure to present to you –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The system should be that one side is for the Government and the other for the opposition, but proceed.

MR MAYENDE: Mr Chairman, I have the pleasure to present to you the report of the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, on the Ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs’ budgetary proposals for the financial year 2003/2004. This is in pursuant to Article 90 of the Constitution, and rule 154(d) of our Rules of Procedure.  

This report is indeed very brief and I intend to run through it very fast. The report covers two ministries, namely the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which covers Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters, Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prisons Service, the Amnesty Commission, the Government Analytical Laboratory, and the Community Service Programme. 

It also covers the Ministry of Defence, which has the Ministry of Defence headquarters, Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, Uganda Air Cargo and the National Enterprise Corporation.

While considering the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Defence policy statements, the committee studied and analysed the policy statements plus other relevant documents that were availed to the committee. We then raised queries for clarification by the relevant ministers. We did interact with ministers and officials of those ministries.

We visited some places to ascertain some activities that are carried out by the Ministries. We also interacted with persons directly affected by the activities and the policy issues in the two ministries.  

We want to acknowledge and extend our appreciation to the officials and staff in those ministries for their work in the advancement of good governance in our country. The committee notes with appreciation the endeavours that the respective ministers made by appearing in person and coming with most of their departmental heads. The committee thanks them for their candid contributions during the discussions.

Mr Chairman and honourable members, before I proceed to the particular activities of the different ministries, I wish to point out here that this particular report does not address the security situation in the country. The committee has written a report that addresses the requirements of our 14 May 2003 Parliamentary Resolution on Security. At an appropriate time that report will be presented for debate in the House.

MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

This ministry is charged with the responsibility of ensuring and maintaining internal peace by enforcing law and order, providing forensic and scientific analytical services, custody and rehabilitation of inmates and the control and facilitation of movement of people into and out of this country. 

In the last financial year, the Ministry received Shs 90,617,178,000 for recurrent and Shs 5,070,000,000 for the development budget. With those resources, the Ministry was able to register a number of notable achievements through its various departments and these included:

 Prisons department:

• The department embarked on the modernisation of prison farms. They did commercial production of maize on four pilot farms in Kitalya, Isimba, Bufulubi and Ruimi. They produced food worth Shs 1.2 billion on those four pilot farms, and that food was enough to feed 18,000 prisoners for three months. 

• Under the Sector Wide Approach to Planning (SWAP) in the Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS), the prisons department secured funds to purchase five mini trucks, three lorries, two pick-ups and three vans. This has improved the transportation of food and prisoners to court. Prisoners can now be delivered to courts at 8.00 a.m.  

• The department also undertook to construct barracks. This included construction of female wings at Kigo, Jinja main, Mbarara prison, Soroti and Lira. In that, Swedish Assistance helped us with finances to the tune of Shs 144 million. 

• The department also recruited 500 warders and wardresses. 

• Renovations were carried out in a number of barracks. Shs 144mn was spent to renovate Kotido, Moroto and Namalu prisons.

Police department:

• The Police carried out construction of barracks in the districts of Katakwi, Ntungamo, Apac, Kibaale, Bundibugyo and Rakai.

• The Police recruited, trained and passed out 503 personnel.  

• The Police force acquired 30 pick-ups at a cost of Shs 1.1 billion to boost its fleet of vehicles.

The Government Analytical Laboratory acquired five refrigerators.  

There are however, outstanding issues in the Ministry. These include:

• Under prisons, they continually have under-funding, which has hampered the ability to rehabilitate the prison barracks all of which were constructed before Uganda’s independence.

• Congestion in the prisons is still an outstanding and sour issue. Many of the prisons are overcrowded. 

• There is a massive backlog of cases. Poor facilitation and other factors affect the prompt delivery of prisoners to courts for trial. We noted that 64 percent of the prisoner population are on remand.
 
• Reconstruction of Mbarara Prison, strengthening of the Jinja main prison, construction of a female wing at Mbarara, Bushenyi, Kigo and Fort-Portal prisons, have not been completed.  

• The prisons in Karamoja have not been repaired for a long time. As a result, it is difficult to reasonably confine lawbreakers in them. 

We are told that sometimes outsiders come and assist in the escape of people who have been confined in those prisons very easily because they are not very secure.

Under the Police, the construction of the Police headquarters is outstanding, and Police Personnel are still very few in numbers. Their total number in comparison to the population is still low, that is, the police to public ratio is still very low.    

• In the Ministry headquarters, we did note that the Ministry is not considered a core department of government. It is not yet accorded the Priority Programme Area (PPA) status. This has made it impossible for the Ministry to fulfill its mandate of ensuring and maintaining internal security, peace and stability in some parts of the country.  

• The Ministry has not been able to secure approval from the Ministry of Finance to allow the Prisons and Police departments to access funds that the donors are willing to offer for revitalizing the prison farms and building the police headquarters respectively. The reason offered by the Minister of Finance is that this will negatively affect the macro economic stability of this country.

• The disarmament programme is being handled almost exclusively by the UPDF. The Ministry of Internal Affairs was expected to develop capacity to handle the programme through its departments. However, the Ministry is neither prepared nor equipped to take up this programme.

Legislations:

There are proposed legislations, which are still outstanding. These are:

• Legislation on Auxiliary Forces.
• Anti-Narcotics Bill.
• The Police Statute (Amendment) Bill. 
• The NGO Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2001 is still pending.

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the committee report on this Bill is ready but presentation awaits the Certificate of Financial Implications. We did go through that with the Ministers responsible and we are awaiting that certificate.

The national identity cards:

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the production of national identity cards has been an outstanding activity for many years now. There seems to be no action taken by the relevant authorities.

The DNA machine:

This was supposed to have been acquired but it is still not yet acquired.

The Amnesty Commission:

The Commission has a total of 4,500 reporters who have not yet been resettled, and this activity requires Shs 1.6 billion.

Planned activities:

The Ministry plans to receive – Mr Chairman, I think there will be an adjustment. I have been informed by the Minister that these figures might change. I will read out the figures at the end. 

The Ministry intends to carry out a number of activities that include: 

• Bringing to Parliament the Prisons Bill, the Police Statute (Amendment) Bill, and the Amnesty Act (Amendment) Bill.

• Under Prisons, they intend to take on two more farms under the Commercial Production Project. The project is expected to make a saving of Shs 2.4 billion in food expenses if the funds are released in time. Food production from the six pilot farms will cater for 36 percent of the total food requirements in the prisons.

• The Prisons Department will also renovate staff houses and prison structures in Muinaina and Tororo.

• Under the Police, they intend to increase the transport fleet for districts, urban and highway patrols as well as improve fire brigade facilities.

• The Police communication system will also be improved.

• Under the Amnesty Commission, they expect to receive 8,000 reporters.

• The backlog of 4,500 reporters will be resettled in their communities in accordance with the Amnesty Act.

Observations:

Mr Chairman and honourable members, we did make observations about the entire policy statement of the Ministry. These include:

Regarding the work permits the committee did observe that the permits are sometimes issued to questionable cases. On the face of it, persons without special skills have been issued with different classes of work permits.

The East African passports were intended to ease the inter-East African travel for East Africans. However, in some cases national passports are preferred.

The Police personnel’s salaries are still low. This could partly be responsible for the low morale and corruption reported in the force.

The NGO Board: There is a general feeling out there, especially among the stakeholders and the NGO community themselves, that the NGO Board should be transferred to a ministry or department that is more concerned with development or planning, such as the Ministry of Finance or that of Gender, Labour and Social Development - or even the Prime Minister’s Office. That the Ministry of Internal Affairs is seen as a more of a security, law and order ministry and therefore, inappropriate to house such a development-oriented board.

The DNA Machine: The committee noted with grave concern that it was not purchased as expected.  The funds were available but somehow the people who handled the procurement failed to complete the transaction in time.

Under the upcoming Bills, we did note that the Amnesty Act (Amendment) Bill is due. The Prisons and the Police Statute (Amendment) Bill are expected to be tabled during this financial year as well.

The Police fire brigade requirements: We did note that the procurement has been very slow considering the urgent need to have them in place. The incessant fire outbreaks in urban centres in various parts of the country need to be attended to, promptly.

We did also note that the flow of vehicle traffic in Kampala, especially at certain times, was a source of concern to all vehicle users. The resultant jams, the road rage and sometimes delays of up-to-four hours in a distance of a few kilometers, need urgent attention. 

This morning, Mr Chairman and honourable members, one of my committee  members missed a meeting because he was held in a jam when he was coming from Entebbe.

Under narcotics, we did note that the current law regarding the use and abuse of narcotic drugs is defective and inappropriate. Therefore, its spread and intensity is not as it should be.

The small arms and light weapons: The proliferation of small arms and light weapons in the region is responsible for the continuing instability and criminality in the Great Lakes Region. However, in a cyclic manner, the war and violence spurs on the proliferation. There is need, therefore, to have a good and effective policy to record, control, manage and dispose of firearms in our society.

We were told that police intends to reduce accidents as a major stakeholder in matters related to vehicles, traffic regulations, traffic crimes and resultant penalties. Police is indeed, a major player and carries major responsibilities when it comes to road accidents. Other stakeholders too have responsibilities that contribute to reducing road accidents.

We were informed that ordinarily, the Police force should not be carrying assault rifles such as AK-47s. Pistols are preferred because police is a civil force and not a paramilitary. The committee is, however, aware that criminals also carry and use equally deadly weapons.

We did note that police sniffer dogs are an effective tool in detection and investigative operations.

We did note that the Police Air Wing is literary non-existent. The one helicopter they have is not enough, and it is defective. The Naguru Airstrip is a residential area and is not recommended for use.  

Under the Police transport fleet, we did note that the lack of vehicles, even for District Police Commanders, is a big setback in police work. In Kaberamaido the District Police Commander does not have a vehicle, and even in some other districts.  

On the general facilitation for police, we thought they seem to be given less consideration in comparison to other departments, yet they are expected to be present at all times to keep law and order.  

The committee noted that the welfare of the Police leaves a lot to be desired. Their accommodation, in particular, is pathetic. Alongside this, the facilities in their barracks such as water, power, et cetera, are sometimes non-existent. The effect of such living conditions on their morale is necessarily negative.  

The Prisons Department:

We did note that the release of funds for farm work continues to be out of tune with the seasonal changes. When funds are required, they are not availed and they are sometimes released later! 

Prisons continue to lack transport facilities. The lack of means of transport is a serious problem in the Prisons department. Prisoners sometimes escape while being escorted on foot for long distances. The few warders and wardresses cannot effectively control and guard the prisoners, who outnumber them. 

The lack of uniform for prisoners amounts to abuse of their rights. They are forced to go half-naked or to share uniforms. One member told us that when he went to see a prisoner, he was told to wait until somebody had given that prisoner a shirt to wear so that he could come and see the honourable member. 

Sometimes inmates have one meal a day in some prisons. Their health has consequently been affected, thereby increasing risks of death for people serving prison sentences.

Recommendations: 

The committee feels there is need to sensitise political leaders and the general public about the procedure and process of issuance of work permits. This would eliminate all misunderstandings and misconceptions surrounding work permits.  

It is recommended, therefore, that government immediately publicises, through the print media, radio, television programmes and others, the requisite procedures for obtaining work permits. The Defence and Internal Affairs Committee intends to hold a public hearing on this matter soon. Mr Chairman and honourable members, you will be informed about it because we will be having an open session.

In view of the fact that the Government of Uganda encourages the acquisition and use of East African passports, there should be steps taken so as to exclusively use the East African passports on all inter-East African travel by East Africans.

The committee recommends a review of the Police salaries with a view to harmonizing them with other service organizations, and to be in line with the East African region. We were informed that the Police in Kenya and Tanzania receive a decidedly higher salary than what their counterparts in Uganda receive.

The Minister of Internal Affairs argues that the NGO Board matters and whatever they deal with touch on internal security and it is only appropriate that the Ministry handles them. The committee concurs. 

The DNA machine should be purchased without further delay. Persons who delayed or neglected to do their duty last financial year should be reprimanded appropriately.

The committee welcomes the anticipated Bills. It is hoped that the proposed law will help in improving the conditions and terms of service for both the Police and Prisons. The Amnesty (Amendment) Bill, on the other hand, needs to be expedited so as to quickly attend to the shortcomings already identified in the current law. 

The efforts to procure fire-fighting equipment need to be stepped up so as to curtail the destructive fire outbreaks.

We did note that there are other stakeholders involved in the vehicle traffic flow. The committee is aware that certain efforts are underway to improve the vehicle traffic flow and minimize jams. So, the committee believes that if the stakeholders expedite the proposed solutions, the menace of the traffic flow would be eliminated.

We were told the Narcotics Bill is expected. Therefore, steps to amend the relevant and applicable laws should be intensified. Honourable members will agree with me that this is becoming a serious menace in this region.

On small arms and light weapons, a high profile department headed by a coordinator at the rank of Commissioner of Police, has been established to handle matters related to small arms and light weapons. This is in response to the United Nations Programme of Action, and the Nairobi Accord. The Minister of Internal Affairs appoints the coordinator. This goes to show that this office is high profile, and to a large extent is also inter-territorial. The same office will coordinate with neighbouring countries over this matter. The committee recommends that all possible support be given to this infant but vital department.

The Police did indicate to us in the policy statement that they have a target of reducing road accidents by 10 percent in the current financial year. We think that is a good and acceptable target. However, the committee thinks visible, increased vigilance by the traffic police personnel is required day and night.  

Efforts to acquire more pistols for police work should be expedited. The committee recommends a steady and systematic shift from the use of assault rifles in cases other than special operations and special situations. 

We believe that special attention should be given to sniffer dogs, with a view to breeding them in Uganda instead of importing adult, often very old, sniffer dogs.

The committee recommends that additional vehicles be purchased for police work. Priority should be given to districts that have no single vehicle currently. More motorcycles and bicycles need to be procured as well.

There is need to adequately cater for police facilitation, as they act in the security and governance sectors. We were told that if there is no law and order, other sectors may not function. Therefore, in the short-term, the committee believes the ideal budget for the Police should be made with effect from next financial year. 

In the long-term, the National Planning Authority (NPA) is well advised to take serious consideration and recognition of the fact that the Police should never be left behind. We thought the NPA would look at the long-term but for an immediate solution the committee thinks the ideal budgetary allocations for police should be made available for their work next financial year.

There is an urgent need to improve the living conditions of the Police personnel. Housing and shelter NGOs can be approached to assist in the construction of appropriate housing for the Police.

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the timing of the release of funds is important. Therefore, it is important for the Ministry of Finance to plan for specific releases such us funds for farm work in prisons. Efforts should be made to properly coordinate the releases in a lump sum and in tune with the seasons. 

We did note that a vehicle would ease the work of the warders/wardresses while they are escorting prisoners. The committee indeed commends the efforts to procure vehicles for the Prisons department through the Justice Law and Order Sector. We commend that, and we indeed think it should continue.  

Efforts should be made to avail appropriate clothing and uniform for the inmates. 

The committee strongly advises that the rights of prisoners should be taken into consideration at all times.  

The Ministry of Internal Affairs should be facilitated so as to have the capacity to train and handle the anti-stock theft unit in the Karamoja disarmament exercise.  

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

Mr Chairman and honourable members, I now turn to the Ministry of Defence. The Ministry of Defence has the cardinal duty of: 

i) Preserving and defending the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda. 

ii) Safeguarding and protecting the lives and property of Ugandans. 

iii) Co-operating with the civilian authority in emergency situations and in cases of natural disasters. 

iv) Fostering harmony and understanding between the defense forces and civilians; and 

v) Engaging in productive activities for the development of Uganda.

The Ministry did certain things with the money that they got last year, but you will recall that after we had passed the budget, there was a new emergency under the Ministry. Therefore, to meet that emergency security need, which was not envisaged at the time we were passing the budget, Cabinet took a decision to have a 23 percent budget cut across all ministries. This 23 percent budget cut was meant to raise US $26 million. However, only US $17.5 million was secured.

The Ministry continued to implement efforts towards building a professional Army that is well equipped and trained, so as to effectively enhance the capacity to create and sustain conditions, which are conducive to economic growth, stability, democratisation and national unity.  

In order to achieve that, the Ministry continued to do the following: 
i) Recruit, train and equip an army with a national outlook. 

ii) They carried out operations to make it difficult for the terrorists and rebels to operate from both within and outside the country.  

iii) They encouraged peace dialogues with remnants of the armed groups. 

iv) They enhanced the operational capacity of the UPDF. 

v) Participated, and continue to participate, in regional and national peace initiatives such as the Lusaka Peace Accord. 

vi) Uganda fulfilled its bargain in the various agreements and understanding between the Government of Uganda and the Government of Sudan. 

vii) They continued to support the Presidential Pardon and the Amnesty Act; and 

viii) Continued to assist the Police in shouldering the anti-stock theft activities. 

There were also other notable achievements:  

i) The disarmament continued, and to-date 11,000 guns have been collected since the launching of the disarmament programme in Karamoja. 

ii) The long awaited UPDF Bill was approved by Cabinet and will soon be tabled before this Parliament. 

iii) An understanding with the Rwanda Government to re-locate the People’s Redemption Army leadership to a third country was reached and implemented.  

iv) The Ministry of Defence paralysed operations of the PRA by putting fighters out of action, and they arrested a number of them. 

v) The documentation of ex-servicemen was completed and files referred to the Pensions Department in the Ministry of Public Service for appropriate action. 

vi) Additional fighting equipment for the UPDF, especially helicopters, was secured. 

vii) The first phase of Kakiri Barracks in Division I, Wakiso District, was completed and occupied. 

viii) The UPDF curtailed LRA activities in Acholi. More specifically, the UPDF has made it difficult for the LRA to abduct people in Acholi. 

ix) The Ministry continued to pay salaries by the 28th of every month. 

Mr Chairman and honourable members, there are outstanding issues in spite of those achievements: 

i) The 10 percent salary increase for soldiers that was announced in 2000/01 financial year has not been effected.  

ii) The budgetary constraints arising from the small national resource envelope, and the ceilings on the Defence budget to two percent of GDP continue to hamper the ministry from achieving its desired outputs. We were told the ministry gets only 20 percent of the actual needs they require.  You need to multiply the current requirement by five, and then you can know how much they actually need.  

iii) The UPDF Bill has been an outstanding issue for long, and it still has not been tabled before Parliament. It would streamline the important matters concerning the Army such as deployment outside Uganda. A case in point is the intended deployment of UPDF to Iraq.  

iv) The LRA is still a menace to the population and has recently extended its atrocious activities to the Teso Region. The Ministry is optimistic that LRA will soon be no more.  

v) There are a big number of ineffective forces that need to be retired. The process has been delayed by the lack of funds to pay off that ineffective force. 

vi) There is a big and outstanding bill in payments to widows and orphans of fallen soldiers. The Ministry has a backlog of Shs 17 billion that has accumulated over the years. We are told that about 30 percent of the required annual amounts are released on average and paid out annually. This leaves two-thirds unpaid and it is carried over to the following financial years.

vii) “Ghost soldiers” still exist on the UPDF payroll. The Ministry is handling this through computerization of the payroll. 

viii) We saw that some soldiers still stay in grass-thatched houses, otherwise called mama ingia pole pole. The committee was informed that many countries in the region have a similar problem.  

ix) Some individuals displaced by the UPDF units have not been compensated. The budget constraints hamper the Ministry’s ability to pay all the claimants. 

x) The modalities of opening the Army Shop have not been worked out yet. The shop was closed sometime in 1993 due to perceived abuse. I want to indulge the members here and use the words “perceived abuse” because we have been advised that it was never proved. So, the words “perceived abuse” should actually be added to that point on page 21. 

At the time of its closure, the Ministry of Finance made a commitment to make a provision of Shs 3 billion per year to compensate for the closure, but the Ministry has not honoured that promise to-date. The Ministry proposes to re-open the Army Shop although this has not been approved. Modalities have been proposed to operate the shop so as to benefit all the personnel in the Army.

Mr Chairman, honourable members, may I seek your indulgence to point out that this morning you did receive the report on the opinion of the Auditor General on the Public Accounts. We are also told that the money, which we thought was on the account, is actually being reduced steadily by Shs 5,000 every month, as payment of bank charges. I am sure members will refer to the appropriate page. 

Under the planned activities this financial year, the Ministry is seeking the approval of a figure that will be given to you later. There was an adjustment, which I got this morning. The Ministry intends to use that money to have the Defence Review Programme completed during this financial year, and a White Paper presented to Parliament. The White Paper will, among other things, identify the security threats, needs and the appropriate resource requirements. 

The UPDF Bill will be tabled before Parliament. It is expected that the Bill, if enacted into law, will address issues of welfare of the Army, recruitment, promotion, status of the reserve force and command structures, among others. 

Furthermore, procurement and control of modern equipment to enhance the efficiency of the UPDF operations will continue.  

The LRA insurgency in Northern Uganda and North-eastern Uganda will be eliminated and total peace restored. 

The Karimojong warriors will be disarmed and cattle rustling activities curtailed. The Karimojong will cease to be a threat to their neighbours and to themselves.  

The Ministry will identify and secure a partner to undertake production in the NEC Pharmaceuticals that has stalled for a very long time. 

The Ministry intends to identify development partners to put up low-cost housing units for soldiers in the UPDF.

Negotiations with those in charge of the budget will continue so as to have the Army Shop in place.  An army radio is expected to be established so that the forces are well informed of forces-related news and other activities. The committee was informed that other armies have similar facilities, such as the army in Germany.

The committee did make the following observations on the Defence budget: 

1. The Ministry’s policy statement does not provide satisfactory information on how the US $17.5 million, which was received through the budget cuts, was utilized despite the enormous amounts involved. 

2. The LRA remains a big menace. The committee observed that the attitude that the LRA is not a threat to state power is wrong and unfortunate. The LRA activities are a big threat to people’s lives and security of property. The LRA has unleashed untold suffering to people in Acholi and now in Teso. I request members to add Lango and West Nile between “Acholi” and “now”. 

Normal life has been disrupted, economic activities halted, people killed, children abducted and masses of people confined in displaced peoples’ camps.

3. The committee appreciates the mobilization and arming of the local communities to fight rebels. The extent of arming the local communities, however, has to be seriously regulated and put under the close supervision of the UPDF. 

The committee noted an element of misconception of the change in the balance of firepower arising out of arming groups such as the Arrow Group in Teso Region. Some people in Karamoja Region seem to think that they will be the next targets for the Arrow Group once the LRA is defeated.  

4. There was concern expressed, especially in Teso, that there are many self-appointed spokespersons on military operations in the region. It was observed that such spokespersons sometimes gave misleading information to the population.  

5. The UPDF was deployed in Kapchorwa to contain cattle rustling and they have indeed effectively done the job. There are, however, complaints that due to poor facilitation, they have turned to the population for their upkeep. This has created an uneasy relationship between the local population and the UPDF.  

6. Protected camps still exist in Northern Uganda and are on the increase in Teso arising out of the recent LRA incursion into that part of the country.  

7. The Ugandan troops have withdrawn from the DRC and only remain along the border to monitor security. 

8. We also observed that cases of “ghost soldiers” still exist, and this is an avenue for corruption although there are measures in place to stamp this out.

9. The committee is aware that the Presidential Guard Brigade, which protects the President, is additionally facilitated from the State House Vote.  The committee was, however, not informed of how much was budgeted for the Presidential Guard Brigade in addition to what they get from the Ministry of Defence. 

We are also wondering, but I believe the Minister will say something about it, about the overall implications of the command structure arising out of having the Presidential Guard Brigade, which seems to be a "personal army". We had been informed of this allegation, at the time of writing the report, but the implications are what we intend to find out at this point.

9. The UPDF has made commendable headway in training officers in both specialized and general training courses both within and outside this country. 

The committee recommends that: 

1. The Ministry should adequately facilitate the local fighting groups, such as the Arrow Group and the Amuka (Rhino Group), that are fighting the LRA. The Ministry should specifically support the President in his pledge to assist these groups, in all ways possible.  

2. The Ministry should not establish the army radio, estimated to cost Shs 200 million. This money should instead be used to facilitate the establishment of an army shop or a similar facility that caters for the welfare of the Army Shop.  

Mr Chairman and honourable members, I wish to give some explanation here as to why we arrived at that recommendation. You are aware that the Director of Information has issued a directive, and it was contained in the report this morning, that no new licenses will be issued for radio stations. So, will there be special consideration for the Army? 

We also thought about the sustainability of this radio station. Will the radio station not require additional funding? Also, instead of having this army radio, could the Army not use the current facilities that are available in this country? For example, currently they have programmes about the welfare of the veterans. 

The committee noted that battalion barazas and morning parades are enough to sensitise and pass on information, which the radio would be airing. We wanted to know what programmes are going to be aired over that radio. We thought that if there is need, Parliament could support a policy reversal on taxation so that the Army Shop is allowed to sell duty or tax-free goods to soldiers.  

The committee wanted to find out whether this radio would be semi-commercial. The committee did believe that this was not a priority. Therefore, the money should be transferred to another item.  

The weeding out of the “ghost soldiers” should be accomplished this financial year. The committee recommended that means should be devised to get updates on deserters and fallen soldiers. This will help not only in establishing the actual strength of the Army, but also eliminate expenditure on non-existing soldiers.  

I do request members to delete the word “force” and replace it with the word “soldiers” at the bottom of page 24. 

A specific programme to demobilize the ineffective force within the UPDF should be devised and implemented. This will help in reducing strain on the defence budget.  

A law to establish the reserve force should be made to help define the command structure, recruitment, training, deployment, welfare and other attendant needs and requirements. The reserve force should eventually become a replacement of the local fighting groups.

The committee recommended that the Ministry of Defence avail a full and detailed utilization of the US$17.5 million supplementary releases for the last financial year.

In conclusion, Mr Chairman and honourable members, the committee recommends the adoption of this report and approval of the budget under the following Heads and Votes.

Ministry of Defence: recurrent expenditure of Shs 299,207,237,000.

Ministry of Internal Affairs: recurrent expenditure of Shs 98,685,960,000.

Ministry of Defence: development expenditure of Shs 13,945,803,000.

Ministry of Internal Affairs: development expenditure	of Shs 7,044,953,000.

Mr Chairman, and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you chairperson for the report, and for handling it as fast as you have done.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman and honourable members, I heard members asking about the changes in the figures. As you noted the changes are upward and the reason was that these figures were correct, but they had not included donor component and taxes. So, the additional figures are donor funds and taxes for the equipment.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Chairman and the committee for the report. However, I am disappointed because under the Ministry of Defence they have not tackled Uganda Air Cargo and National Enterprise Corporation, which corporations have taken a lot of money. For example, it would be good for this Parliament and this country to know the fate of the C130 under the Uganda Air Cargo. What is happening to it? We would like to know what is happening to the NEC pharmaceutical plant. We hear that some of the equipment within the plant is “going out” one by one, and eventually the plant might be a husk. I had opted the committee to visit it. 

Members would like to know who is heading Luwero Industries. We were told that half of the enterprise is headed by the Minister. How is he supervising it? We would be interested in knowing what is happening to all other firms and parastatals under the National Enterprise Corporation. So, Mr Chairman, I have started from a disappointed note.

Mr chairman, we would like to know the strategic plan of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. How do they intend, in the next five years, to rehabilitate these prisons? We are all potential prisoners as we sit here - including the Minister of Defence - because anything can happen.  

The committee talked about police/public ratio although they did not give the figure. I have got the figure. We are told that the ideal figure should have been one policeman to 100 people. Currently, the figure is one policeman to 1,500 people. How do you intend to meet this ratio in the next five years, leave alone the feelings of hon. Rukutana?

About the Police Air Wing and the East African passports, we would like to know if there are effective. I happen to have travelled with someone who had an East African passport last year. When we reached Malaba the passport was stamped; we reached Namanga it was stamped again. I thought the East African passport would be stamped at the exit, when I am crossing to Mombasa or Kenya or Tanzania. What is the essence of that?  

About the Ministry of Defence, on the issue of the radio station, what do you want to inform the semi-naked soldiers about? When you cross Karuma you immediately meet soldiers, but you do not know whether you have met the rebels or our soldiers. Let this Parliament today resolve that there is a technical supplementary to transfer this money to recurrent, and they buy soldiers uniforms. What do you want to tell these people, who listen to Kony on Mega FM? We have Radio Uganda and Star FM, which cover the whole country but are not used. 

The Ministry of Defence has nothing to inform the people of Teso about. Although you are saying the LRA threat will soon be finished, but people are in camps.  

I have met some NGOs that were working with protected camps, and they do not know who is protecting them. They say the soldiers are camped within the camps and the civilians have built all around them. So they are saying, “who is protecting who”? Is it the soldiers protecting the civilians or the civilians protecting the soldiers? Those are issues that need to be handled.  

Mr Chairman, I think the committee should give us details. We want to know what is happening in NEC pharmaceuticals; we want to know what is happening to all enterprises under NEC; and we want to know what is happening to Police Air Cargo. Thank you.

MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Chairman. The eminent African writer, Chinua Achebe, told the story of a man who had 11 wives but did not have enough soup for his foo foo. We have a formidable army led by an impressive array of military top brass. Despite all this, we have lived with insurgency for the last 18 years. As it were, Ugandans are not getting enough soup in the form of security.  

Did you know that the President of Columbia recently asked his generals to resign if they could not contain the rebellion? I think we could borrow a leaf from these people. I was thinking that there should be a mathematical relationship between the increase in the defence budget and the preponderance of Kony in an inverse manner. It appears the more money we give to the Ministry of Defence, the wider Kony is spreading his wings. This is a paradox –(Interruption)

MR KIDEGA: Thank you so much. I would like to volunteer some information to my honourable colleague on the aspect of the importance of command in the army. The king of Lu, by the name of Sun Tzu, wrote the book, The Art of War. At one time this philosopher was being tested on the aspect of command and they gave him women to try to test his ability of how commanders could operate in the field. He was given 800 women, not even soldiers, and they told him to show his art of military skill on these women who could join the struggle. 

He lined up the women picked the best concubine of the King to be the commander. He told the women, “When I say ‘turn right’, you turn right, when I say ‘turn left’, turn left.” He taught the women the commands and then gave the instruction. They all laughed and paid no attention. What he did was to get two concubines, and he executed them immediately. After killing the two concubines, he brought two other commanders on board and he gave the same command. The two women performed that action and the best military skills. So, commanders are supposed to be answerable when the army is not performing. Thank you.

MR ARUMADRI: I thank my colleague for that information. Mr Chairman, sometime last year an idea was mooted by, I think Commissioner John Kazoora. He said that since the Defence Ministry needs more money, why do you not put some Ministries on ice and then we raise some more funds? At that time it sounded rather comical, but now I think it is pertinent.  

If Kony is still around next financial year, I want to propose that we should raise a militia of about 500 million able-bodied Ugandans. How shall do this? We shall put some ministries on hold. I want to propose as follows: The Office of the President should move to State House, the Movement Secretariat should be put on hold, the Ministry of Agriculture, we can do without it for the time being –(Laughter)– the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should move to State House, Ministry of Gender we can do without it –(Laughter)– Ministry of Public Service, only the department of salaries should work –(Laughter)- the Ministry of Information should also move to State House. I think the Ministry of Education can also wait for one academic year –(Laughter)- I am not trying to be rather funny here, Mr Chairman. 

I want to say here –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. I would like the honourable member holding the Floor to clarify, according to his proposal, where Parliament should go in those circumstances?

MR ARUMADRI: The Constitution says Parliament manages its owns affairs. I will leave that to the House. (Laughter). 

I want to support Archbishop John Baptist Odama of Gulu, when he said that the Arrow Group members are being sent to their deaths. We have a Reserve Force, commanded by a whole Lt Gen., but we have not heard that these people have been deployed. We have demobilised personnel. Some of them are willing to come back and serve; they have not been deployed. Why are we instead using civilians who are not trained?

Yesterday I received my copy of the Human Rights Commission monthly magazine volume 6, No. 2 of June 2003. On the cover of this magazine you will see a very sad story. We are very quick at condemning Amin, and indeed Amin should be condemned for the atrocities that he did. But this picture shows that Amin is still around. (Laughter). Mr Chairman, I say this with a very sad heart: we should not be doing this to our country. The Constitution enjoins us to build a democratic society, but torture, the type that has been displayed here is not a good bedfellow with democracy! I thank you.

MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (Workers’ Representative):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to add my voice to those who have appreciated the work of the chairperson and his committee. However, I find this report lacking more flesh. It is because of this that I want to make some few observations.  

When you look at page 8, the committee came up with some good observations, but when it came to the recommendations, I do not know what went wrong. You are talking about work permits, and we all know very well that many graduates are on the streets. Indians and Nigerians have entered this country and actually taken over the jobs. 

When it came to the recommendation on page 12, the committee is simply saying, “There is need to sensitise the political leaders and the general public”. Whom do they want to sensitise? We need to strengthen the Immigration Department and make sure that we enforce the law. This business of politicising the public and the leaders will not help. The number of graduates on the streets is increasing, not because the jobs are not there; the jobs are there. You look at the organisations, which have been established by Indians and other nationalities! When they get a work permit for one person, 50 people all work using that permit and nobody is monitoring them.  

You should cross over to our neighbouring countries like Kenya. To work there, they must monitor you and see if you have a work permit. I have a colleague of mine, a whole company secretary, if the work permit expires by only two days the Police will be there to harass him to renew it. In Uganda once somebody has passed Entebbe Airport or Busia that is the end. He can even bring the grandsons and daughters. We need to strengthen the Immigration Department. Sensitising the political leaders is not enough.

When I look at page 10, they are talking about narcotics. I also looked at their recommendation on page 14. The recommendation is simply saying that the steps to amend the relevant and applicable laws should be intensified. Mr Chairman, this is why I said this report lacks some flesh. Do you know how narcotics have spoilt our young generation? I do not know if the committee was serious -(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. This question of narcotics is very serious. I read in the newspaper early this week that people in my village were murdered by somebody who had consumed marijuana. The drug abuser murdered his aunt, his two children and four other people. When I went for the burial, I raised the problem of growing enjaga, especially in this part of Uganda. 

But before I ended my speech, I got warnings that, “The moment you talk of bangi and the problems related to it, you will never go back to Parliament”. And currently out of the 46 cases in our court in Mpigi, almost 75 percent are related to people who smoke bangi. I do not know what the Ministry is really doing to fight this problem.

MR BAKKABULINDI: I thank you honourable member. You can see how serious this issue is. The committee observed that the current law regarding the youths and abuse of narcotic drugs is defective and inappropriate. It is high time the honourable members, in various committees, came up with a solution. If it is defective, which areas of it are defective? Members should know and straight away take an action. The committee left the statement hanging, but we shall also leave it as ineffective as you have recommended!

On page 8 they are talking about salaries of police personnel. On page 5 they talked about the Police being very thin on the ground. They are saying their salaries should be increased, but they are not talking about increasing their number. Our policemen are overworked because in a section where they are supposed to be 20, they are only 3. They work for almost 24 hours. It is high time we looked at the welfare of the Police seriously, in order to discourage people who want to bribe them.

Mr Chairman, quickly on page 16 -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, no!

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Chairman, I want to make one more observation.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  No!

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Chairman, on defence. I have been interrupted, only two more points.

THE CHAIRMAN: You should be interrupted because you are making a contribution. Okay, one second.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Let me make one observation on defence. My colleague said it is not necessary to establish an army radio station. Let us first analyse it before we become emotional. Why do they need to establish this radio station? We have talked of having more than one operating FM station. Why were they created? Some of us who normally go to these Bimeeza to debate find it effective to use these radio stations. The born-again community have also come up with a radio station in order for their messages to be delivered.  

In most cases, Mr Chairman, we have been relying on our colleagues here from Teso and the Northern region for information. When the Army Representative tells you, “Kony is in this area, we have done this.” Another representative says, “No, I was there. Somebody rung me; it is the other side.” How can we get the true picture? Let us get a radio station so that if we want somebody to tell us about what is happening in the Army, there is a particular FM for that. 

Saying, “Go to Radio Uganda”, Radio Uganda has got its various programmes that are covered the whole day. Why is it that you do not tell others not to create the FMs and that instead they should use Radio Uganda? It is only business. We want to understand the exact picture on the ground. So, Mr Chairman, I support the establishment of the radio station. And even the Army Shop, if there is money it should also be established. There is reason to look after the army officers. I thank you.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Kapelebyong County, Katakwi): Mr Chairman, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for its method of work. I bring the gratitude of the people of Kapelebyong to the committee because they were able to reach Kapelebyong at the height of the LRA’s disturbance in the constituency. So, the observations they have made here are not imaginations. It is what they saw on the ground. 

I would also like to express the gratitude of the people of Teso to the President, for having accepted to come down to the ground to rescue the people at this time of need. They suggest that his colleague, the Minister of Defence, should have been at the forefront, to come and help him in Teso. 

However, I have a few comments to make about the report of the committee. On page 23 the committee has rightly observed that the LRA is a menace. Our observation is that the LRA do not want state power. By all description they are thieves. They are using the name “rebels” to help them amass wealth by carrying out slave trade and looting property. But the name “rebels” is just to justify their activities. 

I was surprised to read in the papers that Uganda is preparing to send an army to Iraq. I thought our leaders should have read the Bible. It says that if you have a log in your own eye, you do not struggle to remove the peg in a neighbour’s eye first.

The committee has also observed that there were many spokesmen on military operations in the region. There were not many. I would like to correct this impression. They were only two or three. But I remember very well in the Teso region, it is specific here that we had our brother Mike Mukula and our honourable colleague, John Eresu, taking it upon themselves to talk about the military operations. They revealed the tactics and threatened the lives of those who were telling the truth about the situation. So, they were not very many; they were only two or three.  

Mr Chairman -(Interruption)- -(An hon. Member rose_) I have just started, please. I want to paint you a picture of the protected camps. In Kapelebyong, where we are over 100,000 people, we have only four camps. In the camp of Obalanga there are over 30,000 people and there are only two boreholes as water points. And the people cannot go beyond two kilometers to look for food, and yet we are not able to deliver food from the Disaster Preparedness Department! At least for the last two weeks, we have not been able to.  

In Acowa, where I come from, there are over 40,000 people and yet we get some of our army equipment being used by honourable members on the frontbench to go for funerals! Mr Chairman, that is the picture on the ground. Our appeal is that we direct our resources in the Defence Ministry, to defending the people of Uganda. Thank you.

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seek a brief clarification from the hon. Minister of Defence. First, I sit on the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. When the Director General of Internal Security Organization (ISO) appeared before our committee, we asked him how the rebels could move all the way from Sudan, cross Acholi and now enter Teso without all these DISOs and GISOs detecting them. 

He said - before the Minister in Charge of the Presidency - that they provided this information weeks earlier, and that the Army did not act. I repeated the question two times and he repeated the same answer. Now that the Minister is here, he should tell this country why they neglect intelligence reports to cause death to the people and destruction of property?

Number two, when His Excellency the President gave the State of the Nation Address, among other reasons he said the Army has problems because of insufficient funds, but that he was happy Cabinet sat in Gulu and allowed him the 23 percent; and that problem was solved. He also said that the problem was the tall grass, and he was waiting for the dry season. What season is this one? Is the grass still tall? If it is short, where are we?

Lastly, when hon. Stephen Kavuma was the Minister of State for Defence, he promised this House that he would bring the Army Bill. He left without bringing it. Then when hon. Mbabazi was Minister of State for Defence, he made the same promise. Today we are getting the same promise. Is he also willing to leave without the Bill being tabled?  

MR IBRAHIM KADDUNABBI (Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to thank the committee for doing a good job and I want to note that on page 4 it says that the Police bought some new vehicles. But we happen to witness increased highway robberies most especially on Mpigi-Maddu road, and our district police never benefited from these new vehicles. I would like to know from the Minister if Mpigi District Police will get more highway patrols to curb highway robbery.  

Mr Chairman, we have a prison in Kabasanda, which I visited some time back and I was told that the prisoners take one meal a day. Two, they even share blankets, which they also use as a mattress. I would like to know how the Minister will help these prisoners. As rightly said by one honourable colleague, we are all potential prisoners.  

I understand the Minister of Internal Affairs suspended authorising civilians to possess firearms and yet many or our colleagues even here in Parliament have been victims of robberies and even thefts at their homes. When is he planning to lift that ban?  

About work permits, we have heard many people in this Parliament complain about people who would not qualify to get work permits. But why does the Ministry continue to issue work permits to those who would not qualify to be called professionals? And if they want the locals to get employed, what can they do to help the nation? 

Since the Police embarked on spot fines for traffic offenders, I would like to hear from the Minister of Internal Affairs about the progress of these spot fines. How have they helped our nation? 

About traffic jams and the road-accidents, I would like to know if the Ministry has found out the causes of increased road accidents. And, why are some traffic lights switched off when they took taxpayers’ money to install? I thank you.

MR NYEKO OCULA (Kilak County, Gulu): I thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity. We are talking about the budget of the Ministry of Defence, and to me currently in this country this is the most important ministry to consider, because the nation is at crossroads on issues of security. Before I continue, I beg that you give maximum time on this ministry so that members diagnose it properly, unlike other ministries.  

Mr Chairman, I would like to begin with observations – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But honourable Member, the problem I have is that there is one remaining Vote, which is the Vote for the Auditor General. And you know that if you do not pass the Auditor General’s vote, then no money will be released. 

MR NYEKO OCULA: Mr Chairman, I would like to make an observation. If you look at the list of members of the committee who signed this report, you will notice something, which I should call funny. All the people who are very knowledgeable about defense in this committee did not sign it. There is hon. Katongole Abdul - who is very knowledgeable in defense but did not sign, Col. Katirima has not signed, Lt Gen. Tumwine has not signed, and Maj. Gen. Akandwanaho Caleb has not signed. The question I am posing here is: why have these people, who are very knowledgeable about defense and are on this committee – some of them even representing the Army in the House - shied away from signing this report? Or did they not attend the committee proceedings?

MR MAYENDE: Thank you, hon. Ocula for giving way. I wish to point out that the practice is, the report is signed after it is compiled and presented. I have the original here. It was signed yesterday and today when the members you are talking about were not here. But I want to assure hon. Ocula and the House that the people you have talked about actively participated in the drawing up of this programme. 

I want to point out that hon. Abdul Katongole did attend all the meetings that we had, except when he was out of the country. Hon. Kasigwa, hon. Apuun, hon. Katirima, all those attended. The only person who has not attended our committee meetings is Lt Gen. Tumwine who like you know very well is on other duties that are equally important. We did have hon. Salim Saleh who actually even gave us detailed information about the UPDF and the reserve force. That is the information I wanted to give the member.

MR NYEKO OCULA: Mr Chairman, I thank the chairman of the committee for rebuilding my confidence in the report. Let me now go straight to the issues I want to raise. 

One, the work we are doing today to consider the Defence budget is exactly what a legislator should do for this ministry. This is our cardinal rule: to make sure that adequate funds are provided for this ministry, for the security of the country. Nobody should expect, for example, hon. Ocula to put on combat and go to the frontline; that is out! That is another person’s work altogether. Our job is legislation and we have to proceed with this and do it effectively. 

Mr Chairman, when we are dealing with this Defence Ministry, what I would love to see is that when we pass money here, there should be effective work done on the ground. Last financial year we passed money for the Defence budget with all the rosy promises about improving security in the country, and today as we are talking, things are actually worse. 

I had even rougher times in my constituency sometime in December, when I went there and found that the LC officials in Parabo camp were moving door to door collecting food to give to army men - and yet we had just had a 23 percent budget cut. I hope this will not happen again, Mr Chairman. When we pass money, let it be used effectively. Let the population see the effects on the ground.

Mr Chairman, I always get perturbed about the Presidential Guard Brigade. This brigade has a total of over 6,000 armed men protecting State House in Kampala. I am informed now it is about 10,000 protecting State House. About three weeks ago, I was in Amuru camp, containing a population of about 34,000 people, but it has only 69 soldiers guarding it. What is all this irony about? How do we have a whole 6,000 people around Kampala or Soroti, and then 34,000 people elsewhere are protected with a force of only 69 people? It raises a lot of questions. 

I really urge the Committee of Defence to try and stand firm and have the number of soldiers guarding the President here in Kampala and so on, reduced. Let more soldiers be sent to protect our people who are living in the camps and elsewhere.  

I would also like to comment about the issue of the radio station. Which radio station in Uganda here is not accessible to the Ministry of Defence? They even have authority to recommend the closure of radio stations, and they have more authority over them than anyone else in Uganda. Radio Uganda is also there, Mr Chairman. Why spend more money on another radio station specifically for the Ministry of Defence? For example, in Gulu we have got Radio Omega, which the army spokesman in Gulu uses everyday.  

MS TIPERU: I want to inform my colleague that actually the Ministry of Defence does not have authority over all the radio stations in Uganda. Most of them are private and being private, they are profit-motivated. It depends on which company can pay them for commercials and so forth. Maybe the intention is to raise money within the Ministry of Defence, or motivate the soldiers who are in the battlefield who can access information. Precisely, I want my colleague to know that the Ministry of Defence has no control over radio stations. Thank you.  

MR NYEKO OCULA: I thank you for that information. But, does one have to own a radio in order to use it? Why do you not just budget for some money and then send information to Radio Omega, send to Radio Simba and then you utilise it accordingly. So, that this little money, which is supposed to go to this radio station, can be used to perhaps improve the welfare of the soldiers and other activities. Let me end here, Mr Chairman, I thank you very much. 

MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I intend to be brief. The first issue I would like to address is this false hope always given by the Ministry to the people of Uganda in general, but in particular to the people who are affected by this Kony menace. “This war will all be over next year, when such a season comes,” you tell the people! It is high time the Minister of Defence and government told this country the truth about this war. 

The Commander-in-Chief himself, all the army commanders have been giving deadlines and yet this war has not come to an end. What we should do is to tell the country the truth. So, I propose that much as the statement says that this war will be over, in fact, it is only last week the President said the war in Teso would be over within one week, and the week is expiring today. I am waiting to see whether tomorrow there will be no insurgency in Teso.

Two, Mr Chairman, there is a big problem and the country should move with caution about militias. You see, once we start arming tribal militias who are fanning tribal sentiments, we are going to develop a culture of “war lordism” in this country. You hear Mr Ecweru on radio say, “All these people, these Acholis, we shall kill all of them. Whoever is an Acholi in this land, that one we shall kill.”  Hon. Mukula said, “Once we finish Kony, we are turning our guns to the Karimojong”. I think the Ministry should be very careful, and the Government in particular when it is dealing with these warlords.

Thirdly, about these very militias: what is the Government policy for compensation, for example, if one of these arrow boys died in battle? We are already having a problem because even officers and men who die in battle, their families are claiming compensation and gratuity and it is not forthcoming. (Interruption)- hon. Lukyamuzi, give me a chance to have my bite.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, for giving way.  Mr Chairman, the clarification I am seeking is with reference to Article 208(4) of the Constitution and I would like to read it: 

“No person shall raise an armed force except in accordance with this Constitution.” The militia you are referring to now prevalent in Teso, under which law are they being raised and maintained?  

MR KATUNTU: I would like to disagree with my brother, Ken Lukyamuzi. You see, self-defense is a natural instinct. You do not have to have a law to defend yourself. So, I think the Teso people could have all the right to defend themselves, and there is no doubt about it. 

But my caution, especially to the Minister of Defence is, we should control the radicalism and the extremism of some of these arrow group commanders, because they could degenerate. Much as the Teso people have got a right to defend themselves against Kony, if the situation degenerates and they become tribal militias against another tribe, we could have a situation like that of Mogadishu. That is my only worry. But about militias and the law, the Minister could perhaps answer that.

Lastly, it is about the Police.  Really, it is high time the Minister of Internal Affairs handled the issue of police welfare. You need to build the barracks for these policemen. Some of them sleep in what are supposed to be mortuaries and when we are looking at our priorities we have a problem. This is a gentleman who is supposed to be enforcing law and order! He is the one supposed to be fighting corruption, but the conditions are so bad that he cannot have morale, leave alone the obligation - much as he is employed by the Police to fight. So, the issue of police welfare should be addressed. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the committee for outlining very important issues that are affecting these two ministries, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Defence. I would like to make comments on a few issues. 

First and foremost, Mr Chairman, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has budgeted for some money for the modernization of prison farms. Last financial year the pilot prison farms produced so much food and they earned so much money for the department. I do not see Obegigi Prison Farm on the list. I would like to urge the Ministry to consider it because it is one of the big prison farms in this country.  Right now, they are producing food, which is also sold within the district and outside. I would appreciate if they would modernize it further.

Secondly, I do not know how some of the departments perform their duties. Mr Chairman, when I was in hospital in Mulago, I was aware that there was someone who was admitted to the hospital who had been charged with treason. On the day I was discharged, I wanted to check on him but when I went to the room, he was not there. A few days after, I read from the newspapers that he had escaped from the hospital. 

If someone is charged with treason, how do you handle such a person? I actually went to see him because he married from my constituency and I know him personally. This is someone who was arrested from Ituri trying to cause commotion in this country, and you just let him escape like that! He is called Dr Okongo. I think the Ministry is inefficient!

Mr Chairman, I would like to appreciate what the Amnesty Commission is doing. I would like to thank the Ministry and its negotiation team, which made sure that UNRF II signed an agreement with this government and now they are out of the bush.  However, there is a lot of panic going on in West Nile because the implementation of this agreement has not yet started. We fear that these people may easily go back to the bush. I do not know what the Ministry has planned in respect to that.   

Mr Chairman, I would also like to comment on facilitation and transport for the Police. In Adjumani District the rebels came and abducted children. But because the Police Commander who is in charge of deploying soldiers and other armed forces does not have communication equipment at night, when somebody noticed people walking towards the district they tried to reach him but he could not be reached. The armed people who were deployed could not also be reached because they did not have communication equipment. 

The committee report is silent about communication equipment for the Police and some of the armed people. The radios they are talking about, I do not know whether they are radios for communication or radios for passing on information. Otherwise, Mr Chairman, I think that the money that is intended for some of these other activities, which may not be very helpful, should go to areas that could help improve the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

Money should go to uniforms and perhaps identification for our soldiers, because the soldiers put on the same uniforms as the rebels. Sometimes it is very difficult even for civilians to identify whether the people who are roaming around are actually soldiers or rebels. And they end up committing so many atrocities amongst the people. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbaale County, Kayunga): Mr Chairman, while contributing to this committee report, I would like to be convinced and guided by the national vision, the President’s State of the Nation Address and also the Budget Speech. Also, what we intend to achieve, how it will impact on the rural poor? My contribution is related to that. Whatever activity we are carrying out, we should see how it impacts on the rural poor. 

My first contribution will be on the NGO Registration Bill. The committee has said here that the Bill is already at hand and it is waiting for the Certificate of Financial Implications. I would like to learn from the Minister what is failing this NGO Bill. 

On page 13, the committee talks about where the NGO Board should be located. I looked at the President’s Speech and he is talking about NGOs, or organizations, being a fourth arm of government and being partners in development. 

I would like to convince my colleagues, and the Government as well, that we should not look at the NGOs with suspicion and leave them under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The committee has recommended here that NGOs should remain under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I want to say that NGOs are partners in development who should be put in a development ministry. 

When you go down to the local level, you should look at civil organizations, community based organizations; they operate under the Ministry of Gender. When it comes to the national level, people are recommending that NGOs should go to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I would like to see a situation where NGOs are given time to contribute to this country without any suspicion. That way, we will be addressing issues impacting on poverty.

I would like to end my contribution by commenting on the national identity cards. It has been said in the report that some relevant authorities have not ushered this in. I am wondering what is happening to this issue of national identity cards. I look at it as a very important activity that will help us get information about the people who are paying taxes. We could track tax defaulters, we could even avoid election violence, double voting, if we had national identity cards. I find no reason why this is not put in place, and I would like to know from the relevant authorities why we could not achieve this. Thank you very much.

MR BEN ETONU (Amuria County, Katakwi): I thank you, Mr Chairman. I belong to this committee, but since I have not been attending the committee meetings all the time, I decided that I should make this contribution. Mine is –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Sorry, if you belong to this committee, I think let us give –(Interruption)

MR ETONU: My chairman, you authorized me to say something. The point I would like to raise here concerns the suffering of the people of Teso because of the LRA. I have witnessed it, and I want to say that the LRA are not human beings because of what they are doing. 

Ugandans are known for being very kind, but if the LRA operatives get to you, they do not use a gun but instead they use clubs to hammer your head until they see the brains come out. I have buried several people who have died in this way. It is very painful! 

Also, the young boys and girls who they abduct, those who manage to escape have told me that if someone tries to escape and they recapture them, they bring all the abductees and kill that person when they are watching. They start cutting the person from the toes, and they do this at the time the food is served. This is being done when you are eating and you are supposed to laugh when this person is being killed. This is inhuman! 

I am proposing that what we need now is a war budget and a mobilization budget. My colleague here was saying we retire some ministries, but we would rather go for a war budget and mobilization budget now. 

What I have heard is that these rebels are saying that when they finish the food in Teso, they are moving to another district. We need to fight these people now. Honourable members, if you see what has been done to these people, you will believe me. This is why I must congratulate my colleagues from the North, particularly from Acholi sub-region, who have endured this up to this time. I expected them to have breakdowns –(Interjections)- that is what I am saying, hon. Aggrey Awori.  

I am requesting that we should have a war budget and a mobilization budget. I would like to request the Minister of Defence to make an initiative for us to start having this, so that we have more sophisticated, armoured, military vehicles to contain Kony. If we do not, these people are going to cause us trouble all over. 

Eventually, I believe that these people are prepared and are actually aiming at causing trouble throughout Uganda. To me, they are not after taking over the Government, their agenda is only to cause problems, kill people and abduct young children. When they abduct these children - for instance, those who were first abducted on June 15th, they have now come back as soldiers and they have made them operate in the areas where they were abducted. When they come with those children, they make them kill their relatives. Then they tell them, “Even if you run away, where will you go, you have been identified?” That is the method they use. These people are very dangerous.    

I would like to request honourable members that when the budget is presented by the Ministry of Defence, let us support it so as to avoid these problems from accelerating in Uganda. Thank you.

MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would also like to thank the committee for the good job done. 

I would like to start by commenting on the narcotic drugs. According to research, which has recently been carried out, it is indicated that Uganda has become a major route for transmission of narcotic drugs. The main reason that it is a popular route is that the laws are so weak. The offenders are let out free or they are made to pay a fine of as little as Shs 10 million. 

My question is: for how long do we have to wait before we tighten these laws on narcotic drugs? Mr Chairman, records in Butabika Hospital also indicate that at least 30 percent of hospital admissions are related to drug abuse. 

Members may be aware that in the schools, especially those around Kampala, drug abuse is becoming a common problem, a very big problem. It is related to HID/AIDS, to crime, to risky sexual behaviour. So, how long will we wait for the Bill to come to Parliament?

On security, especially in the East and North, Mr Chairman, the mandate of the Ministry of Defence is well spelt out. So, the questions people are asking on the ground, especially in Teso, are very pertinent. They are asking very simple questions, but very realistic ones. They are asking, “How come we have a whole ministry and Kony can come all the way from the North and we are not defended? How come it takes so long for Kony to be in our midst before the UPDF acts? How come we civilians are expected to fight, when we have the UPDF?” 

It is also apparent that the UPDF has lost steam and yet we are told of US $17.5 million availed to them last year. People are asking, “Do we have to wait for the Bill to come in before the morale of the UPDF, especially the ones on the ground, is elevated so that they can act?” 

Mr Chairman, the UPDF has sometimes used tall grass as the reason for not combating Kony. May I suggest then that part of the funds of the budget be allocated to cutting the grass short so that this can be effected?  Thank you very much.

CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a few comments to make on the report. 

One is about the NGO Board. The NGO communities are trying to say they would want to have another home. I am only worried about the reason they are trying to give. The committee did not capture it well, but it seems as if they are worried. What do they fear? To me, the board simply registers and maybe monitors their activities. So, to say that they want to choose where to go, I think it becomes suspicious, unless they really have convincing reasons. After all, they are represented on the board.  

Two, Mr Chairman, I would like to comment on pensions for ex-servicemen in our army. This mandate was transferred to the Ministry of Public Service. But the other day, we saw a report from Public Service and Local Government and they are saying things are not well because there is no legal framework in place. And there is no budgetary provision for these gallant sons of ours.  

I want to invite this House to really get interested in the plight of these ex-servicemen, the plight of our widows and orphans. They have lost husbands, who of course died on duty, but Shs 17 billion is in arrears and there is no plan to pay it. This really hurts very much, Mr Minister.

My next point is on the Army Bill. We have seen the report, Kony has been given a timeframe – “this year, Kony will be no more”. But for the Army Bill, no timeframe has been given. We have aged officers, sickly men, and we want to see them off in an honourable way. Mr Minister, why do we not have this issue settled once and for all?

My last point is about the Police force. Their work is commendable. I think the Police have gained a lot of discipline now. They are very confident in their work. Their response to crime is now good. But I am worried when somebody says that you want them to handle pistols. It is not fair. The other day somebody almost lost his life at Hotel Equatoria around 11.00 a.m. Someone had a knife and he wanted to stab a police officer on duty but somehow he was saved by some other friendly force. 

In our situation, there is no way you can recommend that you want our policemen to handle pistols, and of course, they will be procured at an extra cost. Unless this was a recommendation from either criminals or what, there is no way we can have our policemen exposed at this present rate of crime. 

For the radio station and the Army Shop, I am very sorry -(Interruption)

MR SEKIKUUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have heard the member mentioning that a certain recommendation about policemen handling pistols was brought forward by criminals. Could he substantiate what he meant by insinuating that criminals infiltrated a committee of Parliament? 

CAPT. MATOVU: Well, I did not mean it in that context, but of course it would be unfortunate if we exposed our policemen to danger. 

About the Army Shop and the radio station, Mr Chairman, I am in the Army and I know what is in the Army. I do not support these two items to be in the Army. Do not count on my support, Mr Minister.

MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA: (Isingiro North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Chairman. My concern is about the welfare of the Police. The welfare of police is very bad, and the way we are behaving, it is like we do not seem to be moving towards institutional development. Today we are creating Wembley, tomorrow we are creating Arrow Group; we are not strengthening the existing legal institutions! (Applause). 

I think there is need to invest in institutions because we shall reap the benefits of accountability and efficiency. Now we are going to spend so much money on these arrow groups, and then we shall spend so much money curbing people who have acquired skills and they want to misuse them in those groups!

Mr Chairman, in the interest of time I will just tackle the illegal immigrants briefly. We have so many coloured people now in Uganda, actually more than when Amin put his foot down. What is the problem? Our people cannot get employment, we are having graduates on the streets but both the informal and formal sector are infected by these people. They are all over the place, they are selling mandaazi, they are shopkeepers, they are even brushing shoes; they are in garages - (Interruption)

MR KIDEGA: Thank you very much hon. Rwamirama. The issue of illegal immigrants in this country, who are starving the citizens of jobs, is very serious. We have an Indian man in Kampala here who buys pancakes commonly known as kabalagala. He only adds red pepper, piri piri, and he sells them. He then calls himself an investor and he operates in this country. Just down here on Yusuf Lule Road, there are Indian people who are serving in a bar. Could we not have Ugandans to do that job?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, the other area of concern is on the Army Bill. It is very dangerous to run an institution and vote so much money for it in the absence of a law that governs personnel. For how long can we say what is lacking? The Minister should come out and tell us where the problem is. Seventeen years in government, there is no law governing personnel! 

Let me quote a critical incident, Mr Chairman. These people are not represented here because I have never seen their representative stand here and talk in this Parliament. We have people who were supposed to retire and they were looking for packages to treat themselves. These packages were not available and these people died. Silver Oyera is one of them, and Col Lutaaya Sonko is another. 

Why don’t you retire soldiers who have been allowed to go home? Why don’t you look for money and retire them? We are here in this environment because they were there to provide it. So, why don’t we reciprocate?  

Mr Chairman, I would not like to be treated well posthumous. When I am grappling for water and you do not give me water, when I die you should not buy me an expensive coffin and come mourn with crocodile tears! I would like the Minister to come out and tell the whole world about these people who abandoned their families and went to the bush. Once they are destined to retire, retire them, give them a package, give them a good send-off, where is the problem?

Lastly, I want to talk about the radio station. We are talking of divesting ourselves from cost centres and on the other hand we are doing different things. Unless the Minister tells us the other reason for the radio –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Is this radio station coming this financial year or it is a proposal for the future?

MR MAYENDE: Mr Chairman, the army radio is one of the four new proposals that are contained in the policy statement to come this year, if finances are available.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, whichever way you look at –(Interruption)

MR KIDEGA: Thank you very much, hon. Rwamirama. Mr Chairman, about this radio station, it is in today’s newspaper that the army spokesman made reference to the army shopping for transmitters.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If you look at page 21, it is one of the planned activities for this financial year. I do not want to politicise the issue of the radio station. I am looking at the principle. We are trying to improve the welfare of soldiers, so we should minimize the cost at the centre. If you want to disseminate information, we have Radio Uganda and many other radios, draft a document and pass it on. You can also buy space in newspapers. Why do you have to increase on the cost at the centre when we are having a problem of the welfare, and our economy is galloping? 

Mr Chairman, with those few remarks, I hope the Minister will clarify on the issues I raised. I thank you very much. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, 15 members have contributed to this report. I think it is high time the Ministers responded and we conclude this matter.

MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Chairman for giving me this opportunity to speak. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for their elaborate presentation. I have two observations to make.

One, when I was going through the notable achievements of last financial year, on page 19, I did not see anything on compensation for my people who were displaced by a barracks. These people were paid in August, I am sure that budget was for the last financial year. Therefore, it should have been reflected. 

I would also like to take this chance to thank the Ministry for responding to our cries. At least part payments have been effected. I am only urging the Ministry to process the balance so that these people can buy land elsewhere and settle down. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS AKWERO-ODWONG: Mr Chairman, considering that the issue of insecurity in this country is really the pivot point where the issue of democracy and the livelihood of the people revolve; is it really fair to let only 15 people contribute without letting other members also voice their concerns? Mr Chairman, you have always been very considerate. Could you allow us some more time to contribute?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there are plans for this budget. It is now almost 7 o’clock, and the Ministers have not responded. What you need to hear are the responses from the Ministers. We have another matter, which was not within the programme, namely the Auditor General’s Budget. Tomorrow is earmarked for the Finance Bill. This issue is not being exhausted today when we are dealing with the budget. We shall continue monitoring and discussing policies because these policies are meant for the entire year.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have brief comments on issues raised by honourables members. The first one was by hon. Charles Byaruhanga, who raised the issues about the strategic plan to rehabilitate prisons and other institutions. We obviously have a strategic plan to improve the conditions of the prisoners, prison warders and other related personnel.

The question of East African passports, Mr Chairman, they are meant for travel within East Africa, not beyond the borders of East Africa, at least for the moment. Therefore, it is right that they should be stamped.  

The question of work permits was raised by a number of colleagues, especially hon. Bakkabulindi. We are putting a lot of emphasis on ensuring that permits are issued properly. We have problems of monitoring and efforts are being made to increase the capacity to monitor the people who abuse our work permits. We also intend to strengthen the law in this direction.

The question of narcotics was also raised. Again, the Narcotics Bill is in Cabinet, with the view to strengthening the law.  

Other issues that were raised included, points raised by the hon. Member for Butambala about the prison in Kabasanda. This is really a local administrative prison. The new Prisons Bill that is already on the Cabinet agenda is meant to rectify the problem that he did raise about improving the conditions under administration of prisons that fall under local administrations.  

The other issue raised by many other people, like Ndungu Katuntu, is about prison welfare. Yes, all of us realize that conditions are not as good as they should be. There is a lot of congestion, as the report from the chairman rightly noted. We are working to decongest the prisons and improve the conditions for the prisoners.  

The prisoner who escaped – the point raised by hon. Jessica Eriyo - we need to tighten circumstances under which this prisoner escaped and investigations are going on to see if there was some form of collaboration by some officials –(Interjection)- Mr Chairman, you had indicated to us that time is our enemy. I think we should address these issues and move as quickly as possible.  

Mr Chairman, the point raised by hon. Etonu is correct, the Lord’s Resistance Army has been using every criminal and barbaric methods to kill people. It shows the true nature of this banditry group. And really, all of us should support all the efforts being made to eliminate the group as quickly as possible.  

Hon. Matovu, I agree with you and the chairperson of the committee that the NGO Board should be under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, not only for registration but also for monitoring. There was a reference that the NGO Board should be under developmental ministries. I want to assure you that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is very developmental, and without its work the development efforts in this country would come to a halt.

There was a question raised by hon. Rwamirama on aliens selling mandaazi, and other related issues. Well, you may sometimes be mistaken, because seeing an Asian selling mandaazi does not automatically mean that this Asian is a foreigner. He may be Ugandan. So, I would like honourable members to be broad when they are handling this matter. Where there suspicion, please, do report to us. I will take the necessary action.

I want to thank the honourable members who have contributed very positively to this discussion. Hon. Sekikuubo is reminding me about firearms. He is absolutely right. We have tightened the issuing of firearms to private individuals. We felt that many people were getting guns when they had no adequate capacity to handle them. These guns were both a menace to themselves and society. We have put in place arrangements so that before you are issued with a license, you should have the competence to handle that equipment. We are also discussing ways of training people before they can actually get access to guns.  

Mr Chairman, I may have not responded to all the questions, but I have taken your advice about the pressure of time. However, if there are issues that I may have not responded to, my colleagues, the Minister of state and our officials, are at the disposal of honourable members of Parliament either outside this Chamber or in the Ministry. Otherwise, I also thank the chairperson of the committee for the good report. I thank you, Mr Chairman. (Applause)

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for really going out of their way to understand the issues related to the Ministry of Defence. I must say I am happy with this report. I would, however, like to make a few remarks.  

Mr Chairman, there was a question about the UPDF to be deployed in Iraq. I told the chairperson of the committee - we did not discuss this in this committee, and I know that members have been talking about it as a foregone conclusion – that I am not aware at all that we have plans of deploying the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces in Iraq.  

When this matter appeared in the newspapers, I enquired from the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs, to whom the statement had been attributed. He told me he was misquoted. What he said was that while on a visit to the US, the President indeed was asked by a senator whether Uganda would be willing, as a partner member of the alliance, to deploy forces to Iraq. The President said, “If Uganda was requested, it would consider that”. So, I would like to put this on record that there is, to the best of my knowledge, no plan for that - because no one has requested the deployment of UPDF in Iraq.

I would also like to respond to the statement, on page 23, that the UPDF was deployed in Kapchorwa and it has been doing an effective job. I thank the committee for that observation. However, it is not true to say that due to poor facilitation they have turned to the population for their upkeep. When the committee raised this issue with me this morning, I talked to the battalion commander and he said it was not true. It is possible that this issue was confused with the late payment of LDUs’ in that area. I will explain to Parliament the actual problem as I tried to explain to the committee. So, it is not true that the UPDF’s 33rd Battalion deployed in Kapchorwa is in anyway poorly facilitated, and it has turned to the population for upkeep.

Of course on page 24 the committee says it was not informed of how much was budgeted for the Presidential Guard Brigade in addition to what they get from the Ministry of Defence. I suppose that Vote, which we handled earlier, would answer that because that is under Vote 002.  

On the question about overall implications to the command structure of the army, which is also referred to in paragraph 9, I would like to assure this House that there is no implication whatsoever. I repeat what I said earlier that the Presidential Guard Brigade is part of the UPDF, and is doing specialized duty under the command of the UPDF.  

There was a question about defining the command structure of the reserve force, on page 25. I would like to assure the House that this is adequately covered in the Bill, which I will talk about later in response to the contribution made by members.  

There was the question about accountability for the US $17.5 million, which was released for classified procurement. Mr Chairman, I have had an occasion to inform this House that government has now established mechanisms for auditing classified expenditure -(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Thank you, hon. Mbabazi, for giving way.  When we are asking for accountability for this money, the US $17.25 million, we are looking at the history of how we have been releasing money every year. If you look at the Auditor General’s reports, you never accounted not only for the classified expenditure but also for the ordinary recurrent and development expenditure. For example, in 1998, you did not account for Shs 914 million; in 1999, you did not account for Shs 19 billion; in 2000, you did not account for Shs 54 billion; in 2001, you did not account for Shs 6 billion; and in 2002, you did not account for Shs 2.8 billion. 

We understand you need this money, and if you look at the details of the money unaccounted for, it includes salaries, which have been released to you. That means salaries were never paid to the soldiers. The House is concerned about your failure to account for money given to you and yet you are demanding for more every year. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We are the representatives of the people, and in accordance with the Constitution we play a very big role in checking the expenditure of government. The clarification I am seeking is in regard to the US $17.5 million acquired under classified expenditure.  Throughout the excesses, which we have been pinpointing in the past five years, the word “classified” has appeared many times. Could the Minister of Defence tell us in general terms what they have acquired from the US $17.5 million?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank hon. Sabiiti and hon. Lukyamuzi for raising those clarifications. My simple answer to both of them is to make reference to the system of accountability, which this government has put in place. To the best of my knowledge, accountability is done through the Auditor General who reports to the Public Accounts Committee (PAC), which reports to Parliament. The laws specify clear sanctions about those who fail to comply with the law.  So, I am simply giving information, because previously there was that problem of non-accountability for classified expenditure of this US $17.5 million. That expenditure will be accounted for according to the system in place.

Mr Chairman, coming to the points raised by honourable members, I want to first of all thank all of them for supporting the defence budget. I have very little to say except - for purposes of elucidation – to give information as follows: 

I heard the chairman of the committee say that a radio station is provided for in this financial year. There is no provision for the radio in this current financial year. If you look at the policy statement, it has details for the items in the annexes from page 32 onwards. The programme expenditure is here and the radio was not covered. What I was saying in this policy statement is that, we as managers have found the necessity and the desirability to have a radio station. I do not want to engage in a prolonged debate on a matter, which does not exist.

Secondly, I would like to comment on the issue of “naked soldiers” as raised by Capt. Byaruhanga. We happily received information from Capt. Byaruhanga about naked soldiers that litter the roads after one passes Karuma. I have been beyond Karuma many times, but I have not seen these soldiers. So, I would like to know from him if these people exist. To the best of my knowledge, Mr Chairman and honourable members, we have bought enough uniforms for the entire force. I do not expect any single soldier to be going around naked. Therefore, we do not know the soldiers Capt. Byaruhanga is talking about.  

I am not going to comment on all those issues raised by hon. Byaruhanga. I do not know anything about potential prisoners. I really do not know why hon. Byaruhanga perceives himself as a potential prisoner. Each one speaks for oneself, and I really cannot say why hon. Byaruhanga sees himself as that.  

But, I am happy to say that in the case of prisons and welfare, generally in the UPDF we have endeavoured and we still endeavour within the limitation of our resources, to improve the conditions of the Army, including prisoners. 

This question about Kony spreading his wings even wider, as someone said, I think it was hon. Ocula; he said that security has become worse. Well, this is a matter that given the opportunity, I would like to come back and speak to Parliament about. We did as the chairman of the committee said. We had promised that we would give regular reports and I was just waiting to be given a slot to come and talk about security generally. And I would like to suggest that we discuss this in detail at that time. 

Hon. Katuntu, talks about false hope and urges us not to give false hope. He says deadlines have been given and they have passed and we should tell the country the truth; meaning that there is no hope. Well, hon. Katuntu is entitled to his opinion. If in his belief he thinks there is no hope, I will try to persuade him to see that there is hope. But if he does not, well, I will go with those who see hope. 

Mr Chairman, hon. Katuntu knows the history of this country. He knows the insecurity that existed in Uganda starting 17 years ago. He knows the problems we have had since then, the various groups that took up arms to cause insecurity in Teso, the UPA, the Spirit Movement, Itwonga, ADF, West Nile Bank Front, name them. For all of them we can only say that they were, but they are not anymore today. We only remain with the LRA. And surely, if the UPDF has before been able to neutralise all these groups, the logical conclusion one makes is that even LRA will follow suit. Why not? 

When I come to talk about security, as I have promised if you give me time, Mr Chairman, I will certainly explain to hon. Katuntu  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But, earlier on we said every two weeks a statement should be made. I think that position still stands. When you are ready with your statement, we shall definitely accommodate you on our Order Paper so that the statement is made and further discussion of the security matter follows.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I am always ready every two weeks. Just give me the slot and I will be here. 

Hon. Matovu raised a question about ex-service men and their pension. Let me first of all talk about the Bill, because he raised a question about it. Like all the other UPDF Bills, I have kept this House informed about the stages of the preparation of the Bill. And the current status of that Bill is that Cabinet has considered it. We have gone over the bulk of the Bill and it is a huge comprehensive one. There is only one matter over which Cabinet has given me two weeks to consult. Actually it is the question of pensions because government decided as a policy to shift pensions from Ministry of Defence to the Ministry that handles pensions. 





That means that the Pensions Act will apply to the soldiers. But the Pensions Act in its present form was found lacking, and the Minister responsible raised this in Cabinet. We have discussed it, and provisions in the UPDF Bill about pensions and the Pensions Act, are going to be harmonised. This matter is being studied and as soon as we are through, that will be the last bit Cabinet will be deciding on. Then we will go to the stage, which will be after due drafting by the First Parliamentary Counsel. I will present it here. 

To respond to hon. John Kazoora’s point that I had promised when I was Minister of State for Defence - the fact is that I did not. But I have been here several times since I became Minister of Defence, and I have kept the House informed about the stage of preparation of the Bill –(Interjection) 

About the Arrow Group, hon. Amajo raised the point about relying on civilians to fight. I would like to make these two points on that one: One, these groups and others like ASTU in Karamoja, the home guards in Acholi, and those who fought the ADF in the Central and Western regions, all these have been recruited in the same way that we have been recruiting civilians in the past. We then convert them into LDUs or some civilian militias, and there is really no difference between them and the others. 

The difference between the people of Teso and other areas like in the North has been that the people of Teso volunteered. They have volunteered to fight this group of terrorists and we linked up with them and, therefore, we brought them in line with the policy of government.
  
MRS OKWERO ODWONG: I just wish through you, Mr Chairman, to inform the Minister that really for the past 18 years, much as we commend our brothers in Teso for rising up to fight, even in the North in 1991 - you may seek advice and information from Lt Gen. Tinyefuza. The people of the North in 1991 formed the very first arrow brigade in Acholi. And for them they were fighting using bows and arrows literally, they were not given guns, and they were killed en masse. 



They did not lose hope. They kept on fighting because by August 1991 Padibe sub-county had over 6,000 arrow groups. To-date most of our sub-counties have been maintained and supported with the assistance of home guards and LDUs. You know, it sometimes pains! We support this government but, please, give credit where it is due. Acknowledge contribution where it has been given. It is erroneous to keep on creating a disparity and yet you very well know that the people of the North have been sacrificing. Actually, we have been at the forefront in trying to stamp out the Kony activities. 

We have been paying with our lives, our blood. Our sons and daughters have been sacrificing and you may recall that most of our children were sent to the Congo and many of them never came back. We again recruited the LDUs, and to-date we still have them.  

Having stood up to give this point of information, Mr Chairman, I wish to turn to page 19 to further inform this House that it is not true that LRA activities have been curtailed in the Acholi sub-region. On the contrary, since July 2002 most of the Acholi have now been sent to camps. The only credit that I give my government is that our people seek refugee and protection from the UPDF. They have never run to the rebels to seek for protection and that is credit enough that the Government is trying to protect them. But let us agree and call a spade a spade.

As I talk now, Padibe sub-county, since December 18th up to 18th August when we were there with the Ministers of State for Defence and Security, we were told that in eight months, 800 of their children were abducted even from the protected camps. I think the Minister of Defence should call a spade a spade. We are all here and we really hold this country dear to our hearts. We should also hold the peoples’ lives in this country dear to our hearts. More so, him being the Minister of Defence, I urge him to do so. I have even volunteered to escort him to the sub-region and he goes up to the camps and sees what is there. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Nankabirwa Sentamu): Thank you very much. I also want to give information on top of what hon. Akwero Odwong has said. When I was in Padibe I was told that part of the problem is caused by the collaborators in the protected camps. They are the ones who tell the LRA the weaknesses and in the end LRA attacks and abducts children. So, that information had to be brought out so that we are aware of the problems of collaborators with the LRA. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you. Mr Chairman, I would like to confirm what my honourable sister has said. Actually I was going to say so because when I was Minister of State for Defence, I did visit those arrow groups in Padibe myself. So, I am sorry she misunderstood me to be saying that the Acholis do not fight Kony. If I implied that in any way, I did not mean it.

The next point I want to make on the question of arrow groups is, someone has been saying that they are unlawful. I think people have been making the point that the whole thing is unlawful. I would like to refer you to the provisions of the Constitution, Article 17(1)(e) and 17(2), which handles duties of citizens. It says and I will read it:

“It is the duty of every citizen of Uganda to defend Uganda and to render national service where necessary.” (2) “It is the duty of all able-bodied citizens to undergo military training for the defense of this Constitution and the protection of the territorial integrity of Uganda whenever called upon to do so; and the State shall ensure that facilities are available for such training.”  

So, I would like to put to rest this notion that legally there is a problem about what is going on, for instance, in creating citizens’ militias.

Finally, I am surprised that hon. Bright Rwamirama would be the one to make this point because he is a UPDF officer. He was saying that there is no law governing the personnel of the UPDF. Mr Chairman, obviously there is a law. I will repeat what I have said many times here. The Constitution of Uganda Article 273 did save all the laws existing then and the NRA Statute is still in place. It is the law that governs the management and regulation of the UPDF.  

Mr Chairman, I would like to thank honourable members for supporting the Defence budget and to assure you that I will come - if you give me the time - to discuss fully the question of security. Thank you.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Thank you very much.

MR SEKIKUUBO: Mr Chairman, I am aware of the problem of time, but members raised a rather important issue about the torture in Madi-Okolo and Kilak counties. And you remember on the 4th of July the Resident State Attorney of Gulu, Sydney Asubo, was arrested and detained by the UPDF. Since then the Deputy Director of Public Prosecutions has petitioned the UPDF for action. Could the Minister, possibly in light of the other issues raised on torture, throw light on that issue as well?

If we have institutions being attacked and officials like the District Director of Public Prosecutions being tortured, it is a matter of serious concern to this country. We need clarification on that as well.

THE CHAIRMAN: The constraint I have is that he saw you standing and he did not give you the opportunity to seek clarification. Can I force him to really receive it? He has heard; if he wants to answer, let him answer. But it is his right really to accept your point of clarification or information, and he declined it. 

MR SABIITI: This is very important for the House.  There is a clarification, which I think all members want. I would like to know, whenever the spokesman of the army makes an official statement, should we take it to be the truth or we should wait for the Minister himself to come and talk about it? For example, today’s Monitor newspaper page 9 states: “The Army will employ civilians to run its FM station. Army Spokesman, Maj. Shaban Bantariza told the Monitor yesterday that civilians would work alongside soldiers. ‘We will employ some civilians as well’, Bantariza said. He was out shopping for a transmitter yesterday. He said that the radio, which starts broadcasting soon, would cover the entire country.” 

When we get such information from the army spokesman and the Minister comes and tells us this thing is not there, what is the truth? Could the Minister clarify this to the House?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, they are saying that the statement from one of the officers in your ministry is contradicting yours. What is the position?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, could I kindly request hon. Sabiiti to read out the rest of the article?

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. “Asked whether they have been allocated a frequency yet, Bantariza said, ‘That is very easy. The Ministry of Defence Joint Management Team (JMT) proposed the Army FM station last year. The secretary for Defence, Mr Gabidande Musoke, was mandated to look for funds to start the radio’. The Minister of State for Defence, Ruth Nankabirwa, told the Monitor yesterday that the radio would have various call-in programmes.”

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The article says the military spokesman said that the organ of the Ministry, which decided this, then tasked the accounting officer to find money. Obviously a government department finds money by coming to Parliament to ask it to vote for money for that purpose. And I have said that when you look at the state that we have given, we have reasons for having a radio station. But I am not going into that.

I said in the policy statement that some of the things we have listed there, which we desire to have, include a radio station for the Army. I have said so. But when it came to budgeting, when you look at the annexes about actual provision, in fact it is not there. Why? Because when we discussed it - you know by now, this is the tail end of the budgeting process. Because we go to Ministry of Finance and discuss with them, from the Ministry of Finance we go to Cabinet. So, some of the things we intended to do, we cannot do them because the resource envelope does not allow for them. That is all I am saying. 

And you will find in the policy statement not only the radio station but also a few other things, which we would desire to have, but which we will not have. That is simply because there was not provision for them in the budget.

The question of torture and the pamphlet, which I saw, I have forgotten who had it – someone had in his hand a document, which had a picture of a person who had apparently torture marks on his back. I do not know about it. I received this yesterday in my pigeonhole. I was particularly interested in knowing if there was greater detail inside. I wanted to know who it was, when the torture took place and by who?  I did not find that in that article about that particular picture. I have not found it in the magazine. 

I am therefore, Mr Chairman, unable to tell when that torture happened, whether it happened as the honourable member says in Amin’s time or any other time. I simply disclaim responsibility for it. The Ministry of Defence is not responsible and we have, as you know, a very strict code of discipline. If there was to be any torture by the Army and this fact was brought to our attention, you know very well that we would move very firmly against it. 

This question about the DPP in Gulu, yes, I have heard about it. Mr Chairman, I received a report from the 4th Division in Gulu that they had arrested - I think 17 – suspected collaborators of the LRA. These were taken into custody and they were charged before court. They were bailed out because the charges, which were preferred against them, allowed for bail. And yet these were held on suspicion that they were engaged in acts of treason. So, there had to be a meeting point between the military - who obviously had that problem at their hands and would not kindly receive anyone who treated it lightly - who is the state attorney. I have discussed this with the Director of Public Prosecutions fully, and I am sure the solution is at hand. Thank you.

MAJ. KAZOORA: The honourable minister did not answer my concern that came from the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs through the Director General of ISO. Could you answer the question, please?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thought I had answered hon. Kazoora’s points - those that deserved to be answered. Mr Chairman, hon. Kazoora says the member –(Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Chairman, I am John Kazoora. I represent the people of Kashari, second term running now. I am a popularly elected Parliamentary Commissioner. Is the honourable minister in order to put my question on reserve and insinuate that they do not matter and, therefore, they could be ignored? Is he in order? 
 
THE CHAIRMAN: Let the Minister answer your question. I think that will solve your problem.
 
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The question was that the ISO boss told hon. Kazoora’s committee that ISO had given information about Kony and the UPDF did not react when Kony was entering Uganda. Well, first of all, I do not have that information. The Director General of ISO has not given it to me and, therefore, I am unable to comment on it. 

But let me also say that hon. Kazoora would know very well, as a member of the UPDF and as a former senior Director of ISO, that it is possible for one to get information about something that may happen, and not prevent it from happening in time.  

Mr Chairman, when you look at the area we are talking about, when you look at those areas bordering Sudan, which I have visited by the way, hon. Jane Odwong may want to know, many times –(Interjection)- yes, in a helicopter, that is true. When you look at that area, it is a large expanse of land, which is sparsely populated. Even if what hon. Kazoora is saying was true, he knows very well that receiving information that there is a movement of people in this area and for the troops to move in time to prevent that movement, surely, is not something that you do so easily. If anyone were able to do that kind of a thing, then we would not be having the kind of problems we have in the world.  

So, I know for sure there has been a problem, there has been a complaint about the UPDF and its slow response many times. I have had occasion to actually speak about this in this Parliament. To the best of my knowledge, the UPDF gives adequate response where it has enough information and according to the means available at its disposal. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you have heard the responses. We have been dealing with the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. I now put the question that the report of the committee be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you.

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force:

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 74,107,169,000 under Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 4,848,763,000 under Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 17,827,829,000 under Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,373,990,000 under Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 009 – Ministry of Internal Affairs:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,750,962,000 under Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 822,200,000 under Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 299,207,237,000 under Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,945,803,000 under Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: The clarification I am seeking, Mr Chairman, is about Shs 200 million already set aside and meant for the radio station. Before I can give my support to this development Vote; it was not included on this.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,945,803,000 under Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence, be provided as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/2004

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it is true we are really out of time, but I hope we can consider this little matter and finish it so that tomorrow you have time to yourselves.  

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Chairman. This is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the policy statement and the budget estimates for the office of the Auditor General for financial year 2003/2004. 

Mr Chairman, the office of the Auditor General derives its mandate from Article 163 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. It is a statutory body with a separate vote, 131 beginning with financial year 2003/2004. This is the first time it has presented its own policy statement and budget estimates to the committee. The office had in the previous years been budgeted for under the Ministry of Finance.
 
Methodology:

Mr Chairman, the committee held a meeting with the Auditor General and his technical staff.

The committee further analysed the policy statement and the budget proposal for financial year 2003/04.

The function of the Auditor General:  

In conformity with Article 163 of the Constitution, the Auditor General has a big task of auditing the accounts of the following:

- Local governments
- The Central Government; and
- Any public institution/body established by an Act of Parliament.

Observations:

Mr Chairman, the office of the Auditor General is an office of Parliament and they report directly to Parliament. The performance of this office, therefore, impacts greatly on the performance of Parliament in as far as enforcing accountability in public institutions is concerned. 

There is still lack of independence of this office, contrary to Article 163 of the Constitution. The Executive still has control over the office especially in human resource and financial aspects.

Staff of the Auditor General are recruited by the Public Service Commission and operate on the same terms and conditions as other public officers who they are supposed to audit. There are, therefore, no incentives to officers in this office to audit the other public servants.

The value for money audit is a specialised audit and goes beyond the normal financial audit. This covers issues that include the efficiency of the economy. The committee was informed that the office has so far carried out the value for money audit for the Universal Primary Education (UPE) programme and will soon produce a report of its findings.

The organisational structure of the Auditor General’s office is still very old and does not respond to the current challenges of auditing like audit research, value for money audit and computer auditing. However, their staff is being trained in information technology and value for money auditing. The personnel requirement in terms of numbers and skills are not met due to budgetary and structural rigidities.

The committee was also informed that there is a plan to establish a computer audit unit and link the ten branches countrywide to the headquarters.

The continued housing of the external auditors in the respective ministries/departments that they audit was because the office of the Auditor General currently lacks space. This problem will be addressed if adequate office accommodation is secured.

The office of the Auditor General will start auditing classified expenditure in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act, section 33(1)(d), which sets out the procedures for carrying out the audit. The officers to carry out the classified audit had been vetted but the actual exercise did not take off due to lack of details of operations and reporting mechanism that was cleared by the above Act.

Recommendations:

The Bill for a law to strengthen the independence of the Auditor General should be expeditiously brought to Parliament to enable the office perform its duties more effectively. This law should address the above-mentioned concerns.

Value for money audit should be extended to various government programmes, past and ongoing.

Assistance and cooperation should be accorded to the office of the Auditor General in the efforts to audit classified expenditure.

The Auditor General should be given human resource independence in order to enable him hire, motivate, and fire staff members, where necessary.

The development budget for the next financial year should cover the requirements for the office accommodation at region and district levels so that the officers are independent of the organisations they are supposed to audit.

Budget proposal for the financial year 2003/2004:

The following are the budget proposals for the office of the Auditor General:

Vote 131:

Recurrent expenditure Shs	5,424,580,000
Development expenditure Shs 138,000,000

Mr Chairman, the committee recommends to the House the above figures for the office of the Auditor General for approval for financial year 2003/2004.

Conclusion:

Mr Chairman, the committee appreciates the role being played by the office of the Auditor General in curbing corruption in public offices. The committee, therefore, requests that this august House do adopt the report and approve the budget estimates for the office of the Auditor General for financial year 2003/2004. I thank you and I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, chairperson and members of the committee for the report.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Mr Chairman, it is important that the Minister of Finance gives us some information particularly regarding recommendation number one. When is he bringing this Bill? This office, as it is noted, is important to Parliament. Could he tell us how far they have gone in drafting this Bill for the Auditor General’s office?

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro South, Mbarara): Mr Chairman, I thank the committee for this report. I would like to suggest that the committee helps government itself by moving a Private Member’s Bill as a committee, because most likely there are no financial implications. There are people in this House who have attended courses in legislative drafting and they could assist you in that so that you move on this issue, while the Ministry is getting its act together. I thank you.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago county, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to add my voice to those of members who have thanked the committee and the Auditor General for the efforts they are putting in to update the country on financial reports. I have just a simple request, which I made before: when district audits are made, copies should be availed to Members of Parliament for the respective districts. This will helps us to also follow up some of the resources that go to the districts.

MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA (Rwampara County, Mbarara): I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I also thank the chairman and his committee for this brief report. It is brief like a mini skirt, long enough to cover the subject matter. However –(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: Mr Chairman, I have heard that kind of talk among people who are not sensitive to gender issues. And it is really embarrassing to hear a person, who is supposed to represent a population, which is 50 percent female, make such remarks. This is an insult to the female gender. Therefore, is the member in order to insult our mothers and sisters who wear mini skirts, this way? Is he in order?

MR KABAREEBE: I thank you, Mr Chairman, for no comment. This report is a wonderful report, I must say, and it has given us the clue, on how the Auditor General should operate. However, it is sad to note that the terms and conditions of the public servants working there are stressed as per the responsibility they have vis-à-vis the work they do against other officers. In other words, the check duty is paralysed by lack of incentives. 

We used to have a problem in Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and customs, but when their salaries were increased to super scales, there was a very big change. And CAA is now collecting a lot of money, like the Uganda Revenue Authority. I wonder why these protectors of our money cannot be given incentives? Perhaps it will be done when the law is put in place to regularise the performance of the Auditor General.

Mr Chairman, I must say that the public money must be protected and if we deny them personnel in terms of numbers, then we are not actually doing any service to our people. In the establishment of decentralisation you will find that, like in Mbarara for example, each sub-county receives between Shs 600 million to Shs 1 billion of Central Government money. Then you find that the Auditor General’s staff may take three months before they go down there. That means the money is at stake. 

It is only these nearby sub-counties and towns like Entebbe, Jinja, Mukono and Kampala, who have benefited from the Auditor General’s being on the spot. In other words, he does pre-audit before the money is spent. But unfortunately, down there the money is spent and we have met a lot of problems in local government accounts because the money is not properly accounted for.

Finally, the Constitution in Article 163(6) gives autonomy to the Auditor General. But this autonomy has not been exercised because we have not made any law here to regularise his performance. In section 9, Parliament also has a duty to appoint the auditor to audit the Auditor General, which the Parliament has also not done. So, for all this time the monies in the Auditor General’s office have not been audited and we are also not sure whether this money is going into safe hands. We need also to effect section 9 of Article 163 that gives Parliament permission to appoint an auditor for the Auditor General. I thank you very much. 

Lt JAMES KINOBE (Katikamu North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to thank the Finance Committee for a brief but precise report and likewise, I will also be as brief as the report.  

By way of emphasis, I associate with all the recommendations of this committee but more specifically the first recommendation that the Audit Bill should be brought to this House to create the autonomy of the Auditor General. We had interactions with the Auditor General and he is having problems. He says that his officers have the bad job of following corrupt people. Sometimes along the way, some of them get compromised; but even when he detects that there is a problem, the best he can do is to switch them over. That is because he does not have powers over their deployment. 

If an officer misbehaves in Luwero, he is transferred to Ntungamo. If he misbehaves in Ntungamo, he then gets transferred to another area. 

Sometime back we heard that the Audit Bill had almost reached the Cabinet and somehow along the way - the Minister will tell us what exactly happened. That is the only way we can strengthen audit, given the gravity of the concerns associated with transparency, accountability and what is actually going on down there. If this officer is going to do a good job, let us give him the autonomy he deserves. Let us give him the funding, let him be able to attract good people and even retain them so that he does a really good job of helping this Parliament to monitor public expenditure. 

Therefore, I totally support the recommendations of the committee and urge government to bring the Audit Bill so that we create the autonomy the Auditor General deserves to perform in the best way possible.

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro East, Wakiso): Mr Chairman, given that the report has been very clear and the members have expressed their concerns, which have been taken, I beg to move that the question be put.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MADADA: I want to be clarified. Is it me who is living in the past? This report is dated 29th August. It may have an implication. Is it the committee that is living ahead?

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question in favour of adopting this report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much, the committee and the chairperson.

Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor General:

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,424,580,000 under Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor General, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 138,000,000 under vote 131 - Office of the Auditor General, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply report thereto. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the following votes and passed them without amendment:

1. Vote 144 - Uganda police,
2. Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons, 
3. Vote 009 - Internal Affairs, 
4. Vote 004 - Defence. 

I also wish to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Vote 131 – Office of the Auditor General, and passed it without amendment. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I congratulate you for completing the process of considering the committees’ reports. The time limit is 31st, which is Sunday, but we have been able to do it by the 28th. Thank you very much for –(Applause). 

The process is that we shall continue with the supporting Bills to the budget. I do not know whether the Chairperson of the Finance Committee is ready with the Financial Bill, which was earmarked for tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

Honourable members, I am informed that the report on the Finance Bill is not ready, and since it is the business, which was supposed to be transacted tomorrow, it means that we have a free day tomorrow to transact our personal business. This brings us to the end of –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Sorry, Sir, I should have interacted with you earlier on this matter. Now that we do not have a sitting tomorrow, could you announce that the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline will sit tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline is convening a meeting in your usual venue, at 11.00 a.m. tomorrow. 

That brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Monday at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.55 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 1 September 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)  


