Tuesday, 23 August 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Chairman, Mr Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I wish to inform you that one of our colleagues, hon. Amin Wadriff, CM Jonam, is currently in Nsambya Hospital. You are, therefore, encouraged to visit him as and when you can. Try to give him the necessary moral support.

QUESTION NO. 29/94

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Chairman, Question No.29 of 1994. 

THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Dr Adriko): Mr Chairman, the effective date of implementing the sale of pool houses was March 18th, 1994.  That is when I announced on TV, Radio and in the Press, the decision of government to sell pool houses.  The main aspects of the policy is as follows: 

    (a) Houses will be sold to sitting tenants who will be required to indicate their intention to purchase within a period of twelve months.  

    (b) The purchase price will be at market value.  

    (c) Sitting tenants who cannot afford to pay cash, will be required to make a down payment of 10 per cent of mortgage value.  After which, they will enter into a paper mortgage with Housing Finance Company Limited which will operate under the company’s formal procedures with exception of interest rates which will remain at one per cent above sayings interest.  Any default will be treated as any other mortgage.  

    (d) At the lapse of one year, all units that will not have been taken up by sitting tenants will a commitment of the down payment will be advertised in the public media and sold to any purchaser affording to buy.  The preference will be given to civil servants who will not have participated in the scheme before.  

    (e) Sell proceeds will be deposited with Housing Finance Company Limited from where the general public may borrow money for purposes of residential construction of purchase of residential properties.

The main thrust of the policy is to sell houses to anybody who can afford the market value. However, even sitting tenants the first auction to buy is an acknowledged principle whenever public properties are being sold at market value to the public. In this connection, once an officer enters in a paper mortgage, with Housing Finance Company, he is entitled to getting a housing allowance which varies with the status in the Public Service.  Although at present the allowances is not the full monetary value of the house he is expected to reside in, this is an important start in the improvement of the terms and conditions of the service of our public officers. 

It is expected, that it will progressively increase in value during the next financial years. If an officer finds it difficult to meet his payments in installments, the officer may opt to rent the house to somebody else at a value that can meet his obligations, and move to cheaper house or he may opt out of the scheme and move to a cheaper area where he can put up a house of his standard.  It must be emphasised here, that most of pool houses are located in prime areas of towns.  Hence their market value is relatively high.

I must, however, add that, the figures quoted by the hon. Member for the payment in instalments against the cost of houses are misleading.  Because it depends on the applicable interest rate which was used in that particular incidence. 

What is important, however, is the fact that, officers will face the reality of trying to own houses of their own. Presently, the officers who stay in government houses tend to forget that on their retirement, they are supposed to vacate these houses.  Hence such a situation does not encourage public officers to put up their own houses.  The money received from the sale of those properties will be put into a revolving fund in the Housing Finance Company from where other officers can borrow for purposes of construction or purchase of residential houses on their own.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

SUPPLEMENTARY QUESTION

MR MANZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The interest rate I used in getting the installments is the current interest rate.  Secondly, if it is actually the figures given by Ministry of Public Service as a negative prices of what civil servants will pay, so that issue is clear that these rates of - when a house is 30 million, you pay 407 per month given by the ministry itself.  

Secondly, civil servants are poor like most people are in this country, and are being asked to pay 10 per cent down payment, and they are being asked to pay installments which are almost four to ten times higher than the housing allowance provided.  Because the maximum housing allowance so far provided by the public service is Shs100, 000.

Question: If this situation comes in, and the civil servants are thrown out of their houses, and have to go and live in cheaper places, and they are out of the scheme, would the hon. Minister actually tell this House the likely implication in the Civil Service, given the already demoralised people, how far will this be and if so, what will be the effect on the total economy?

DR ADRIKO:  Mr Chairman, I do recognise figures which the hon. Member has quoted here, and I can confirm that, these figures were calculated on the basis of interest rate of about 14 per cent. Today the applicable interest rate is of the order of 5 per cent, that is the interest rate, 1 per cent above savings rate. So, in other words, this is why I say, these figures are misleading.  Because if they reflect the current position, then they are not correct.  In other words, the present installments against these figures will be much, much lower realising the total in the hon. Member’s computations.

As regards the affordability of these houses by the civil servants, this question must be answered with a look at the current condition of the pool houses, even if we left the situation to pertain as it does, sooner rather than later, these houses will collapse on the sitting tenants, because government has made no provision for their maintenance.  The only alternative is to implement this sensible policy to sell these houses and the civil servants who are so dispossessed, if that is the word we may use, can back to the Housing Finance Company Limited to borrow money so as to put houses which are more durable, which will not collapse on them.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR: Point of clarification. Will the Minister, please, state why was this Policy to sell government housing estates, not debated in Parliament -(Applause)- relative to its economics and fairness to the national economy, more particularly to the construction industry.

MR ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr chairman.  This Policy, the Government Policy on civil servants housing and divestiture was discussed by the Sectoral Committee of this House.  That any resolution of this House becomes binding. Now, in the recommendation of the Sectoral Committee responsible for Ministry of House, they recommended certain things which must be done before this policy could be put into operation, and this was controlled and resolved by this House.  

Now, I am not aware that the Ministry even made effort to consult with this committee as to whether they could go ahead. Can the Minister tell us why it was necessary?  It is a globe resolution of this House to go ahead with this policy, which the Committee definitely refused to endorse. 

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr Chairman, could the Minister clarify who is actually telling the truth?  The First Deputy Prime Minister when he came in here, and informed and denied that this policy has never been debated in the Cabinet, or it is only the Minister who has got his own policy.  It was here when the Minister - the Prime Minister stood and informed the House, and said that it is not true that this policy has been decided, maybe, it is going to the Cabinet.  Can he clarify which is which? Whether it is true or not?  Because the Prime Minister disowned it. 

DR ADRIKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Hon. Obwangor asked why the hon. House did not have the opportunity to debate the policy.  My only interpretation that the primary function of the House is legislation.  There is really difficulty in trying to determine which aspects of government policy should be debated in the House and which aspects should not.  I can cite examples of policies which have been - are being implemented by government, which have not necessarily been in this House.  

So, there is - I think I am right in saying the House’s primary objective is to legislate.  Secondly, on the Sectoral Committee’s report, the hon. Member has not really told me which aspects of the resolution of the Sectoral Committee, which we have not fulfilled.  I stand here to say that, we have fulfilled all the resolutions of the Sectoral Committee with regard to this particular policy, which we are implementing, and therefore, he can tell me which particular aspect and I will be able to make a response.  

Thirdly, hon. Nkalubo has said, that the Prime Minister stood up here and said something different. I am really sorry that, I am not aware of the Prime Minister’s statement and I can only say that, this policy was first initiated through a study, it was a Cabinet decision and about four or five months ago, I came before this House and I made a ministerial statement on this policy at a great length and so, it has not been really a closet kind of policy, it has been right in the open.  Thank you. (Laughter)

CAPT. BABU: Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I am the chairman of Lands, Housing and Urban Planning Committee - Urban Development.  We did pass resolutions and the Minister has got a copy and the he accepted our resolutions.

However, since that time, several things have happened and we did indicate to him why we were concerned.  We were very pleased that, civil servants could buy these buildings first and fore most.  I wanted us to get this point very clear, and we wanted public servants to be - to get a chance also to own the building.  But we found a lot of flows in the policy.  One of the flows was that, this policy is designed only in the tope echelons of government will not get these houses. 

As I talk right now, the people who lived in the Kitante Courts have been removed.  They were promised that they would be given reasonable house allowances to go and get houses.  Most of them are being given less than Shs100, 000 a month.  They are getting up to Shs40, 000; Shs30, 000, Shs50, 000.  And some of these people were living in reasonably good accommodation like in Kitante Court for example.  Those who live in the National Housing flats for example, have been given these flats and have been asked to pay directly to National Housing. Their house allowance is not enough even to pay for those flats. So, they are finding themselves moving into areas where they cannot even afford accommodation.  

The other accommodation which was the government accommodation, we agreed which was in reasonable area, one of the resolutions we gave was that, they are given - these houses are sold on the open market for example, the money got, and they come and develop a new area - a new estate where civil servants will then be given houses to purchase on mortgage.  We said, government should take responsibility; they should not throw civil servants to the open market because they will not be able to afford it in our economic situation.  That was one of the resolutions. And therefore, if the Minister claims that he does not remember what we discussed in that committee, I will be calling that committee this week and the Minister will come back again.  And this time, we will not be compromising.  

We thought we had been compromising with him, we have been respecting him a lot, but for him to say and claim in this House that he does not know what we have discussed, is the least to say not fair to our committee.  Because our Committee has always given him biggest estimate and respect, and we expect him to respect our committee.  And, therefore, I would like to say this, that before they throw the civil servants to the gallows of the economy, of the market economy in this country, they must make better provisions. We are very happy with the policy, but we would like the policy to have better implementing methods.  But just to leave them hanging in the air is not acceptable to the Committee, not even to this House, not even to the people of this country.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR RWABITA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I seek clarification from the Minister, in his exposition, he said one of the alternatives given to the civil servants is to leave the house that he is supposed to buy and rent a cheaper one and therefore, get money to pay for the other house.  But I want to tell you, Mr Minister through the Chairman, that that thing is not practical.  Because first of all, that house that you are selling to the civil servant is not ready for anybody to gain, it needs a lot of renovation.  If you sell a house at Shs100 million, you need another Shs70 million to put it for the market.  

So, as a matter of fact, we have to sell that house to that man at Shs170 million. Now, how do you expect this civil servant to rise enough funds to repair the house so that it is marketable for renting.  So, it is self-defeating; really this thing cannot work unless government comes itself to the civil servants, they are nowhere to get these houses.  As a matter of fact, what many do, what they do now, they go to a rich man, and gives them good will, Shs 5 million, Shs10 million and the other man takes the house, and that is all.  But the civil servants have no way to get these houses in any sense.  Mr Chairman.

DR ADRIKO: Mr Chairman, first of all, the report of the Sectoral Committees is a published document and if the hon. Babu can make a reference at that document, and also to my policy statement, I have answered point by point, the issues which were raised by the sectoral committee on my ministry in that document.  And, therefore, for us to stand here and disagree, I think there must be a paper or a document, which we are referring and I am glad to draw his attention to my policy statement.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, the Member has said, you are going back to that; so you may continue answering other questions, you will go back to committee - (Laughter)

DR ADRIKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am sure you will give me the allowance also to put my side of the story because it is not right for the hon. Member to say that, he compromised, I think, we are all trying to serve the public and the issues which I put across are what I sincerely believed in that, here we are trying to redress situation where only, 8 per cent of the entire civil service is housed, it is inherently unfair, it is not correct.  So, we are trying to rationalise the system so that all the civil servants, the whole lot of them can have equal access to housing.  

With regard to the observation about the tenant living out and renting the house out, I can assure the hon. Member that most of these houses can still be rented and they are tenantable and therefore to say that it is not in a tenantable position is not correct.  It seems Mr Chairman, there were no other supplementary questions.  That is all I had, thank you.

MR TOM RUBALE:  Mr Chairman, given the fact that most civil servants occupying these houses will not have the financial capacity to buy them as sitting tenants and given the fact that these houses are sited in prime areas all over the country, what measures does the Minister intend to put in place to safeguard those houses in fact sites in most cases being sold to foreigners with these sitting tenants, civil servants acting as fronts?

MR PINTO:  The Minister has just made clear statement that if these houses are not sold, they are collapsing; not a minute passes and he tells the House that the houses are tenantable.  Will it be possible for the Minister to make clarification; would these collapsing houses be tenantable? (Laughter)

MISS NAMUYANGU:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to know from the hon. Minister if these civil servants who might afford to get these houses will not be subjected to transfers.

MR NTIMBA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. Considering the fact that the number of houses envisaged for this type of programme is so small compared to the number of civil servants that are expected to benefit from this, what steps has the Minister put in place like approaching international bodies like Habitat for loans to be able to come up with a more comprehensive housing scheme to cover the big chunk of the civil servants?  And I also like to say whether the Minister and his predecessor that considered comparing notes with other colleagues of his in African countries like in Kenya or Zimbabwe which have been able to come up with every, very comprehensive housing programme; not only for their civil servants but also for their general population.  Thank you.

DR ADRIKO:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  The first question related Mr Chairman, instances of civil servants acting as fronts for other purchasers.  The formal statement I read was quite clear.  It said the main trust of this policy is to sell houses to anybody who can afford the market value.  However, we are giving reference first to civil servants or sitting tenants because it is difficult and it is not fair not to offer them this preference first.   The emphasis is on mobilising funds into the Housing Bank so that the bank can lend to public servants and to everybody.  So if a civil servant cannot afford to buy on the stipulated terms, then he has one of several options.  I was just preferring certain options whether they exercise that option or not, it is upon them and I am sure the Member can come up with many other proposals and the civil servant will be the wiser in considering all those propositions. 

Secondly, hon. Pinto, I did say clearly, I think he might have just not heard my initial statement.  There was no contradiction whatsoever.  I said sooner or later, I did not say immediately.  (Laughter) So, immediately the houses are tenantable, that sooner or later they may collapse on the tenants.  On the issue of transfers, once the property is bought the purchaser is free to transfer it to anybody whom he or she likes.  

On the number of houses, I would like to inform the hon. Member who asked this question that this is a start that we are making a move towards liquidating these houses in order to set up a fund which can be lent for people to build.  The practical position is a little more serious hon. Members. The amount of money that we require to put houses, is so enormous.  

Two years ago, there was census of houses and of people.  That senses found that the country needs about half a million units of houses.  That is a shortfall.  In other words, the occupancy ratio in the country is about 1.4.  In a space where one person is supposed to live about four persons are living; 1.4 persons are living.  Therefore, there is a shortfall of about half a million units. If you multiply that by figures - 10 million shillings, the figures are in billions and billions, about hundreds of billions. The government cannot afford this amount of public investment and therefore the government policy is to enable the construction of houses.  That is, we shall enable easy access to lend for the prospective buyer, we shall capitalise the housing banks, we shall provide the infrastructure where it is necessary but the actual building construction has to be done by the individual, by NGO or by community organisations. That is the only practical solution now. The solution that is being proposed by the hon. Member is antiquated and it cannot work.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I am still at a loss when the Minister says that he is intending to capitalise money that will be derived from the sale of these houses because civil servants are going to pay certain percentage and then followed by monthly installments.  How long will it take him to capitalise, the - have enough funds to replace these units? Suppose now we have a CGR in Luwero. He is occupying a public housing unit and he decides to buy it without any alternative accommodation or replacement and this fellow may be transferred tomorrow.  His successor will not have a place where to live.  Will this mean that the government is going to continue or to go on renting some accommodation and will this not be more costly than the case is to repair these housing units? Because if the Minister says that some of these units are about to collapse and they are likely to fall on occupants’ heads -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Can you put your question?

AN HON. MEMBER:  I am asking a question.  We have a Ministry of Works, which has got specific department to carry out such repair. What are these people really doing? Can the money not be availed from the budgeted funds to repair these houses and make sure that these people continue to stay in them rather than to dispose them by selling them to various people?

DR ADRIKO:  Mr Chairman, sale of pool house excludes institutional houses and therefore, institutional houses for judges, CGR, the Police, the President and Prime Minister will not be sold.  Those will continue to be available in all the stations where they can stay.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Kaijuka): Mr Chairman, and hon. Members government has noted with great concern the ban imposed by the government of Kenya on the importation of maize.  I have personally drawn this concern to the attention of Kenyan authorities in communication I have had this morning with the Minister for Commerce and Industry in the Kenyan Government.  I also consulted a number of international agencies and grain exporters and I have been assured that the demand for our maize mainly for relief purposes within this region is quite high.  This will facilitate the marketing of most of the maize produced by the farmers.  In light of the foregoing, farmers are advised not to panic and not to fall victim to unscrupulous middlemen who may wish to take advantage of this situation to offer  -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of order. Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of order to clarify whether it is in order for the Minister to begin with a statement not recorded on the Order Paper and not having sought the suspension of any rule which he knows very well.  I realise he has been away very long.  He may not be familiar but he could ask for the suspension of rule 85 and then we proceed Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I have dealt with that matter.  So the Minister is in order. Hon. Minister, please, finish.

MR KAIJUKA: Thank you, Sir.  Mr Chairman, I was saying that farmers are advised not to panic and not to fall victim to unscrupulous middlemen who wish to take advantage of this situation to offer unrealistically low prices to farmers.  Farmers are also advised to keep reserves of food to avoid recurrence of famine situation recently experienced.  Before I conclude this statement, I have just received information that the Kenyan Minister has just rung me a few minutes back to say that Uganda - that this will not concern Uganda and they are making a statement to that effect.  I urge hon. Members to convey this same message to their constituents.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR MARWAS:  Thank you Mr Chairman. Arising from the Minister’s statement, of late we have just had problems Famine had been taking care of 16 districts which are more than a half of the districts in this country.  I would like the Minister to tell this House, what steps - in case we have a surplus like this, what steps does his Ministry and the Ministry of Agriculture take, to take storage of this food? It seems we will not get rid of this food now.  But because Kenya does not want it, the government has no storage at all.  There is nothing in place to preserve this food.  I am told we have silos all over this country.  What is the government doing about this surplus in case Kenya refuses? Are we going to throw it out? Thank you, Mr Chairman.  And we do not produce for Kenya anyway.  We produce for Ugandans.

MR KAIJUKA:  Mr Chairman, I want to agree with the hon. Member seeking clarification that certainly we grow first and foremost for Ugandans and the reason why I gave the statement was because I wanted to allay farmers fears, who because of the recent ban could panic and not so much because we have no use for maize and I went on to give assurance that given the demand by the Relief Agencies and I have talked to a number of them this morning, people should not panic; there will be enough demand to purchase most of the maize that has been grown.  Now, should a situation arise, the hon. Member is raising a separate issue which I think Government is currently addressing; whether or not, within our Budgetary limitations, we can afford to raise enough money to keep the adequate supplies in our silos which we have and I am afraid I cannot answer that question adequately before we have discussed it in Cabinet to see whether we have the financial ability to do that.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR NDEGE (Luuka County, Iganga): Mr Minister for your very encouraging statement and just a little bit on the comment about panicking, I think, there should not be panic, but also, I would like to, maybe, just tell the Minister or cautioning the Minister that, the question of price is determined by demand and it is also determined by competitors outside Uganda. The Minister’s statement should not make us believe that other countries like South Africa and Zimbabwe cannot supply these NGOs at cheaper rates.  So, why I agree that, we should pay maximum possible prices, we must also be able to compete with other countries who have got big reserves of maize; Zimbabwe and South Africa, and I repeat, big reserves of maize in millions of tonnes.  Thank you, very much

MR WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like the Minister for Trade and Industry.  I would like to get a hint to get in touch with his counterpart in Kenya, so that in future, he does not make similar statements without consulting -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  The Minister is in touch.

MR WANENDEYA: What I am saying, Mr Chairman, is that, making a statement and then later on you find telephone communications. Secondly, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Please, make your point.  Order, please.

MR WANENDEYA:  The second point I am making Mr Chairman, is that we have empty granaries in our country.  Could the Minister consider ordinary Ugandans to use those granaries by a payment fee for storage; so that we can store our maize and other crops for a bit longer and therefore be sold at a higher premium sometimes after the harvest, Mr Chairman.  I thank you.

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Chairman. Since the hon. Minister has hinted on this problem of maize, I want to say to the hon. Minister that it seems he is being engaged somewhere. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Put your question hon. Member.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Mr Chairman, since the hon. Minister has touched on maize, I want to use this opportunity to inform him that currently we have a problem of beans which are not moving and unless these beans can be bought openly; they move, I have a fear that the farmers may not be prepare to grow more beans this season and as you will appreciate, it has now started raining but the farmers still have very big stocks of beans in their houses and unless something urgent is done, to get rid of the these beans, our farmers will not be prepared to grow beans this season. Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR OPIO (Samia Bugwe County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The hon. Minister has said that there are AID Agencies which are willing, to purchase some of this maize.  Now, I would like to request the hon. Minister to go further, because as we speak, people who have grown maize would like to sell maize so as to send their children to school, would like to sell their maize so as to pay graduated tax. These Agencies, if they have to be effective must be told to us where they have established stores, where our people can go and sell their maize and whatever they have; because if they are in Kampala here, and we have maize stuck at the border, waiting to be bought, and we are told that the agencies are here, I think, we would not be giving a solution to our people who are hard up and they want to get money from the sale of maize.  Mr Minister, I would like to find out whether there stores where we can advise our electorate to sell this maize so as to get money.  Thank you very much.

MR KASAJJA KABUUBI (Bujenje County, Masindi): Mr Chairman, in the first instance, this situation of the Minister informing us about Kenya has given me a idea that there is what we call crisis management; because it clearly reflects that we do not have a proper marketing process in this country. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member you are supposed to give a mere elucidatory quest.

MR KASAJJA KABUUBI:  So, in fact, that is what I am going to  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Please do it.

MR KASAJJA KABUUBI:  Now, in view of the fact that, many of our people whom we represent in this House have large stocks of unsold maize, can the Minister give assurance to this House and the nation, how our people are going to dispose of all that big stocks and I have been just - I went over the weekend, I was at home, and my Constituents came to me; they were looking for markets.  So I would request the Minister and his team to work very vigorously to make sure that this problem  - so, I would like him to highlight and what steps he is taking.  

MR KAIJUKA:  Mr Chairman, I want to appreciate comments raised by hon. Member and I will be very brief because if I may start with the last question, a minute we decide that the Government to liberalise, and not to take commend economy, in terms of managing of stocks or buying and selling farmers commodities we thought had solved these problems. In other words, hon. Members like hon. Kabuubi are welcome to set up a Trading Intermediation and make sure that their people are served; do not wait for the Minister, please, if I may say so; the minute you liberalise, everyone is free to get on with business, that is one.  

Secondly, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Cries of order.

MR KAIJUKA:  I want to agree with hon. Ndege that it does not matter how well we produce our crops, we must at the end of the day be competitive.  In other words, whether or not our maize, our beans and any other crops become marketable, and the buying agents including the International Agencies, World Food Programme and so on, continue to buy Uganda crops, they will continue to do so for as long as it is cost effective viz-a-vis what they can import from other countries. That is a fact and I want to agree with you, but that is not to suggest that there is absolutely no market.  That is why talking to World Food Programme yesterday, for example, they may be tendering for more than maybe about 10,000 tonnes of maize, some tons of beans, but that is not the only venue available for our farmers and there is a gap between exporters - I mean the buyers and the farmers and it is these middlemen that I am worried about; because they exploit farmers, because farmers are not in the know of what these prices are. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  May I, Mr Chairman, seek clarification from the hon. Minister in view of what hon. Ndege has said about Ugandan’s farmers’ crops being uncompetitive; whether he is fully aware of the exorbitant interest rates of commercial farmers are charged in order to produce?

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, we could really spend hours on end debating the issue of whether or not Uganda is competitive in producing maize, beans, or any other crop and it is a long story and I want to agree with hon. Pinto that part of the cost obviously involves financing and financing costs.  I am not blind to that aspect.  

All I am saying here is this, that I think our producers are farmers of maize and beans need not be discouraged because we have enough demand internally here through agencies plus now the market in Kenya.  Although the ban was blanket banned, I am now being advised fortunately for our farmers and for us that certainly when I go back to the office, I will have to confirm this; so that it is a fact.  Our farmers will continue to sell their maize, beans, to Kenya.  That is all I am doing here for the sake of our farmers. (Applause) 

And lastly, on the crisis management by my Friend hon. Kabuubi, if he was to go behind to see my style of management, I think he would agree with me that I am perhaps more professionally inclined than he thinks and therefore, I wanted to advise him that because we have liberalised, we know what we are doing, he should inform his people to take it easy and begin trading.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MISS NAOME KABASHARIRA (Women Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you Mr Chairman, for giving me the opportunity to add my voice in support of the Police Bill. Members have talked about the corruption in Police and I think it is good if we think about the cause rather condemning and then may be we think of the solution if possible.

Recently, they raised allowances and salaries of the State Attorney and we have the Revenue Authority in Finance. Those people get good allowances and good salaries and, I think, that money was given to those people so that they are not involved in corruption because they deal with people who are likely to corrupt them with large sums of money to stop the Revenue collection.  Now, we very well know that the police prosecutors and the CIDs, they are normally involved in large cases of - in cases with large sums of money and they are likely to be corrupt and then you know what happens is that, such a case which involves large amount of money can end somewhere and then the Government or the people will loose.  

So, I would suggest that the Police prosecutors and maybe the CIDs or any police officer who is involved in such cases, should be given at least some good allowances; so that they can curb these criminals and I have a feeling that they can really do it if they are well facilitated.

There is a Project called the Community Policing Project; this project has got good objectives which can help the public to curb the criminals and it is under Police, but this Project is only in Kampala and yet the police is everywhere in Uganda. So I have a feeling that if this project can be strengthened or maybe taken to other parts of the country, maybe we can be helped. So, I beg the Minister to take this into account and may be take these services into other areas of the country.

	Mr Chairman, the Police in Uganda is everywhere; when you go to any part of Uganda; whether a rural, whether urban, wither where, you find the police.  That means that they are together with the community more than any other security organ.  Now, when you come to the Parliament, you find that some other organs are well represented; the workers are represented in the Parliament, the army is represented in the Parliament, the youth are represented in the Parliament.  I am wondering why police cannot be represented. Mr Chairman, if the Police was represented in the Parliament, I think these problems which you have been raising - like poor welfare, the poor facilitation; if they are well represented here in the Parliament or even in the CA if they were represented then I think, the Police would do better. I am wondering why they are not represented. I always ask myself. 

The Police Prosecution Department; at times when you go to court, you find some cases which are represented by the professional lawyers and on the other side the prosecutors.  But when you are to go back and know their history, especially in the area of specialisation, you find that at times the Police Prosecutors are not specialised in some areas, especially in the prosecution. (Interruption)

MR ELYAU: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  The hon. Member on the Floor is raising a very important point. The Police should be given enough facilities to educate the Prosecution of rime in this country.  

For example, in Soroti about one and half years ago, an LDU who had raped a girl in my compound or defiled for that matter, was arrested with a gun, taken by RCs to the Police, taken to court and when staying on remand for nearly a year, I was surprised to see this person being released; that is on cash bail, which there was an evidence.  That can show that there must be some weakness in Police Prosecution so that the court as such cannot jail this person.  This is a very serious matter and I do not know if the Minister could give more light, if it is Police or court which is wrong.

MAJ. TOM BUTIME:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I think the Chairman even knows better what could have happened since he is a lawyer himself.  But the point there is that we just discussed that matter just outside here as we were coming and I explained to the hon. Member that the question is a case triable I think by the High Court.  It is a very serious criminal offence.  I could imagine that even in court, it is the State Attorney that may actually be involved in that kind of prosecution and therefore, the Police may have to stop at the level of investigations and hand over to the State Prosecutor or hand over even to the DPP and it is the DPP that may decide which particular lawyer or which particular State Attorney is going to appear on behalf of the State on such matter.  So, you cannot take it so lightly to think that a rape committed in your courtyard as you said and a person ends up being released and you say that is Police Prosecutor. I do not think.  I think the matter is more serious than that.  Maybe, the lawyer seated near you could assist - the Kadagas and Company Advocates.

MISS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think, the Prosecutor Officers should match the lawyers in the court to avoid corruption.  

Lastly, the traffic policemen; the Members will agree with me that if you go to the road going to Nsambya, the vehicles where the taxis that go to that end, are all ramshackle vehicles but no traffic man can stop that vehicle.  What does that raise? I think somehow somewhere, those taxis belong to some big shots in the police.  I think, the hon. Minister should also help us because those who have their vehicles - ramshackle ones, they also want to earn some little money so that they can take their children to school but the traffic men are always on them and yet they cannot get those ones going to Nsambya.  Mr Chairman, I beg to support the Bill.

MR BUTAGIRA (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to thank the hon. Members who have supported the report that is in effect incorporated in this Police Bill, 1994.  I will not comment on each and every contribution but I will highlight some few and also tell you what the committee has come up with in regard to the Amendments which have been submitted. I think, if I am not mistaken, this Bill has received very exhaustive scrutiny; right from the beginning when it was presented here and it raised some storm, from then on, we carried out excessive consultations on the matter right up to this morning.  

Therefore, I would like to reassure hon. Obwangor, who is not here, who said that it took so long to present the report. It took so long simply because we wanted to do a good job.  The hon. Member I referred to even took more four years to produce a report on the Constitutional Commission.  We have done very well. (Applause) 

Let me now turn to a few comments.  Hon. Babu presented amendments which we received this morning.  These amendments are really good. They concern a new notion of introduction of Metropolitan Police. Metropolitan Police - these are in the summer countries but the idea fascinated us.  Unfortunately, it is a major shift to the Bill under discussion and it needs extensive consultation; more so as touches on issues like decentralisation, in regard to urban authorities.  It touches on the role of the Local Government, Police and so on.  So, we have decided to refer this matter, with high recommendations to the authorities concerned, to study and scrutinise and come out with appropriate version at appropriate stage.  But I thank him for his innovation.  

Now, hon. Atwai came up with a proposal that the police authority composition should be enlarged to 40 -(Interruption)

REV. ATWAI:  Point of information. It is appearing in Clause 11.  That is where I am seeking for expansion.  Not Clause 9.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Clause 11 -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of clarification.  I would like to - Mr Chairman, in a course of the Debate to explain to the hon. Mover my position.  That what took us for four years in the Constitutional Commission was a varsity job.  But this one here  - if you look at the Chapter 313 and also the Police and Prosecutes Act, 294 of which the hon. Mover as a practical lawyer knows, there are of a lesser ground but our work was tremendous.  (Laughter)

MR BUTAGIRA: I leave that to anybody to judge.  But let me continue. Even reference to Clause 11, the same reasoning would apply, which I had on Clause regarding Police Authority.  This would enlarge the body to such extent that it would be unwise to transact business.  That rule is just like a small cabinet.  It is not meant to be like a Parliament.  That is why much as your idea is good of representation by lower ranks, but the Police Council should be really a small body so that it can transact its business effectively. Other Members like hon. Omoro came out with a very startling preposition that the police should be allowed to apply a little torture in their investigations.  I think we cannot really go by that yardstick we are trying to move forward and not backwards.  

Now, permit me to go to the substantiative part which concerns what is in light of what Members have said, and in light of the amendments which they have tabled, what we have come up with.  Under the Procedure, that is Rule 66 - of our Standing Orders, under which this Motion was brought, if passed, will go straight to the Third Reading. This is because it is presumed that the Committee to which the Bill was referred to, exhaustively considered the Bill and this in fact, it did so that under Rule 66, once the Report is adopted will go to the Third Reading.  It is in view of this, that the Committee saw it fit that any proposed amendment should again be examined by the Committee.  We have done this with relevant people who have submitted Amendments. We have sat down with them and also the Minister in charge of the Bill and what I am about to say here is really a result of our agreement on those amendments.  They are, therefore, forming part of our report as addendum.  

In Clause 5 (3) of the Bill which concerns powers of the Police; functions of the Police Force.  In Clause 5 (3), If you recall, it reads ‘No person shall arrest or detain or institute criminal proceedings save as provided for under this Statute or the Constitution; but we have found out that there was a lacuna, that there are other laws which may empower Prosecution by other bodies other than the Police, like Immigration, like under Local Administration’s Act.  So, we have now improved on it to read like this; ‘No person shall arrest, detain or institute criminal proceedings, save as it is provided for under this Statute or any other law empowering such a course of action. That takes care of other laws that may empower prosecutions.  Mr Chairman, Clause 4 -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Please, allow the hon. Member to make his speech.  Go ahead.

MR BUTAGIRA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Clause 12 (1) (i) be deleted because it is already catered for in Clause 10 (1) (c), now if you read that one -, Clause 16 (1)(a), that concerns retirement.  Clause 16 (1)(a) should now read: ‘Unless otherwise, provided in this Statute, the Member of the force shall retire from the office not vacate, on attaining the age of 55 years. In other words, the word ‘vacate’ is being replaced by word ‘retire’ from his office.  Then Clause 16(2) sub-Clause (ii) - the word ‘misbehaviour’ is replaced with the word ‘misconduct’. Then we move to Clause 28 (1) concerns search by Police Officers.  That provision concerning searches to be conducted by Police and as a result of the representation by hon. Ongom, we have felt it necessary that the grounds for the search being carried out should also be handed to the occupier of the premises.  In other words, the Officer conducting the search, who is obliged to put his reasons in writing he should also give a copy to the person occupying the house or premises, which is to be searched.  That is very important because later on could the search turn out to be unconstitutional or unlawful, then there is a basis for a challenge.  So, we have improved upon that particular Clause.  Clause 28(5) - again these copies in Clause 28 (5), we delete the words just towards the end, which says ‘on application,’ and we replace with the words ‘of the same by the magistrate’ 

Tape No.5 is missing.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Obwangor, please, I have taken a ruling on that.

MR KAYONDE:  Mr Chairman, with your indulgence, we wish to adopt the method of - since this matter is very, very important, we think that the method of adoption should not be simply matter of putting to the Vote, but we go through Clause by Clause, and that is another accepted method of adoption.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members if you do that, you will defeat the purpose of having indulged the efforts of the Sectoral Committee.  That will be out of order.

(Question put on the Report of the Sectoral Committee, as amended and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Capt. Butime): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Police Bill, 1994’, be read a Third Time, and do pass as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title

(The Title settled and the Bill passed.)

(Bill read a Third Time.)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the Chair, especially since, this is a Bill, and has not gone into the Committee State as it is normally done; would it be in order for us to just go and pass the Bill like that, because some people may have Amendments at Committee State, Mr Chairman?  So, I am seeking your clarification.

THE CHAIRMAN: I ruled on that earlier, signifying the importance of the Sector Committee.  I now adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 4.45p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 August 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

