Thursday, 23 August 2007

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

2.40
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand up to raise a matter that would require urgent attention because of its nature and its grievance to the public.  

You will recall that a while ago, the Minister of Finance did stand in this Parliament and informed the House and the people of Uganda that there was a transition in the payment system to a modern and advanced payment system, and because of that transition, the salary payments for Members of Parliament and all workers in Uganda had to delay. I have noted that the system has tremendously improved because Members of Parliament have been duly paid. But on scrutinising what is happening in other public offices and local governments, it has come to my notice that many local governments and public officers have not been paid their July salaries. 

Mr Speaker, this is a little bit disheartening and very unfortunate to the people of Uganda who have earned the money but have not received it. It even puts them in a more precarious situation especially when they are before their children and they cannot fend for themselves. I had wanted the Minister of Finance to explain to this Parliament and therefore the people of Uganda too, as to what exactly is happening. Is Government broke or has the system failed? Why are the people of Uganda not being paid the salaries that they have earned? 

When I look around, I cannot see the Minister of Finance. May I, therefore, ask the Speaker’s indulgence that when the Minister of Finance comes in, you provide an opportunity for us to raise this issue so that he can respond to it and give hope to our people? I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I also have been hearing on radio CAOs apologising and telling employees of local governments that their July salary is coming. This is August and it is about to end. There is merit in what you have said. When the minister comes in, we shall ask him to explain.  

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, the additional information, which I want to give on this matter, is that there are some funds for the last financial budget that have not been disbursed for such sectors like health, and these departments at the district level are operating in arrears. We are now in a new financial year, yet the money for the last financial year, July and August and the subsequent months, has not been disbursed at all. This has made the operations of local governments, especially in social services, so difficult that they are almost rendered incapable of performing their duties.  

2.44
MR JOHNSON TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Permit me to also raise a matter of national importance in this Parliament. In the last session, I raised an issue to do with the failure to recruit about 3,000 nurses and midwives in this country. As we speak now, there are about 3,000 nurses and midwives who have not been registered by the nurses’ council, which would therefore enable them to be recruited by both the local governments and health units. This problem arose because there is conflict between the national council and a board, which was appointed by the Ministry of Education to handle the training and recruitment of nurses and midwives in this country. 

The conflict now is that the nurses’ council cannot register the nurses because they insist that these nurses must again undergo another examination, and yet these people had already been trained, they had been examined, they had even undergone the necessary upbringing through the hospitals. 

So, Mr Speaker, I am standing here to say, can the Minister of Health explain to the nation what is happening to these 3,000 nurses? These nurses sat for their exams in May last year. They also sat for their exams in November 2006. There are other nurses who are also undergoing training and they are likely to suffer from the same problem. I want the Minister of Health and the Minister of Education to explain to this country the fate of these nurses.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This issue came up on the Floor of this House sometime back and it was committed to the Social Services Committee. We have since had interactions with the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education, the nurses’ council and all other related stakeholders. Our report is ready. Perhaps what would be required of the committee is that, we present the report as indicated in the Order Paper and that could give us a way forward.

THE SPEAKER: So the matter is being addressed by our committee.

MR TOSKIN: I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker. Yes, I am quite aware. I was even invited in one of these committee meetings, and what was being suggested in that meeting by the Ministry of Health was that these unfortunate nurses and midwives are supposed to be taken through another process of training again, which is not correct.

THE SPEAKER: Since it became an issue in the House and we decided to probe it and have a report, we have to await the report itself. We shall see the merits of the recommendations, what the minister says and then we shall find a solution. Very soon we shall find space on our Order Paper so that we deal with this serious matter where you say 3,000 people are involved.  

2.48
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to raise a matter of national importance that I feel this House, since we are charged with the responsibility of making laws, we need to address it. This is the issue regarding police recruitment for the positions of cadet assistant superintendent of police. 

We have accessed the list of the recruits who are supposed to start training on 1st September because it is displayed in all districts in Uganda. When you scrutinise this list, there is imbalance in representation. It was even quoted in the papers sometime back that 130 out of the 350 recruits are coming from one region. If you go deeper, it is not even from one region, it is coming from Kiruhura and Ntungamo. We cannot even put the blame to the whole western region; they are only coming from that area.

Our Constitution is very clear on recruitment of the Police. If this is the way the Police are going to be recruited in this country, if 130 come from two or three districts, it is very unfair and these are issues that bring injustice. That is why some Members have started raising the matter of seceding from Uganda. It is because of such matters. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: We are not going to have a debate. What the honourable member is raising is that the minister should tell us the policy.

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE (LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I also saw that publication in the press claiming that a good number, I think 50, of the recruits came from Ntungamo, Ruhama County. Subsequently, I saw an explanation from the Member of Parliament for Ruhama County, hon. Janet Museveni, explaining that he recommended eight people and of the eight, only two were recruited. So, there is no truth whatsoever in the assertion that a good number of the recruits came from Ntungamo. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Our Constitution, Article 214(b) says: “Parliament shall make laws ensuring that members of Uganda Police Force are recruited from every district of Uganda.” So, the information I want to give you is that the list we got from Police headquarters, name and district of the person attached, is to the effect that 40 percent is coming from those two districts. I want to lay it on this Table so that this Parliament can consider even stopping that training before it begins.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable member, the matter that has been raised by hon. Okupa is that the minister tells us the policy followed in the recent recruitment of the Police so that we wait for the statement and when the statement is made, since it is subject to a debate, then we shall make our contribution. That is how we should handle it. When you start debating it without facts –(Interruption)- no, you may have that fact but that may not be enough. Let the minister make a statement on the policy followed, especially in the recent recruitment.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I personally do appreciate the guidance you have given us. In view of the fact that the training is going to commence early next month, which is 1st September, and bearing in mind that we are going to be very busy considering the national budget for 2007/08 fiscal year, can we therefore appeal that training does not commence until we have exhaustively discussed the minister’s statement as is presented here so that depending on the outcome of our decision then, adjustments can be made later on. Otherwise, it will be futile for us to discuss if the training commences on 1st September. I beg to move. Thank you.

2.53
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a pity the minister in charge of internal affairs – I think he is still in the canteen but I had already requested someone to go and alert him. As you know, crime does not wait for policy formation – (Laughter) - so we cannot stop the process of recruitment. I can only urge and direct the Ministry of Internal Affairs to come and clarify the issues on Tuesday. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall get the necessary statement on this matter on Tuesday. Let us proceed with our Order Paper.

2.54
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have a subject that I hold quite dear and I have been widely quoted in all the papers without those quoting me looking at the ingredients of my point. 

I am extremely happy that this matter has finally landed onto the Floor of this House. Mr Speaker, I will oblige by your ruling that we wait until Tuesday, but as you may well be aware, some of us who have been talking vehemently against this practice have been witch-hunted in one way or another. To that effect, I have received summons and I must appear at the CID offices tomorrow. The trick with the Police is that you go on Friday - I am prepared to go on Friday and stay in prison Saturday and Sunday! So, I may be able to appear and explain my case but this matter must be handled critically and fairly. Otherwise, the disease is eating every department. This is just to begin with the Police; go to CHOGM, you will be surprised, Mr Speaker. I wait for that day when evidence will be adduced to this House. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ekanya and I have pending questions. On Tuesday our questions had appeared on the Order Paper; we were persuaded and you made a ruling that the questions would be answered today. Meanwhile, the minister has given hon. Ekanya a copy of the answers; to my questions I have received nothing. 

Mr Speaker, I want to seek you guidance. In the Order Paper of today, we were not there; even in the business to follow, we are not there.

THE SPEAKER: I regret the omission, but on Tuesday it will be there. There was an oversight. Following the request of the Leader of the Opposition, I had said that let them be shifted to Thursday but unfortunately there has been an omission. On Tuesday we shall see what to do.

3.00

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:
Mr Lule Umar Mawiya.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and I want to welcome the new Member of Parliament for Kalungu East, hon. Lule Mawiya. You are welcome! 

On this occasion when we are welcoming a new Member of Parliament, we have in our midst friends and voters, citizens from Lukaya, Bukulula and Lwabenge sub-counties, which form this new constituency. (Applause) I want to take this opportunity to welcome you and to thank you for what you are doing in those counties. But, at the same time we have also pupils and teachers from Mituma Central Primary School in Ruhinda Constituency of honourable Minister of Local Government. Please, join me to welcome all our visitors today. (Applause)  

Hon. Mawiya, this is not the first time to be in this House but you have come in a special way as a result of a bi-election in your constituency. We followed up what was happening; definitely it was a hot contest in this particular election. There were reports of violence, there was this and the other but now you are the Member of Parliament for that constituency. You are not going to be representing only those who voted for you; you are a leader for everybody in that constituency. Forget the emotions that took place during elections and consider yourself a Member of Parliament for everybody in that constituency and serve them to the best of your ability. 

I was happy today when you gained access for your oaths that those who accompanied you included people who were not of your party. I want to thank those Members who are not Members of Mawiya’s party who accompanied him. (Applause) This is the spirit we should cherish when we are here. We know we belong to different parties but we should be courteous to each other so that we can show examples to those that we lead.  

In lottery, some of the guidance that we have is to create goodwill. Please, prepare to bring goodwill even to those you think are not of your party. So, I welcome you and I have no doubt that you are going to carryout your mandate and your assignment to the best of your ability. My God bless you! (Applause)

3.08
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue that requires urgent public attention especially by us, as Members of Parliament and this is an issue that greatly affects the public. Mr Speaker, you will recall that some time back, the Minister of Finance did report to this House explaining why the payment of the salary for Members of Parliament and other civil servants and public officers had delayed. He said that it was because of the transition in the payment system that had been introduced. It was understandable then and we were given assurance and hope that this issue would be cured so that the payment of the salaries of the workers of this country would be on time. 
  
Mr Speaker, I want to appreciate the Minister of Finance because the payments for the Members of Parliament have been spot on. Whereas we celebrate as Members of Parliament, there are so many public officers and civil servants whose July salaries have not been paid to date. Those who have access to the telecommunication media should have heard CAOs in various districts trying to explain to the workers and the public as to why the salaries have been delayed. And in some situations, Members have been wondering whether the government was broke. I felt that this issue should be raised so that the Minister of Finance does explain to this House and also to the people of Uganda as to what exactly is happening. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, there is nothing as painful as earning a salary and failing to receive it; and you look hopeless before a family when you are supposed to fend for them. This is a time when many children have just come out of school; either school fees arrears must be paid or food and medication services must be provided for. Therefore, may I find out from the Minister of Finance what exactly is happening and when should the people of Uganda who have not received their salaries expect to receive them? Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, honourable minister.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, for clarity, I had supplemented hon. Dombo’s issue - (Laughter)– and I would want to make it clear so that the Minister of Finance answers. This is because as much as people earn salaries, the workers in the districts have not received their money.  I had earlier said that even some departments at the districts like NGOs - the money to supplement health NGOs- did not receive the adequate funding in July and they have not received any money since then just like other departments. 

So, as much as we are addressing the issue of salaries and wages of workers at the district, not enough money has been disbursed for the operations of departments like health, water and other social services. I think the Minister of Finance needs to clarify as to why adequate funding has not been disbursed to the districts and yet we passed money on the Vote-on-Account for these kinds of operations.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister.

3.11
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to appreciate the difficulty of our citizens whose salaries have been delayed. So I regret that this has happened. I would like to tell the honourable members that the reason for changing from cheques to Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) is to reduce fraud and actually reduce delay in payment of all of us and the general public.  But all Members are aware that in changing from a paper based system to an electronic based system, a great deal of care has to be taken in order to prevent further fraud, even the most sophisticated fraud, from occurring because fraud that is in electronic means of payment is very hard to detect and can be extremely dangerous if we do not make sure the system is fool proof.  

I have asked the people in the accountant general’s office to prepare a statement on this matter and, Mr Speaker, I will be glad to read this statement at the next sitting of Parliament to explain all the details that have led to this delay. In the meantime, I would like to assure Members that every effort is being made to make sure that everybody is paid. Thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, my issue has not been answered. What about these other departments? 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think it is also involved. He has taken care of all other payments that have to be made the same way. There should not be any delay. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am not an IT specialist but I just wanted a simple clarification from the minister. I guess Bank of Uganda, and specifically your ministry, before they venture into an ambitious programme, they would have to pre-test it; they would have to pre-test whatever gadget they would bring. So, it appears your Government ministry or procurement department is now operating on a try and error basis. It is my opinion. 

So, I want an assurance from you – those who have got loans from banks, their loans are attracting interest for two months. Can you tell us a probable date when these people will get their money? Forget about those scientific jargons, even if it means using the old method of physically delivering the cheques so that they first get their money and then we can spend the whole year learning this IT. We want to know when they will get the money so that we can communicate that the minister said, “next week.” And I pray that the communication is not like that of your junior minister who made a false statement in front of Parliament and caused a lot of political problems in this country. So, when are these people getting their money irrespective of the method you are going to use?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Just additional clarification. I want the minister in his submission to allay the fear and the rumours, which are circulating that the system is technically being sabotaged by the technical officials in your ministry because under the old system, they used to get kick backs. Mr Speaker, the EFT programme is not being tested in Uganda for the first time. We have been using it at some minimum level and it was paid for very highly by Government. So, may the honourable minister allay the fear that technical officials in your ministry are sabotaging the programme so that they revert to the old system from which they used to benefit?

Secondly, you also need to assure us that in applying this system, you will not violate the laws of this country. For example, Parliament is a self-accounting institution - it is independent. But the system has introduced a new arrangement where our accounting officer has to submit records to the Ministry of Finance and yet Parliament has an account with Bank of Uganda. That makes Parliament to be under the Ministry of Finance and it removes it from the principle of being self-accounting. Some MPs have just got their salary for July this week because the Ministry of Finance decided to say, “Pay from No. 1 to No. 175,” and I was among the first 75 MPs paid. That really makes our Clerk a staff of the Ministry of Local Government, contrary to the law. 

DR EZRA SURUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to assure the honourable Member that the payment system will in no way infringe upon the various votes and their responsibilities. The allocation of funds by the Parliamentary Commission will remain the responsibility and authority of the Parliamentary Commission and its secretariat. And the payment system will simply be an accounting implementation of what the Parliamentary Commission will have decided. There will be no alteration whatsoever. 

The purpose of the EFT is to reduce fraud and to increase speed of payment. I wish to ask Members to be understanding because if you do not understand and you are attempting to improve the system then you will go back to the old system which will continue fraud and there will be no improvement. I think it is important that we understand that when a system is beginning, there are some inefficiencies. 

It is not really pre-testing, honourable member, because pre-testing would mean that we would make some payments to see how they go through, but you cannot really pre-test, it has to be a real test. This would be destructive testing if you have a number of bulbs and you want to see how long they take to burn, you have to burn a few, you cannot burn all of them to see if all of them will burn well because then all of them will have burned and they will no longer be useful. So, we cannot have pre-testing, we have to go out and do it because once we have paid, we have paid. 

On the issue of sabotage, I think that the whole purpose of this process is indeed to stop any such possibilities. If there are any persons in the ministry or outside who have been benefiting from the old system and would like to stop the new system from working, I want to assure you that they will not succeed. I cannot say they are not there but if they are there, they will not succeed and we will make sure that the system is such that people get their payment quickly. They get it on time and they are pinpointed; everybody gets their money on their account and these intermediaries, people who are standing in between the release of the money and payment of the money at the other end, are being weeded out. I cannot rule out that they may be unhappy, but they will not succeed in stopping the new system from working. 

I will bring a statement next week. I have been assured before I came in here, Mr Speaker, I talked with people in accountant general’s office and they seemed surprised that there was still a problem. As far as they are concerned, they have paid everybody - but the money is released to banks and then the banks have to make sure that they have credited each person’s account. So, they are going to have a meeting with various banks to make sure that each bank, which has received money, has actually credited the beneficiaries and I will bring a report first time next week. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before we go to the next item, I want to find out from the chairpersons of the sessional committees about the position of their reports. Because as I told you before, our intention was to have these reports even before the general debate so that Members would use the information from them in debating, but this was not possible. Now I want to find out whether there is any committee, which is still working on the report or I take it that all reports are ready. Can I get the position? The chairpersons please, inform us.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, the Committee on Natural Resources is ready to report anytime we are put on the agenda.

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, we could not meet what we had decided in the Business Committee. We had decided that we give time to the committees to finish the reports and then give us copies so that when Members start the general debate - let us say I want to contribute on infrastructure, I should know the problems of the infrastructure from the report. If it is agriculture, I know the committee, which has been dealing with agriculture and the problems they have found. But this was not possible. 

Members have just been using what is in their heads without using reports. So, if the reports are ready, I suggest maybe on Tuesday all of you should lay them on Table so that Members – or if you have them now, let them be distributed. Members can read through over the weekend and when they come on Tuesday, we benefit from researched reports. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, some of the committees have found a problem in concluding some of these reports. I can talk of Physical Infrastructure where I serve and some other committees where I have been as an ex-officio Member. Since we were told by the ministers that some money is going to be cut, we were wondering as to which figures we were going to put in the report as the final ones? That has been the difficulty we were finding in concluding the reports as far as figures are concerned. So, unless this matter is resolved, we shall still have a problem with which figures. Because under infrastructure, we were told by the minister that about Shs 45 billion is going to be cut and that will affect the road maintenance. Which figure do we put?

THE SPEAKER: No, what you as a committee you are concerned with is the allocation, which was given during the budget speech. Then after the approval, in disbursing this, that is when the cut comes. The cut cannot come now. So as far as you are concerned, you should deal with the figures, which you have. What happens during the implementation will come because in cutting, those concerned must agree. The Budget Act says the vote, which is suffering must agree to be cut. That is the Budget Act. 

MR NATHAN BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, while we were almost ready, we were taken aback today. Well, all of you know that the Minister of Works has been given a go ahead to have Uganda National Road Authority to take over the roads plus the road fund. So, this means that all the money that was meant for road licenses and which was incorporated in the tax on the fuel was supposed to have a Road Fund Bill here so that we could be able to approve it and come into effect immediately. 

But surprisingly, we have been taken aback today that the Minister of Finance has put it into the Finance Bill, and yet the Road Fund Bill is supposed to be a Bill later to be enacted into an Act of Parliament so that that money is reinvested for road maintenance. But the moment you put it into the Finance Bill, that means it will be part of the money and we shall not achieve the target of feeding Uganda National Roads Authority. 

So, I beg that the Road Fund Bill - because it had been gazetted, but some forces within the Ministry of Finance are even up to now disagreeing. So, we feel that this Parliament should be given the Road Fund Bill on the Table as a Bill so that we can move ahead systematically and have that money reinvested for road maintenance. I beg to move.

MR WILLIAM OKECHO: Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is really the budget process, which was still going through. I know many committees have discussed the policy statements and they are busy writing their reports. These other issues, which are coming up, seem to be something, which is new because I know very well that some time back, I was requested by the various committee chairpersons to request the Minister of Finance to come and meet all of us under my committee. And we did meet and many issues were clarified during that meeting. After the meeting it was really the general agreement that they will go and complete the writing of the reports. From what I know, some of these reports have been lying here. For example, there is one on foreign affairs just down here and it is awaiting distribution. 

Secondly, as you advised, I am ready with my brief, which I see is now on the Order Paper and actually it sets the procedure and the ball rolling for the presentation of most of these reports. May I present this or wait for next week when we start the whole debate? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: My interest was to know how many committees have their reports ready.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, our Committee on Local Government and Public Service is ready, even now. The technical officers and ministers are also ready to present and copies are available.

MR SERUNJOGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Social Services report will be ready next Tuesday. 

MRS KAROORO OKURUT: Mr Speaker, the one on Presidential Affairs is ready.

MR NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, as Parliament pronounced after receiving the policy statement for Ministry of Finance, on the 24th August we also received the Finance Bills and they were to come before the appropriation Bills. Therefore, on Tuesday, the finance committee is ready to present the finance Bills.

THE SPEAKER: No, we can’t mix up these things. We have started debating the motion to resolve ourselves into a Committee of Supply and now you are bringing in the issue of the Finance Bill. What are we doing? We have to complete this motion and agree to resolve ourselves into a Committee of Supply. The Finance Bill can come afterwards. I am asking about the reports for the budget from the various ministries and sectors.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Mr Speaker and hon. members, the report for the foreign affairs committee is ready.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Agriculture will be ready by Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Are you ready?

MR BIKWASIZEHI: It will be ready by Tuesday, we are finalising.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, the report for the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs will be ready by Thursday next week. 

MR AHABWE: Mr Speaker, our report on Tourism, Trade and Industry will be presented on Wednesday next week.

THE SPEAKER: I am asking whether it is ready. (Laughter) Honestly, I wonder why this has happened this year because last year when we were a new Parliament we were able to be on time. We were able to complete the process by 31st August but now this is an old Parliament with the experience of last year but we have not been able to adhere to the time set in the law. Anyway, I now understand the position.

3.31
MR UMAR LULE MAWIYA (NRM, Kalungu East, Masaka): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was entirely moved by your guidance in your communication and I thought it fitting that I should put this on record. Allow me to appreciate, from the bottom of my heart the hon. Members of Parliament who made it to Kalungu East -(Applause)- in one way or another. Like you properly guided, there were quite a number of members from across who actually came in to support him. 

Also as you introduced, in the gallery are people from Kalungu East, from the three sub-counties: Lukaya Town Council, Bukulula and Lwabenge. I would like to thank them most sincerely for the support that they exhibited in the election. These people are peace lovers and they were very peaceful. I thank them very much. 

I would also like to thank my chairman in the constituency, who happens to be here, Mr Kiddu Ssali, the Mayor of Lukaaya Town Council, my campaign manager, Hajat Hawa and of course my dear wife and children who happen to be here. (Applause) I cannot forget members of the Cabinet who went to Kalungu and who were led by non other than the Secretary General of the party and the Deputy Secretary General as well as many others who made it to Kalungu East. 

Lastly, I would like to give special thanks to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda -(Applause)- and Chairman of the NRM party, who traversed the whole of Kalungu East soliciting for NRM votes. I would like to say, “Bravo” to His Excellency the President. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to assure the general public that as you properly guided, I now represent Kalungu East, which actually encompasses people from various denominations. I would like to allay the fears of all those who think that I will be this or that. I am going to serve these people to the best of my ability without any division, fear or favour and I would like to call upon all those with whom we competed in this race, which was so tight, to come up and unite so that we can uplift Kalungu East and keep it burning. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION

3.26
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Under Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I wish to present this petition. The copies are going to be circulated.

“The humble petition of Mzee Osuna Otwani, living in Tororo County presented by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya. 
1. 	The subject matter of this petition is in respect of a claim by Mzee Osuna Otwani that his land, leasehold No. MP50956 Vol. 619 folio 1 located in Malaba Town Council along Bugiri Highway measuring approximately 400 acres has been unlawfully grabbed by M/S Great Lakes CFS (U) LTD.
2.	In the year 2005, some foreign investors showed interest to purchase part of the said land and on arrival into the country they first made contacts with some brokers who own the company Great Lakes CFS Uganda. Some people in Tororo, one Jamal took Mzee Osuna to Kampala in April 2006 to see and talk to the investors but he failed to see any of them.
3. 	The said landowner met hon. Igeme Nabeta, Mr Juma Seiko and Tom Mugenga who told him that they were representing the investors and that they would finalise the purchase of the land on his behalf.
4. 	It later transpired that the directors of the said company after realising the investors wanted part of the said land, went ahead to secretly and illegally acquire a fake title in respect of the said land.  

Mr Speaker, the petitioner prays that- 
1. Parliament investigates the matter and finds out (a) who the owners of Great Lakes CFS Ltd are.  
2.  Have Great Lakes CFS Uganda Ltd acquire land in Malaba. 
3. Parliament recommends and ends all interference on the said land until all investigations are complete.

And your petitioner as is in duty will ever pray, and hereto your humble petitioner has appended signatures.  I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But couldn’t this be dealt with by the courts of law?  

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the petition and plea on Table. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but what I am saying; this is a matter which could have been expeditiously dealt with by the courts of law rather than Parliament investigating. Anyway, the petition is received and I will ask the committee dealing with lands to handle and report to us. Thank you.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, like you have wisely ruled and correctly said, there has been a misconception at times when petitions of this nature are brought in this House, or some matters that are continually being referred to the Committee on Natural Resources, which formerly had the mandate of the Ministry of Lands and the sector of lands as well.  But the Committee on Infrastructure is the one that is responsible for matters of housing and land. I just want to mention to the Members so that they could know, in future if such things happen, the Speaker already knows because he has been forwarding the corrected things to us and the other committees. 

But, I have noted that there are many Members of Parliament who still think the mandate of lands is still under Natural Resources, which is not. Although in our report like you will note, Mr Speaker, we have discovered that matters of land are not being given adequate prominence that they deserve by the Committee on Infrastructure. I think the Business Committee and the House may want to find out how best this matter could be addressed in future in order to give the proper attention that land matters deserve in this issue. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I recall this matter, which hon. Ekanya brought before this House. At that time when he brought it before this House, Mr Speaker, you gave a wise ruling. He was accusing hon. Hope Mwesigye. This is the same matter which is resurfacing and at that time, if I could be guided procedurally, how was that matter handled between hon. Ekanya and hon. Hope Mwesigye - because at that time he was accusing hon. Hope Mwesigye in her capacity as a Minister of State for Local Government.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, this is a different matter. The matter regarding, hon. Hope Mwesigye was referred to the Committee on Rules and Discipline and the committee will have to report appropriately because we have appeared there. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO APPROVE ADDITIONAL EXPENDITURE ON THE VOTE OF ACCOUNT TO FINANCE URGENT PREPARATION FOR CHOGM 2007

MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONBOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Mr Speaker, I was asking for a postponement while a correction is being made in the papers brought to the House.  There is a correction in the -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to defer it?

DR SURUMA: Yes, Sir. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, deferred.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF: -
I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2006/2007 
II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2007/2008  

(Debate continued.)

3.44
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I salute you all. I would like to refer to page 32 of the Budget Speech, about incentives for investment. I like the spirit that we as a Government should encourage investment so that our country can grow economically. But, if you look at the provisions given here, they favour a certain class of traders and investors. 

Like exporters, 10 years tax holiday to companies engaged in value addition is good. But, I have questions and concerns about the small enterprises that most of the Ugandans are engaged in. Even Ugandans who had crossed the line from being a small scale investor or small scale entrepreneurs to the side of big scale investors are falling out of the business. If you walked to Kikuubo today, you will find a lot of complaints from Ugandans that are being unfavourably competed out of the business environment by foreign investors. 

I would like to get a clarification from the Minister. What do we mean by incentives for investors? Do we mean foreign investors? What about our own citizens of this country? In my understanding of economic development, I believe that development economically does not mean transplanting of rich people from the rich countries to Uganda. If somebody has buildings in New York, in Japan and he is given a business in Kampala, he transfers part of his wealth from New York to Kampala; do you believe that Kampala is developing? The figures, I believe, that have been given -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, please. I would beg your indulgence for young visitors here to be introduced. Sorry for the interruption. In the gallery, we have pupils and teachers from Ibanda Integrated Primary School, Ibanda South Constituency, Ibanda District represented by hon. Kiboijana and hon. Byabagambi. You are welcome. Proceed, please.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. The big investors, natives of Uganda - for example, in the recent past, there were companies like Sembule Electronics. They started, what the Japanese are praised for in the world, here in Uganda. Assembling small radios and TVs, to me this represented what we would call development of Uganda because it involves transfer of knowledge and skills to the hands of Ugandans. It also means that Uganda is developing. But today, things are changing and it is foreigners- what do we do to our small-scale investors? That is the question I would like the Minister of Finance to clarify.  

When you go to Arua and West Nile generally, e people there have put attention on fighting poverty by engaging in trade especially with our neighbouring countries, Congo and Sudan. But you find that there is a lot of unfairness, instead of encouraging the small-scale traders, they are discouraged. In May or June this year, a young boy involved in this trade across the border, riding a motorcycle from Congo to Arua was knocked dead by Police and anti-smuggling Revenue Authority people. We do not stop our people from paying taxes but the treatment to which they are subjected seems to be directed to the point of discouraging them from that trade. Even getting the number plate for a new motorcycle, the amount of money and the process required is so prohibitive. (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, my colleague. I want to inform hon. Fungaroo that the ministry or Government should come up with a policy to support the private sector - a clear guideline that can be presented to this House, debated and adopted. If we do not do that and we continue under the current trend, Government is losing a lot of money. Companies like Mukwano were guaranteed loan by this Government in the late 80s and to-date they have not paid. Money was extended to Metha, instead of them compensating Government, it is Government compensating them because of poor policy. The same Sembule got a grant from Government; it went bankrupt and that money has not been recovered. I can list several companies. 

Even in the report of the Minister of Finance under the Budget Act, which he laid regarding loans and grants given to the private sector does not indicate some of these companies that have to pay Government money due to guaranteeing loans and giving grants under an awkward system. The point is that the faster the government comes up with a standard - so that an investor in Kasese, where the Minister of Defence comes from, doesn’t disturb the minister and say, “I also want this Government guarantee.” He will just go to the right institution. An investor in Tororo will move there. Otherwise, this method of working where everybody needs State House to call the Minister of Finance puts us in serious jeopardy and financial loss. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Wambuzi Gagawala): I thank you hon Fungaroo. Surely, this Government of Uganda is very anxious for the SME Sector including the traders. In fact, in the current budget as the Minister said, a figure has been put in the Uganda Development Bank which the Minister is soon going to table to us. Therefore, the government of Uganda is actually mindful and indeed takes the small scale traders and industries very seriously to the extent that the Minister of – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Gagawala for giving way. The UDB you are mentioning, the share capital is Shs 2000. Which money are you talking about that Government has put in UDB for small-scale business holders?

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, in August 2006, we authorised Bank of Uganda to transfer Shs 18 billion to UDB. This is money which belongs to the government of Uganda, out of Shs 18 billion, Shs 14 billion was transferred to UDB. In addition to that, we transferred money from the budget worth Shs 1.5 billion and we have budgeted in the current budget an additional Shs 10 billion. We have also put in the current budget a proposal to raise a bond of Shs 40 billion to UDB. I think it is totally unfair for the shadow minister to be idealistic. And it may well be that on some certificates, Shs 2000 is written in the books, but the actual transfers of capital are far in excess of what he is quoting. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you. I think the Minister of Finance should be fair to Ugandans. We have the issue of saying capitalising UDB; you moved one time Shs 3.7 billion with a letter saying, “Distribute this money; $1.5million to Tri Star, $0.5 to Phenix.” That was not capitalising UDB. You again moved Shs 2 billion in the same process. So, UDB books read share capital for Uganda Shs 2,000. You can talk of August because our accounts are yet to be audited but –(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I just want to seek procedural clarification because, with due respect, my colleague is the chairperson the public accounts committee and of recent we have been going through those audited accounts. And it would not be procedurally right for him to preempt our report because he is going to make a well-detailed report and submit it to this House. When he brings UDB in the budget debates - I understand many of our colleagues are actually at a loss. It would be prudent if he brings the report and then we discuss it.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you honourable members for making these contributions on this issue. The point I am trying to make here is fairness to all when it comes to incentives for investment. We should be mindful of our small-scale traders. Yes, there is also the part of enforcing the law for those who are in error. Heavy handedness for the sake of the Police and the Revenue Authority officers, which we have seen in Arua, implies that there is a linkage between the big traders who fear being competed out of the trade by the small-scale traders with these officers. That is what led to the death of Mawa Hussein of River Oli Division in Arua Municipality. A young boy was chased literally and he crashed with the vehicle of the Police. The issue was reported to the Police, investigations done but no report given so far, two months down the road.  

Right now there is another young boda boda cyclist groaning in Koboko Health Centre IV - supposed to be Koboko District Hospital – was shot by the Police in the leg in this fracas of trade. Instead of encouraging these young people and facilitating them to settle down in trade so that they do not think about negative things – you know in our region we are still fighting for peace. If they cannot settle to trade, why do you want to force them to go out?

I kindly request honourable members to think about Uganda developing and that means Ugandans developing not buildings built in Uganda by Asians or foreigners. I am not against foreigners but I feel support should be given to our people as well.

Secondly, we support the on-going issue about peace and development as well as the rehabilitation in Northern Uganda. But, I would like to remind our officers particularly the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Defence who are also here that what is being done today was done in the past. The fruits were not as good as we hoped them to be. We had peace talks and a peace agreement signed between the LRA and the government of Uganda. The late Angelo Okello signed on behalf of the rebels and President Museveni signed on behalf of the government. But right now, if you move down there and put an ear to the side of the- you will realise that they like referring to the failures made by Government. 

For example, the LRA are complaining that the late Angelo Okello died under mysterious circumstances. We know that he was sick, yes, but allow me to give you the other side of the story, as now said by the LRA, so that we can block all the possible loopholes. We do not want these rebels to keep on giving excuses, which can cause more problems to our people in Northern Uganda. 

Get it from me that the rebels are complaining that the mother of the late Angelo Okello is not getting what was promised to her by the government. I want to agree with them because as far as I know the Late Angelo Okello’s mother leaves in very, very miserable conditions in the Ogwali IDP Camp in Amuru District, yet Government had promised to take care of her. 

What is being done to the mother of Gen. Joseph Kony is good for confidence building, but why forget the relatives of the other rebels; why do you give room for the rebels to get excuses that the mother of this one and the other one is not being catered for; the family of this one and the other one is not getting what was promised. I think that you are not caring for these people the way you promised. We dont want such excuses; we should support this process to a logical conclusion. I know that we are likely to meet obstacles and slippery grounds, but given the good intentions that we seem to have now, I hope that we shall reach a good conclusion. 

Lastly, I received a letter from the honnourable Minister of State for Water and Environment about the bad state of the road connecting Moyo to Gulu via Adjuman. It is the same road that goes to Sudan. We, the people of West Nile, are committed to business and trade, no matter whether other things come our way or not. As long as we can trade peacefully, there is no problem. But when our only hope gets frustrated like it has happened with the road being blocked, then it becomes frustrating. 

As I talk, over 100 vehicles have got stuck on this road; this is a matter of emergence; it is as bad as people dying because some of the goods that are transported to Juba, for example tomatoes, are perishable. They are now rotting because of the road being in that condition. I request the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to show that he is at least himself Disaster prepared on the issue of this road.

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, contribution is for seven minutes; we agreed on that yesterday.

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. As I conclude, I want to say that we need help. I am Fungaroo K. Hassan, representing the people of Obongi in this Parliament. Thank you.

4.01
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti District): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity to participate in this great exercise as per Article 155 of our Constitution. I consider the exercise of deliberating on the budget, a very important one. I think it is a tangible process on which we can, at the end of the day, follow track and ask ourselves what we have done; it is more tangible than the State of the Nation Address because there are things in the that address that you may not touch; in the budget you expect physical, you expect impact; you expect tangibles.

Mr Speaker, I would like to make general observations in regard to our participation in the budget process. Article 154 (1) of the Constitution section reads:- “No monies shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except-
a)	to meet expenditure charged on the fund by this Constitution or by an Act of Parliament; or
b)	where the issue of those monies has been authorised by an Appropriation Act, a Supplementary Act, or as provided under clause( 4) of this article.

2. No monies shall be withdrawn from any public fund of Uganda other than the Consolidated Fund, unless the issue of those monies has been authorised by the law. 
3. No monies shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund unless the withdrawal has been approved by the Auditor- General and in a manner prescribed by Parliament.”

Mr Speaker, as I said, this is a very important exercise and my reference to the Constitution was to restate our involvement in it. I would like to draw the attention of the House, particularly that of the Minister of Finance, to a growing concern that actually the provisions of the Constitution in regard to appropriation and in regard to authorising expenditure from the Consolidated Fund, are being circumvented. 

It is a very big concern because we appropriate funds with a hope that Ugandans will, one, have a say on them. Secondly, that Parliament will be able to oversee where we put the money and at the end of the day be able to ask for an evaluation or audit the impact on what this money did for the people of Uganda. Thirdly, it is an accountability measure because we will all be held accountable for appropriating this money.

Mr Speaker, of late there has been a lot of concern about the behaviour of the Ministry of Finance especially in regard to expenditures not authorised by the Parliament of Uganda and expenditure that has not been verified by the Auditor-General. So, for us to be in this House to appropriate or to authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund, we need to be sure or at least be comforted that the Ministry of Finance will play the games by the rules as provided for by the various statutes. Unfortunately, this is not being done. 

I would like to refer to a number of insistences. The first one, of course, which has already come out, is the question of us acquiring shares in the Speak Resort Munyonyo. I do not remember any time us, as Parliament saying that we should begin to do this business. Sometime back, I think in 2000 or earlier, the PERD Statute came in place to provide for divesture; it provided for the procedures in which divesture would be done; it provided that Government would pull out of some of those schedules. 

For example Government was supposed to divest itself of the items in Schedule IV. I am not sure, but I think Government was supposed to completely divest itself and have nothing to do with the items under Schedule IV. Actually there was a schedule for liquidation and the one for total divesture. Now, how come we have began putting money into the Hotel Industry? Who authorised this business and how much money have we put in there? When we put it there, how do we follow it up? What is our share capital? How do we share the dividends after CHOGM? As a taxpayer in this country, I am very concerned.

I have acquired information from reliable sources that we now have a shareholding of 25 percent in Mera Investments, the owners of Speke Resort Munyonyo, which is giving us an expenditure of about Shs 12 billion. I have also heard that the minister is coming here to ask for more money. I do not know where he is going to put that one, maybe in the same ventures. But as a taxpayer, I really want to know where my money is going. What is the explanation to the public? Where do we stop after CHOGM, when it comes to this money? 

I would like to point out an undertaking, which the Ministry of Finance has not denied. This is an undertaking to do with the National Housing and Construction Corporation. 

Mr Speaker, you know that currently we probably have less than 49 percent of shareholding in that corporation owing, largely to the fact that, the Ministry of Finance undertook to pay a debt, which we did not even negotiate in this Parliament with the Libyan Government. My question is, who authorised the borrowing, in the first place? It is important we get to know this because before we pay this debt, Parliament is supposed to scrutinise all borrowings, all loans and so forth. So, we must be told who authorised the borrowing before the technocrats decide to pay a debt, which Ugandans did not undertake. 

Mr Speaker, I am very, very concerned because apparently it looks like if the Libyans go a head and acquire 2 or 3 more percentages of the shareholding, then the whole of National Housing and Construction Corporation goes to them. The point I am making is that if we cannot audit those private entities through the Auditor- General, then I do not know what we are doing. Recently there were issues about Metha in the press -and hon. Ekanya has just talked about them- that although we have been putting grants into this company, we do not have a way of going in to audit and find out what is accruing to us as shareholders. So, what do we do in such a situation? (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I want to inform my honourable friend and Members of Parliament that Government has just given a private company, Bujagali Energy Co. Ltd, $ 75 million; Government has also given $ 18 million to the same company. So, in total they have already loaned this company $ 90 million without the knowledge of us, the owners. 

This is a matter that us, as Member Parliament, must stand firm to question. If Government is loaning any money to a private company, Parliament must know. How can you commit close to $ 100 million to a private company without the knowledge of Parliament? We pass the budget like this and you go to Bank of Uganda; you go to the Ministry of Finance and just exit money like that? I think this a point where us, as Members of Parliament, need to come out very clearly and protect the money that our people have worked for. So, can the minister tell us what authority he has to loan money to a private company without the authority and knowledge of Parliament or the knowledge of the owners of that -(Interruption)

DR EZRA SURUMA: Mr Speaker, the Parliament of Uganda authorised the Ministry of Finance to set up an Energy Fund, and approved and appropriated money to that Energy Fund. The purpose of this money is to assist Uganda to generate energy.  Mr Speaker, when the negotiations for the establishment of Bujagali Dam became difficult and slow, the government of Uganda decided that this was an appropriate time to use the Energy Fund to speed up the starting of this dam. 

As a result of the commitment of $ 75 million from the Energy Fund, it was possible for the constructor to move faster with the site. It was done on the understanding that once the financial closure of Bujagali takes place, this money will be returned to the Energy Fund accounts. I believe that that is definitely the interest and intent of the people of Uganda; that the Energy Fund should be used to accelerate the production of energy or electricity for this country and that is precisely what has been -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the whole Minister of Finance, who is also a Doctor, to come to the House and lie that it is Government that gave money yet we know that Government  guaranteed a loan, an act that violates the Constitution of Uganda as provided for under Article 159 (2), which partly says that nobody can guarantee a loan and give a loan without the authority of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: I think you are talking about understanding the provisions of the Constitution. My different understanding from your understanding does not make me be out of order; it is a question of assisting me to understand. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to resume the Floor so that when his time comes, the minister can respond to every other thing.

THE SPAEKER: No, I think there was a point arising from what hon. Okot Ogong said, which he was trying to clear.

MS ALASO: Well, as long as I still have the time to say all-

THE SPAEKER: I give you only 3 minutes.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much-

THE SPEAKER: You had already taken 6 minutes; they were 7 but I will give you 3-(Laughter)

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I want to state categorically and clearly that the $ 75 million, which has been used to enable the constructors come on site was not guaranteed or loaned; it is merely an indication. This money is available to enable the constructor come on site and once that has taken place it will be returned to the Energy Fund accounts. There is no guarantee and there is no loan -(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, the minister has to be very clear on this matter; he should be very explicit on it by telling Parliament under what terms he did exit this money to a private company. As Ugandans, that is a lot of money; we need to know the agreement. For example, that money can develop the entire Northern Uganda and that is the reason why we need to know the terms clearly so that we devise means to bar the minister from doing the same thing next time; exiting money as if it is his; it is money that belongs to Ugandans; it is tax payers’ money.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I have indicated that this money was appropriated to the Energy Fund for purposes of building a dam to generate electricity in this country and that is what the money is being used for -(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am sorry that I am exchanging words with the minister, but he must be clear. We appropriated that money as a fund-

THE SPEAKER: He is saying that he is using money that was earmarked for Energy Fund to generate electricity-

MR OKOT OGONG: Okay, but Mr Speaker, did we tell him or agree that he should exit that money to a private company? It is very clear- Mr Speaker, that as Parliament, we cannot see the exit of $ 100 million and we keep quiet; that money was not to be loaned to a private limited company.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I would like to clarify that Article 159(2) does not only stop at authorisation by Parliament, because it says, “Government shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person, except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.”  So, either you come here and get authorisation or by operation of the law, which can be an Act of Parliament, to access that funding. 

I think that is what the minister of Finance is saying when he talks about the Act which authorised the appropriation towards the energy sector; it was done by an Act of Parliament -(Interjections)- yes, because we have the Finance Act and many other Finance Bills which we pass and I think under those Finance Appropriation Acts, money is appropriated for certain purposes; you do not to always come back here to seek the authorisation of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: I think he is saying that when you consider that provision, you do not consider it conjunctively but disjunctively.  Conjunctively, is when you sit as the whole body. Disjunctively, is when each party is independent of another; I think that is what he means. If there is a law other than the guarantee you give - that is the interpretation of the law - you should read that provision disjunctively –(Interruption)- I am saying what he has said; he has said, “Whole.” When you say, “whole”, it means either you take the first or the second that is what they mean by, “disjunctively”.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I want to inform this House that I am  -(Interruption) 

MR WADRI:  Mr Speaker, I think we are not interested at this point in going to a law school, but we want realities and clear explanations to this country. It is true that Parliament did enact a law and provided for establishment of an energy fund; that is not in dispute, honourable members. But the point of contention is that when the fund was established, the rationale behind it was that it was to enhance Government provision when Government got directly involved into it. But what we are asking to be explained is the fact that Government went ahead to disburse money from the Consolidated Fund and gave it to another separate fund, which is not stated in the fund. How do we explain that? 

Secondly, before the minister comes up, assuming that we wanted to go and construct a hydro-power plant in one of the sites, say Orewa water falls in Terego, and I came to you and said: “Mr minister, we are still in darkness and have not yet benefited from rural electrification. So, we want to establish this -” would you go ahead and remove that money and give it to Wadri because he has come up with a proposal that the people of Terego are in darkness and they need to construct a hydro-power dam? 

There should be a proper way; you must come back to Parliament and say: “There is an application from hon. Wadri, who wants to do a,b,c,d. So, under such conditions, could we divert this money to him”? There must be such a thing, otherwise, it will depend on the will of the person giving it out and that subjects it to abuse because you would give it out as if it is your personal money from your pocket. These are public funds; we want to find out the authority under which you diverted this money from the fund.  Thank you. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the supplementary I want to add was a live case in the 1980s. The Government of Uganda gave money to Mehta in the same manner, without clear terms and condition.  Mehta did not deliver equipment at the right time and the project failed. But instead, Mehta has been demanding for more and Government has been putting money in the budget for Mehta for the last five years; Government is compensating Mehta after giving him money in dollars. That is why we are asking the minister to follow the laws of Uganda so that if things go wrong, it will be easy for this Government to sue and recover the money. We are not refusing you to invest in the Energy Sector, but we are saying, “Follow the Constitution”. If you do not follow the Constitution, we will lose money like we lost it in Tri-star. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you. I pray you honourable minister to hold on, because I am going to ask you more questions and please respond to all of them. 

Mr Speaker, during the days of joint campaigns, when people used to hold joint rallies, if you happened to be No.3, you would say that all that they have said were my words. I wanted to say all that has been said. But, let me restate this for the sake of the minister, Article 155, Section (2) says, “No money shall be withdrawn from any public fund -” I think it presupposes that there was a law that created public funds. But it goes ahead to create a regulation for you to withdraw moneys from any public funds, including the Energy Fund.  Before you withdraw any money from the Energy Fund, which is a public fund, you should have recourse to an Act or to Parliament to authorise you; that is my understanding. 

Mr Speaker, having restated that, I would like to say that the attitude demonstrated by the Ministry of Finance in issuing out money from the Energy Fund is the same attitude they have been using to give money to Tri-star, causing this country a loss of over Shs 21 billion - giving money to Basajjabalaba, and to anybody and any how just because the person has the right links.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, assuming you create an Energy Fund, is it your view that anytime the minister, who administers the fund, wants to resort to that fund he has to come to Parliament and say, “Today, I am going to take Shs 10 million? Is it what you are saying?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am aware that if it does not come back to this House, it will go to the Auditor-General to issue the authorisation. 

But in most of these cases, you find that even the authorisation of the Auditor-General is lacking. We are genuinely concerned as Ugandan; I think Ministry of Finance should stop circumventing the law. My emphasis is that Ministry of Finance should stop circumventing the law – they avoid recourse to Parliament, they avoid situations that will call for the intervention of the Auditor-General and behave as though the money that they are dishing out left and right belongs to them.  

To me, Mr Speaker, this is the epitome of corruption - corruption at its best; it is institutional, yet it is taken as though it were not wrong. But I think it is wrong. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give is that during the time when the Auditor-General was having the function of the controller, Ministry of Finance used to get audit warrants whenever they were going to spend money. But now, when they made the 1985 Constitution and the subsequent amendments, we gave the Ministry of Finance mandate; the moment Parliament appropriates, the Auditor-General issue just one warrant regardless of whether the money will be used properly, that is a different story.  

So, the appeal is that it is Parliament which amends the Constitution –(Interjection)- whatever, the argument is it is only one audit warrant, which allows the Minister of Finance to access all the appropriated money. So, what I am proposing is that Parliament, if at all you want the Office of the Auditor General to have the controlling function, the Bill is with Parliament, we can amend that clause such that the Auditor-General assists Parliament to monitor the releases as they come. However, as it stands, the Minister has the leeway. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think that this issue is taking a lot of our time? We know that if there was an error, the Auditor-General would come up with a report and we would handle it. Otherwise, we are wasting a lot of time on this issue and we may not agree. The Auditor-General will have to be satisfied that it was properly used. Don’t we have other points to handle?

MR ODUMAN: I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker; I was expecting my colleague, hon. Nsubuga, to complete the message we got from the Finance Committee when we met the Auditor-General. We asked the Auditor-General a very specific question. This is the first year that the Auditor-General is appearing before a committee of Parliament to present a policy statement. We told him that in the public domain, there is concern that monies are being siphoned out of the consolidated account in Bank of Uganda under his watchful eye where we expect him to be issuing audit warrants. So we asked him to tell us whether he was circumvented or not. 

What the Auditor-General explained is actually what hon. Nsubuga mentioned, but we need to complete the story. He said that he issues a global warrant once the budget is passed. He said specifically that once he issues that global warrant, it is based on the breakdown that we make here. He gave a specific case of Basajjabalaba and he said that once he approves a global warrant, he has no role at that point in seeing how Finance alters a line from other expenditure to Basajjabalaba. At that point he has washed his hands and the ball goes back to the Minister of Finance. The Minister of Finance is here; what authority does he have to alter a budget line against which the Auditor-General has issued a warrant to another expenditure line? The ball is squarely with the Ministry of Finance. I thank you.

DR SURUMA: Is it in order for the honourable member to accuse me as Minister of Finance of fraudulently altering documents and laws of this country when it is not true?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I thought the member was simply reporting what they received from the Auditor-General. That was the report. Honestly, I think we should proceed because we shall have other avenues to scrutinise this particular matter later.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to implore this House, given the apparent difficulties the Minister and the Auditor-General are facing in relation to the concerns that we have, to consider even a constitutional amendment or amending the relevant laws, whatever they are, so that we will not have public finance getting to people without the authorisation of this House.

I also want the ministry to consider seriously the fact that we also depend on other taxpayers’ monies. The donor funding we receive is from other taxpayers. I do not think that those taxpayers, wherever they are, would be amused to hear that we give out money and we cannot follow it up and audit those investments, which we have re-capitalised. 

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to assure the honourable member that I have not given away taxpayers’ money against the law, that I have not spent any money against the law and that the payments which have been made for energy have been made according to the law in order to provide energy for this country. I want to assure her that both repays on thermal and those which have been made in order to support the acceleration of the dam and the interest of this country are perfectly legal. I would be happy if she can find any evidence of illegality and we will co-operate with her to ensure that the Minister is brought to book.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have final issues here; maybe I should take on the one of finance right away. I would like to know from the Ministry of Finance the mechanism that is used to scrutinise grants. There is a lot of pressure from the lesbians and the gays and the people of this country are worried. The people think that probably some gays inject money into our economy and now they want us to submit to them. We would therefore like to understand the mechanism with which we scrutinise these grants because they do not come to the House for scrutiny. If we have any sources of funding that are associated to these pressure groups, we should be able to refuse those grants for the sake of morals in this country.

My final submission is on the Shs 18 billion appropriated last year for resettlement of people in Northern Uganda. When we passed that money here, we thought it was going to buy implements that would help people to go back home. However, towards the beginning of this financial year, we had a presentation by hon. Kabwegyere telling us that out of the Shs 18 billion, only Shs 2 billion was used to buy implements. The Shs 16 billion was re-channeled to Police, the Judiciary, desk officers and whomever you can think of. It is very unfair for this House to put in money and claim that it is going to be used to resettle the suffering people of Teso, Lango, Acholi and West Nile and the money ends up doing desk work. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL COOPERATION: (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker, at the beginning of this session, on the Order Paper there was a motion for Government to move a motion related to expenditure for purposes of funding CHOGM activities.

Mr Speaker, I beg that you consider allowing us to present this motion because of the urgency that we associate with this exercise. We are ready to proceed as Government and we seek your indulgence, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know the circumstances. You had said that we defer this, now what has happened? Can you explain?

MR MUSUMBA: Sir, we had earlier on circulated a motion but we found that the figures needed further reconciliation. We now have the fully reconciled figures which we are ready to circulate now.

THE SPEAKER: Why do you think we have to consider it now? You have to lay a foundation on why you think it is urgent. Is it urgent or it is a normal matter?

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, this is an urgent matter, and the nature of the urgency will also be reflected in the nature of the motion. What is happening is that we have a number of activities, which are necessary to ensure that we hold CHOGM in two months’ time. Those activities require to be funded and at this time we are still operating on a vote-on-account. If we continue operating on a vote-on-account, we will never be able to have enough money to finance the activities in time for CHOGM. Therefore, the nature of this request is to enable us to proceed expeditiously.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure in as far as the request of Government is concerned. In principle, we members of the Opposition support CHOGM. I want to make that very clear from the onset. However, I am unhappy with the approach of the Minister, hon. Isaac Musumba. Hon. Isaac Musumba met with the Leader of the Opposition at a social evening last night - I say this with full authority - and he followed it up with a formal meeting with the Leader of the Opposition this morning asking for our support in as far as his bid to present to Parliament this request is concerned. However, in one way or another we felt it was very irregular. 

According to the news print media, our brothers and sisters in NRM have had three meetings discussing the same issue and we just want to be brought on board now, to rubberstamp as it were. However, we have the following to say: One, we will appreciate as an arm of this Parliament to know what our brothers and sisters discussed in the last three meetings so that we work in tandem as Parliament. Two, we do not object in totality to the demand for extra money to support CHOGM activities, but we feel this should be accompanied by the following:

One, we would expect the government to come to us as Parliament to say, “Look, the other time you availed to us such an amount of money which we have used for a, b, d, c and d”, so that we can be able to appreciate your request for additional money –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, Chief Whip for the Opposition, I think I have followed your contribution. However, I think this contribution should be made when we are debating the appeal and you will oppose it or support it with those reasons. The appeal has not yet been made. The Minister was just saying they deferred this matter but they can now bring it up so that we handle it. So, when he does this, he will put up his case and in reply you will bring up those reasons rather than bringing them up even before we have known what he is presenting.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I am most obliged by your advice. As and when the Minister formally comes up with that request, we will engage him in some talk and engage him in debates. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, make your case and then we see how to proceed. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPROVE ADDITIONAL EXPENDITURE ON THE VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT TO FINANCE URGENT PREPARATIONS FOR CHOGM 2007
4.41
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to present this motion. Honourable members, Uganda will host the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in November 2007. Preparations for this meeting are underway and various activities require immediate funding as indicated in the table that is being circulated. The requirements indicated in the table are: CHOGM Secretariat, protocol, venues, conferences, immigration, infrastructure and so on. However, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Summarise and give us the total and then you go on with your reasons.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, whereas Shs 55 billion is available in FY 2007/08 budget now before Parliament, CHOGM activities require an additional Shs 112.34 billion. The implication of this is that Shs 57.34 billion is required as additional funds. The original figure is total funding for CHOGM and this amount includes road repairs, amounting to Shs 45 billion, to be funded within the road maintenance budget provision under the Ministry of Works and Transport. In addition, we need to accelerate the release to State House worth Shs 14 billion. 

At the time I presented the budget for FY 2007/08 to Parliament on 14 June 2007, details of expenditure on the contracts for various activities listed above had not been concluded. It was therefore not possible for me to provide for the full extent of CHOGM 2007 activities as quantified by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and approved by Cabinet. In addition, the vote-on-account also imposes more restrictions on the funds that can be released to CHOGM activities. 

Honourable members, as this is an emergency that requires additional funding for CHOGM activities, it has become imperative that in line with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Public Finance and Accountability Act of 2003, Parliament authorises additional expenditure of Shs 153.08 billion above the vote-on-account provisions to fund CHOGM activities as follows:

i) 	Vote 016 – Ministry of Works and Transport: Road repairs, Shs 45.073 billion.
ii) 	Vote 016, Project 0936 – Ministry of Works and Transport: Redevelopment of State House, Shs 14 billion.
iii)	Vote 006 – Ministry of Foreign Affairs: CHOGM 2007, Shs 94.005 billion.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I therefore move that this august House resolves to approve the resolution to allow expenditure above vote-on-account of Shs 153.08 billion for FY 2007/08 as requested. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Any further justification or you think you have done it? 

4.45
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, in addition to the earlier issues I raised, the Minister has just appealed to us that this is an emergency. I would like to inform him that poor planning on his part should not cause emergencies on our side. The issue of CHOGM is not an issue of yesterday neither is it a matter of last year. I think we have been having these preparatory arrangements for quite a number of years. For the Minister to come up and say that this is an emergency as if the whole thing just came on board yesterday, is disappointing. We would not like to be dragged in that way because when you are in a hurry, the likelihood is that you will not be able to have a critical look at the figures. 

Since, as I said earlier on, our brothers and sisters in NRM have been locked up in a three-day meeting, it will be prudent that our side also gets a team of technocrats to team up with technocrats from that meeting so that they could be able to give thorough scrutiny. That way, they will be able to come up with a position that will be in the interest of this country. As I said earlier on, we in the Opposition support CHOGM activities but what we are demanding is that things be done properly so that we are able to account to Ugandans about these colossal sums of money that we have been asked to approve. 

I beg the indulgence of this Parliament; as for today, let us not rush with this request but let us engage in dialogue. Let the government side tell us what the outcome of the three-day meetings was so that on our part we are also given time to scrutinise this thing. In fact, we have been caught off-guard. We have not looked at the documents other than the one or two-page documents which have just been read to us, and yet the book which has been given to the Leader of the Opposition this morning requires a lot of scrutiny. We would be very unjust to ourselves as persons and as a country if we just rushed into pronouncing ourselves on this matter without scrutiny. 

I beg that a handful of people sit down and go through what you have discussed on the other side and next week will not be too late for us to move on. Having said that, we are left with approximately two months to host CHOGM; to ask for Shs 153.08 billion to be expended in the two months and have things ready, I think we are not serious. We are not serious at all. So, please let us be fair to ourselves as a country and as individuals and have this thing considered next week if the conditions that I have given can be taken into account. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There is a point I want to clarify concerning the appeal by the Opposition Chief Whip. As far as I am concerned, here I handle parliamentary matters. Matters of a caucus cannot come in because I do not know the leaders who will tell us what is discussed in a caucus. So, the demand for caucus reports here does not arise. Here you handle parliamentary matters. I do not know whether they are discussed in the caucus or not. You handle matters as parliamentarians rather than as people coming from caucuses.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I do agree with you that we are here as a Parliament. As I said earlier on, the Leader of the Opposition was given this document spelling out all the details of what they require the money for. The point I am raising is that we should be given time to look at this document. This is a huge amount of money being requested for and in all fairness if we came up with a team of few committed people, they will be able to give this document more surgery and then report to us. It will be easier for us because both sides will have made an input. That is the appeal I am making. If you think that we disregard whatever went on in the caucus, so be it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, what you are saying is that you suggest a small committee of this Parliament be set up? (Laughter)

4.50
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I rise to support my colleague, the Opposition Chief Whip, in asking that this Parliament grants especially members of the Opposition more time to scrutinise the documents that may be availed to us to increase or to add more information to what has been given to us today. 

My quick comment on the two pieces of paper that have been presented to this House is that the information available is inadequate. CHOGM had a budget before; what was that budget? It is not spelt out here. How was the budget broken down? If you looked at item 1 on the table, for example - and I believe the Minister of Finance should be listening (laughter) and the Leader of Government Business should also be paying attention to what I am saying because it is important since it will enhance our understanding -(Interruption)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof Apolo Nsibambi): I was trying to find a formula for accommodating you. Sometimes I consult my colleague in order to solve a problem. I have the capacity because I am an organist -(laughter)- I can use my hands, feet and my head to do so many things at the same time. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank the Leader of Government Business. The good professor is very good at wriggling himself out of tight situations. The point I was pushing across is that when you talk about CHOGM Secretariat, for example, having Shs 7.699 billion additional money being sought by Government, how much money was allocated to that secretariat before?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member let us sort out the issues first. The main issue is that this side thinks that because they have just got this document, they suggest that we have a small committee from both sides to scrutinise this matter so that they understand what is involved and maybe on Tuesday, because Tuesday is the next sitting, they come and report. Let us debate this issue. If it is relevant to set up this committee, then we do so. If it is not possible, say so.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, it is a pity that the hon. Ogenga Latigo is not in the House today because this morning –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank our honourable Minister for accepting this information. Although hon. Latigo is not physically present, he is here in the sense that we shared a discussion on this matter together with other party whips in the Opposition. So when you see us talk the way we are doing, we are reflecting the opinions of the entire Opposition. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We are dealing with a preliminary issue of sitting; there is no other point. Let us first sort this out. If we agree, then we finish with this. Let me here from this side because the Opposition has given us their views. What do you say?

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I thank you and I hope I will make my point this time without interruption. It is a pity that hon. Ogenga Latigo is not in the House because I met him this morning and we discussed this matter at length. He said he sympathises with this motion. He thinks that the CHOGM programme needs a lot of support from all people of goodwill and that as we proceed or progress to bring this motion before the House -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I have been forced to stand on a point of order in reference to what hon. Musumba has said because he keeps referring to the Leader of the Opposition. If we are to buy his reasoning, the copy of the document that he gave to Prof. Latigo in the morning has different figures from what he has given us here. So, if that discussion was held in the morning and you agreed in that way, you also remember very well that you failed to produce the figures here and that is why you were differed to a later time. 

The figures that you have brought here are completely different from what Prof. Latigo photocopied and gave to us, how do you then come and convince us that what you are presenting now is what you had agreed with Prof. Latigo in the morning?  Are you in order to assume that the amended figures are the same figures that you presented to us in the morning?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that we should utilise the time we have to resolve a relevant issue. The relevant issue is that preliminary issue - do we set up that small committee to deal with this? Let us resolve that issue and then we go to the merits.

MR ALASO: Mr Speaker, I think you should guide me because it is important that I follow what is going on in this House. I would like to know from you whether we are supposed to pass this motion here and now, or whether we are supposed to push it forward to the relevant committee of this House because I am beginning to get an impression that we are supposed to vote now.

THE SPEAKER: The matter was brought as a matter of emergency. Hon. Wadri has said yes, they agree with this but what they need is to know more details by using a few of them from this side and from that side to study the document and reach a consensus. This is what we are trying to do. If we agree on that, we may not have to go into the merits and demerits of the motion. If we agree, we will just set up the committee. This is what we are trying to resolve although some people are talking about merits. Do not talk about merits; let us first resolve this issue. That is why I was telling the side which brought the motion that the Opposition is saying that let us have a small committee for two or three days as the case may be, so that we come back and resolve the issue. That is what I am trying to get from you. The issue is, do we set up a small committee or not?

MR MUSUMBA: I want to make a proposal on the way forward, Sir. We have brought this motion before this House and I take the point that the House may find it unfair for them to be asked to pass it now. I therefore move that in our usual way of dealing with matters of this nature, this motion be referred to the Budget Committee, which is the appropriate committee in these circumstances, to consider this matter and they can return to the House when they are ready.

MR OTTO: Mr Speaker, we will still support the idea of creating a smaller committee, probably of six people, because we also have options of opposing the whole thing. So, when we make a minimum demand that you involve us at a micro level, it is for goodwill because billions have been spent on adverts yet some members of the Opposition had opposed it and you could have saved all that money. So, we request that a committee of six people meet, probably tomorrow mid-morning, so that we give our blessings. Otherwise, we are not here to allow a decision of a caucus to be pushed through our throats. That one will not happen.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I oppose the proposal of the Budget Committee. I know that the chairman of the Budget Committee has been in meetings about CHOGM and before we came here, I was with the Minister talking about this. It is just a matter of going there and bringing it back. I think the idea brought by the Chief Whip is correct because we have technical people who can represent us here given the numbers. How many people from the Opposition are on that Budget Committee? Mr Speaker, I oppose.

MR OKECHO: Is the honourable member in order, Mr Speaker, to insinuate that I just produced a paper and brought it here? I am not the mover of the motion and all issues of this nature are normally referred to the Budget Committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, should we assume that the Minister is amending the proposal by hon. Wadri? Do you want me to put it to vote or can we reach an agreement?

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. When I came up with this proposal from the bottom of my heart, I meant well. In no way will members of the Opposition, as I said earlier on, be brought to rubber-stamp. We really want to move in tandem with Government. 

At this point to come up and say that we take this matter to the Budget Committee, you also need to appreciate that at the beginning of this session the Rt hon. Speaker did ask the various committees as to how many of them were ready with their reports and they talked of next Wednesday and next Thursday, except for three committees that were ready. That is a sign that the various committees have much on their plates to chew within a few hours, because under the law Parliament is expected to pass the national budget by 31 August. 

My proposal that we have a small select committee charged with a specific timeframe of up to Tuesday will make the work much easier. They will have churned the nitty-gritty and when they come here, both sides will make contributions to it. However, if we come up and say that we want to take it to the Budget Committee, it might cause second thoughts in many a mind. I beg your indulgence; please, let us have a select committee to make the whole process easier. I beg to move.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, this House is governed by laws. The laws and regulations under which select committees are established are known –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No, this will not be a select committee.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, the law under which I am asking this House to proceed is set out in the Budget Act, section 19, and it says: “There shall be a Parliament Budget Committee which shall be a Standing Committee of Parliament and all chairpersons of the other committees shall be ex-officio members of the Budget Committee.” In (2) (b) it says: “(2) The Budget Committee shall - 
(b) consider the National Budget and compile amendments and refer them to the relevant committees in as far as it will also consider preliminary estimates of the National Budget.”  

I therefore propose, Sir, that there is no committee more relevant to this matter at this point in time than the Budget Committee. All I am asking is that this House – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, to be fair, would you not have loved to have your motion passed today if it were possible, without resorting this matter to the Budget Committee? Would it have been invalid since you have not referred this matter to the Budget Committee? Suppose there were no position and we put the vote, would you say that this matter was not referred to the Budget Committee? 

As he is saying, the report will be back with us on Tuesday. If you agree, we will set up a small committee and we will come back on Tuesday and dispose of the issue. If we refer it to the Budget Committee now, it will take a week or so yet you actually need the money soon. 

MR ARIMPA: Mr Speaker, your guidance is in order. We have a Budget Committee and the rules of the House allow anybody that wants to attend the meeting to do so. Since the Budget Committee is there, the matter should be referred to the Budget Committee and then we resolve it. 

THE SPEAKER: Will the Budget Committee not delay?

MR ARIMPA: Why should it delay? We should give them a short time.

MRS MARY MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I think that we are already too late and that is why we are facing an emergency. In all honesty, I think that this Parliament should not hold themselves responsible for any failures that CHOGM will have. It is not our responsibility but the responsibility of Government. I therefore do not support the Minister who has just spoken unfortunately, because I do not think that the issue should be postponed any longer. We must debate and finish this issue now and pass the budget if it is possible, so that Government can continue with the CHOGM work. 

I have heard several times Government holding Parliament responsible and using Parliament as a scapegoat when Government has failed. I have heard, for example, Government talking about power problems and pushing them on individuals in Parliament. What miracle is Government going to make to be able to beautify Kampala in the next two months? Literally, we are left with two months to CHOGM, why should we hold ourselves responsible because that will not happen? 

MR OWORI OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support what the hon. Mary Mugyenyi has just talked about. We are late hence the emergency. As we know, countries that have ever hosted CHOGM –(Interjection)- playing games must end. Ordinarily, CHOGM is announced to a host country two years to that meeting. Here it was announced to us four years to the meeting. Today, two months to the meeting, people are bringing the issue of emergencies. Who created this emergency? Is it in order for members of the other side to stampede this House after creating this emergency and say that this is an emergency? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a motion has been tabled and its demerits and merits are known, let us vote on the motion.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, I was still making my point.

THE SPEAKER: Let us then vote on the motion.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure. I have analysed the Constitution, the Budget Act and the Public Finance Accountability Act. I do not see any provisions in our laws that permit Government - unless I am educated about it - to issue a supplementary on vote-on-account. There is no provision. I would be pleased if the Minister brought –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is the constitutional basis of this motion? 

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, what we have requested for is additional expenditure to vote-on-account. It is not a supplementary because there is no budget. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is something that is of an emergency nature, but there was a suggestion from hon. Wadri that we select a small committee, which should report to us on Tuesday when the House is sitting, so that we vote on it on Tuesday. Even if we vote on it today, the Clerk will have to draft the document itself and sign it so that the committee that we will set up today will sit tomorrow and produce a report.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: For the sake of harmonising our positions, Mr Speaker, I do accept the idea of a committee as you have guided us. Let us work closely with each other; CHOGM is for all of us. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I suggest that this side brings five members and this side brings two members. [Hon. Members: “No!”] Honourable members, the formula we have been using is that of numerical strength. This is what we have been doing, but let me hear what you propose.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for having accepted that we work together. That goes to underscore the point that I made earlier, that we mean well for the cause of CHOGM. The success of CHOGM is a pride to all of us as a nation and its failure is also a shame to all of us and we wish to see it succeed. 

Having said that, you had earlier on dissociated this House from caucuses but it is a fact that one side of this Parliament has had a three days’ discussion -(Interjections)- No, allow me build my point. We members of the Opposition are ready to cooperate and work with this small committee to critically scrutinise the proposals that have been made. It is our request that the members of this committee be six; three from the NRM and three from the Opposition. This is an important issue.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, I think let us be consistent with what has been guiding us. I suggested two because I thought we would have a committee of seven. What we can do is to have more members so that we raise the number. We can have 11 members so that you get four and the NRM gets the rest. That way we shall have wisdom from different people.  

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the fact that NRM has a higher position and more strength in this House. It is on that basis therefore that I will agree with your proposal that on my side we will get four people who understand figures very well and then let NRM give whatever it has. 

THE SPEAKER: so, we shall get a committee of 11 people. They bring four and you bring the others. What is wrong with that?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Mr Speaker, I appreciate the concerns of the Opposition.  However, we agreed in this House that if we are to constitute committees or anything that has numbers in it, the representation should be proportional. If the Opposition is to bring four people, the proportionate number would be ten for the NRM. I would rather we agree on the size of the committee and then we work out the proportions.

THE SPEAKER: I want this committee to be set up so that on Tuesday this matter is revisited. Let us finish this now. By your method, you will be delaying the settlement of this matter.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Speaker, I am in agreement but the proportion is what I am –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: You see the proportion is seven to four. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, in as far as we are concerned, we will only fill the four positions. Even if you want to field the whole of NRM, we do not mind. (Laughter)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am happy to see that the Leader of the Opposition is here. We are on the brink of solving the problem. We have accepted the committee and I suggest that let it be four to ten so that we end this matter and we go ahead to solve this national and international matter. I thank you.  

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker and Leader of Government Business. I apologise that I was not in this House to participate. However, the position of our side was clearly given, and I think given the importance of this issue we should not spend too much time arguing about numbers. Even if we have three and you have four, in terms of votes you will still get a majority. The idea is that we get a group of people who will work on behalf of Parliament because there is nothing to scrutinise about CHOGM in respect to NRM, FDC or DP.  All we want to ensure is that if we are going to give money, it is money that is truly needed, and that the sectors that have to be protected are adequately protected. Therefore, the members that we have offered will work with those that the NRM will give in the best interest of Parliament and in the best interest of the country. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: So I take it that we have now agreed. You said four to ten. The committee should start sitting tomorrow morning so that on Tuesday a report is brought and then we dispose of this matter. Do you have the names?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, as I said earlier on, we are comfortable with the slot of four and we have the following who will represent the Opposition on this committee:
1. 	Hon Okello-Okello
2. 	Hon Oduman Charles
3. 	Hon Okupa Elijah
4. 	Hon Matia Nsubuga

Where there is need for back-up, I have many on the waiting list. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

MS KABAKUMBA: Rt Hon. Speaker, we have:
1. 	Hon. Okecho William
2. 	Hon. Baliddawa Kafufu
3. 	Hon. Ibrahim Kadunabbi
4. 	Hon. Gaudioso Tindamanyire
5. 	Hon. Rose Akol
6. 	Hon. Loi Kiryapawo
7. 	Hon. Katende Sematiko
8. 	Hon. Abraham Byandala
9. 	Hon. Arimpa Kigyagi
10.	Hon Najjemba Rose

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I propose hon. Okecho to chair the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much. I think this has brought us together. Honourable members, I thank you for being able to resolve this matter. I request the committee to sit diligently tomorrow or even on Saturday so that on Tuesday when the House resumes, we deal with this matter as the first business of the House. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.26 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 28 August 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)






