	Wednesday, 31 August 2005

Parliament met at 10.45 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to today’s sitting and as we indicated yesterday, we would like to complete at least four reports today to enable us catch up with our other programs But for now, we would like to handle the report on the divesture of Nile Hotel for approximately 30 minutes. 

MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you Madam Speaker.  I wanted to update the House on the progress we have made with what was referred to our committee on the 20th July. On the 20th July, the House considered the motion seeking to create 22 new districts. At the conclusion of the discussions and approval of the motion, 20 out of the 22 districts were approved.  

Approval of the remaining two districts of Tororo and Budaka was referred to the committee to investigate controversies surrounding boundaries and we were required to report to the House within a period of one month.  The House also referred to the committee all the controversies regarding the creation of new districts and other proposals seeking to create new districts.  

Madam Speaker, the committee commenced this assignment on the 9th August - that was almost two weeks late.  We have scrutinized the motion as presented by the Minister. We received a memorandum of creation of new districts and petitions from the districts.  We set the terms of reference, which we were supposed to follow. We met the minister and his team; we have met the Members of Parliament from Tororo and Pallisa. We also met interested people from the two districts of Pallisa and Tororo who reside in Kampala, Jinja and Entebbe. We are also intending to move out to visit the affected areas, to meet the local communities and find out what is happening and later on, give a full report to the House.  

Madam Speaker, that is how far we have gone; we shall be going to Tororo and Pallisa to see those places.  The few challenges we have are: that the progress of the committee was hampered by the two weeks period, especially when we went for recess for the referendum and then afterwards when we came back we went into the constitution amendment.

Then, we are also asking you, Madam Speaker, to avail funds to enable us as a committee to visit these two districts of Pallisa and Tororo. After that we are further requesting this House to allow us more time because the month that was given to us ended on 20th and yet we have not completed the work.  Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for the update from your committee but I think I would appreciate it if you remained behind until we finished with the Budget and then you went out soon after, so that we can also have the numbers here to finish this business. But we shall facilitate you to go and we shall extend. You have explained the problem; you started very late for reasons, which are very clear, but I think let us finish this first and then we can facilitate you to go out.

MR BESISIRA: Much obliged Madam Speaker.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
 ON THE DIVESTURE OF NILE HOTEL

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama):  Thank you Madam Speaker and honourable members.

1.0 Introduction

Hon. Beatrice Kiraso, Woman MP for Kabarole District, raised a query about payments by Government and Nile Hotel International to Tahar Fourati International Hotels, (Tahar Fourati), a Tunisian Company.

In 1994 HE the President invited Tahar Fourati, owning a chain of Hotels in the Middle East and France, to manage Nile Hotel Complex.

The company entered into a Joint Venture Agreement (JVA) and a Management Contract (MC) with the NHL and Government of Uganda in October 1994 and January 1995 respectively.

The matter was referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for consideration.  The Committee now wishes to report its findings and recommendations.

2.0 Methodology

The committee held meetings with the following:

The Minister of State for Finance, in charge of Privatisation and the Attorney General, with their technical team.

The Committee further analysed the Joint Venture Agreement and the Management Contract and other documents submitted by the above ministries.

3.0 Observations

1.	Tahar Fourati was invited by His Excellency President in 1994 to manage Nile Hotel Complex and this culminated into the execution of two agreements namely the Joint Venture Agreement of 21st October 1994 and the Management Contract of 16th January 1995

2.	The Joint Venture Agreement led to the formation of a Joint Venture Limited Liability Company, Nile Hotel International Ltd.

3.	In the course of implementing the Joint Venture Agreement there developed disputes between the Board of Directors of Nile Hotel International/ Privatisation Unit and the new management, which resulted into the termination of the Management contract in April 1997 and the Joint Venture Agreement in May 1997.  This termination let to claims by Tahar Fourati from Government and Nile Hotel International.

4.	The Termination of the Management Contract was done illegally as shown below:

·	It was terminated when it had 8 years to run
·	There was no provision for termination in both the Joint Venture Agreement and Management Contract, which was noted to be negligence by those who drafted the agreements.
·	An audit report by the Deloit and Touche who were hired by Privatisation Unit advised that the grounds that were cited did not justify the termination of the Management Contract.

5.	The Joint Venture Agreement was terminated and Government made the payments for the shares owned by Tahar Fourati but did not settle the costs of terminating the Management contract.

6.	The issue at had is the payment for the 10 years period which was covered under Management Contract at a fee of US$1m.

7.	The Committee also noted that the Solicitor General advised Government to settle out of court and pay Tahar Fourati as per the Management Contract.

8.	This stand is reinforced in the Committee’s report that was adopted by this House on the 19th December 2003.

9.	Out of court Settlement is covered under section 28(1) of the Investment Code Act.  It states, “Where a dispute arises between a foreign investor and the authority or the Government in respect of licensed business enterprises, all efforts should be done to settle the dispute through negotiations for amicable settlement”.  

10.	By insisting to go to court the external lawyers of the Privatisation Unit were in breach of the Investment Code Act.  

11.	It was further noted that the President was misinformed of the position of the case when he directed the external lawyers of the Privatisation Unit handle the matter.  After briefing he redirected that the advise from Solicitor General and indeed Attorney General be taken and the matter be settled out of court because it was a threat to the new investors- Serena Hotels who are now management the Nile Hotel Complex.

12.	The committee further noted that the case is still on going in the commercial court pending out of court settlement by the two parties.

5.0 Recommendations
 
1)	The committee supports the Government decision for an out of court settlement because there was overwhelming evidence that the termination of Management Contract was unlawful.
2)	Government should seriously scrutinize the type of agreements entered into to avoid unnecessary compensation like this one.
3)	Officials who carelessly or deliberately make unfavourable agreements or contracts on behalf of Government should be held responsible.

6.0 Conclusion

Government should not be seen to threaten foreign investors by not honouring its obligation in its agreement.  Efforts should be made to make good agreements in the spirit of national interest.

The Committee therefore supports the position of Government and the advise of the Attorney General that the matter be settled out of court through negotiations between Tahar Fourati and Government of Uganda/Nile Hotel International in order to save time and the name of this country as far as investors are concerned.  I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, you recall that we instructed our committee to look at this matter because of the dispute as to the legitimacy of the whole process and this is the report, which is supporting Government position.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  There is a procedural concern here. One, among other places, we see recommendations or observations to the effect that this matter is still before the court of law.  Now, I am wondering if a legislative organ of the State can also get into discussing or looking into a matter, which is before the bench?

However, even if we are to overlook that, this particular agreement brings out a number of undesirable and unfavourable aspects of the State management by the Minister concerned and also the previous Attorney General. 

One, I may not be a lawyer but it is quite obvious in business that you cannot make one agreement covering joint venture and also simultaneously covering management. These two are normally separate; they can only be in agreement if one party is aware of the pitfalls and wants to take advantage of the pitfall in future if the other party is totally ignorant by omission or commission.   

You recall, Madam Speaker, way back when this particular proposal came up for investment. The Line Minister actually refused to sign the agreement and another Minister was drawn in belatedly, either out of coercion or ignorance, who signed it on behalf of the State.  He signed it knowing very well that it was a fraud agreement not only in form but also in substance.  

As I said I have observed, there are these two contradictions: an agreement of this nature, you separate the JVC from the management.  So, I do not know why they did that?  As it is said, I am only pointing out this for future reference.

Two, once again, to go back on the back page for the purpose of advising the Government, when you look in the history, in the files, the Attorney General was brought into the picture belatedly. He almost had no choice in the matter and yet he is the legal advisor to the Government.  A parastatal body is part and parcel of the Government.

Again, to show the fraud nature of events, here, when the matter became difficult and had to be sorted out, when you look at this supporting documents, the Solicitor General and the Attorney General literally took different positions.  

Admit that the Solicitor General by constitution or practice can also enter into legal arrangements on behalf of the State, in this case, as far as Parliament is concerned, the principal legal advisor to the State is the Attorney General.  As I said, when you look at the supporting evidence, which unfortunately was not attached to this report and justifiably so - otherwise the report would have been big - you see the correspondence to the President by the legal departments of his government contradictory.  

The Solicitor General says that we should not pursue the matter. The matter goes before the President, and the President says, “No, we have got a case. We can actually stand our ground. So that matter should not be dropped.”  That in this case, the Solicitor General, who wants to settle it out of court, is now differing with his boss.

As a result –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, there is no contradiction. Hon. Awori Aggrey has been attending our meetings. His Excellency again redirected and the Attorney General has written a report of which he has a copy, but which we did not want to circulate because of the matter being in court.  I think that since he is aware that the principle and advise of the Attorney General is that we proceed; I think it is not good for him to start disclosing documents that he has.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, this report is basically for noting, because it is still in court. You could only comment on the recommendations made by the committee without going into the details because the committee and the Government have the same conclusion.  

So, it is for noting and I hope the Government will take up the recommendations because I think they got the core of work, which is done, on our behalf.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to apologize to my honourable colleague, the chairman, for having gone into other details that should not be disclosed and I was privy to them as a co-opted member of the committee; my apologies, Mr Chairman and Madam Speaker.

However, Madam Speaker, sometimes one gets agitated when you see this kind of fraud way of handling things. You get worked up and ask, “why are we making these mistakes?” That is why I go with the chairman’s recommendations, especially on page 4, number 3 that “officials who carelessly or deliberately make unfavourable contracts on behalf of the Government should be held responsible.” This is not the first case. This is about the fourth of the prominent cases, where Government has lost close to 70 million dollars on court cases settled mutually agreed upon, on the accounts of fraud agreement.  

As I said before, the agreements are fraud for the following reasons:

1.	Either the other party is aware of the loopholes in the agreement and can take advantage of it; or 
2.	The other party is just ignorant and they do not want to admit their ignorance. 

I would have gone back to the other, when the President said, let us take on external lawyers of the parastatal body. But I have been advised by my chairman to move away from that route.  

So, Madam Speaker, why on earth is it that, the Government consistently loses money, which badly needs over hardly $100 million in agreements, which are fraud why; and people get away with it, yet it is very clear in the Constitution that anybody who causes loss to the state should be held responsible!  

I have never known of a case except one little one; only one little one and I think it was also fraud where one, professor Ssenyonga languished in jail for five years unfortunately and later on he was – but again, even in that case, he was just a poor fellow, but I do not want to go into it.

So, Madam Speaker, I am simply saying, that this August House should really pursue -(Interruption)

MR MIKE SEBALU:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising because of what hon. Awori is raising. And given the fact that the committee and Government agree that certain decisions that were made were made unlawfully and given the nature of the contract that was entered into, I would like to seek clarification from the Attorney General whether in this case the people who advised on this legal matter have made themselves accountable in terms of technical advice given, which is resulting into a problem as we see it presented by the committee.

DR MAKUBUYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  First of all, this is not purely a legal matter. It is an investment matter, and it is my colleague who should be responding. But let me take up the legal aspects.  

First, I would like to thank the chairman, hon. Rwamirama and his committee, for the professionalism and business like manner in which this fairly complicated matter has been handled. I appreciate that very much. 
 
Madam Speaker, I really appreciate what hon. Aggrey Awori is saying; that Government needs to put its act in order on how to conclude these agreements and to use all its technical resources.  You cannot argue against this frankly. You cannot argue against this.  Yes, we need to put our act in order as Government on these matters. 

But having said that, I think I would again like to appreciate the committee for appreciating what the priority is now. I think this is the second time we have attempted to privatise Nile Hotel complex and this second time seems to be working. I think what the committee is saying is that, everything possible should be done to ensure that this second effort works.  

The new investor had indicated that he was somewhat anxious when this wrangle between the Government and this other party continues and so the committee is saying that this must be sorted out as soon as possible.  And I think whatever is within our power should be done to ensure that this is sorted out as soon as possible.

Hon. Aggrey Awori being supported by hon. Mike Sebalu are asking about those people; those officers who may have caused loss through their inaction, omission or through their whatever. Yes, the appropriate organs of Government will handle that and it is good that we have a committee on Government Assurances. It should follow up this matter.  I am sure the appropriate organs will handle it and reports will be produced and so on.

But for the time being, the crux of the matter is that the anxiety that had been caused to the new investor is sorted out through a settlement out of court; through a conclusion of this dispute between the Government and the outgoing investor. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon Members, I did indicate that this is for noting. We are not going to dwell on the pros and cons of what happened and so on; that is being handled by the court.  

So, we can only focus on the recommendations, which the minister in charge says he is going to handle and we can continue with our issue of oversight. We have the powers here.

MR AWORI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  You are absolutely right. We should play our role of oversight rather than getting into the pros and cons of the legal details.  But I would also like to make one observation here. Sorry, Mr Chairman, but I may have to disagree with you here again.  

On page 4, item number 11, the last sentence before you come to 12, he says that, “The threat to the new investors Serena hotels…” This seems to be the key item that forced us to settle this matter out of court.  We have mentioned among other places and different for that matter. Really, if this was the fear that maybe the interest of Agha Khan, the new investor may be threatened by court attachment of the property in case we do not settle it out of court, we as Government have got the capacity to guarantee the Serena hotels and say, regardless of the outcome –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Speaker, the report is very clear, it is actually there, the legality of the termination and also our attitude towards investors.  

So it is not true that it is only Serena Hotel that seems to have been propelling this case, and hon. Awori has been very active; he knows it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Awori, we said that you should not go into the details for the pros and cons and this other matter of the settlement is actually before court.  We have no powers to either stop them or do anything else.  So, can you please conclude? You either accept the recommendation or you do not, and stop there.  

MR AWORI: I would like to go along with the recommendations, supporting especially item No. 3 of the recommendations that this should not be confined to this particular agreement.  We should also back-pedal to previous agreements, which I have seen, the settlements out of court, which must be looked into. I can give three examples, but because of the constraint of time, I will mention one.  

There was a one deal with a Yugoslav company, which cost us nearly a million dollars.  Now, the fault was ours.  The Yugoslav company had actually forgotten about it and we just reminded them, we said later on, when it was time barred- the seven-year period, out of the blue. For whatever reason, the Ministry of Finance writes to the lawyer of the company saying, “You recall that deal which we made seven years ago, we are now prepared to settle it, but on slightly different terms, under HIPIC arrangement.” 

Knowing very well that they had not even consulted the Attorney General. The HIPIC applies to certain countries and mostly bilateral launch, not with private companies.  They revived the matter, which the other party had already forgiven the Government.  

It costs us a lot of money! It even cost the reputation of one of our colleagues who was representing the Yugoslav Company and people thought that maybe he had gone behind our back to elicit this matter out of the storage so that he could benefit financially.  I do not want to go into that because he is an honourable colleague.  

But after this kind of thing, nobody was punished for causing loss of more than one million dollars to the Government.  Must we continue like this?

Going by your advice, Madam Speaker, there are two others, which are also being settled out of court, because the Attorney General was not consulted. The Ministry of Finance unilaterally decided to settle the matter with a litigant without legal advice.  What are we running?  I agree with my honourable colleague, the Attorney General, but Government should put this Act together and we as Parliament playing our role of oversight, cannot take this matter lightly.

As the august House in charge of authorizing public money, we should not be a party to this crime of dishing out public money when the people who are supposed to be responsible to carry out policy and other management of the State are just being so careless.  

I hope item No. 3 can be adopted by a resolution and we see that somebody pays for it.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.   It was stated here that this matter is still before the court as in the report.  A Parliamentary document is a public document.  What stops either party to use this as evidence?  Because the way the report is, it virtually supports one side and if the matter is still in court, let the whole institution of Parliament adopt it the way it is.  

One side will take advantage; it will use it in court and then we shall have weakened.  This is really a serious procedural issue because; I do not believe that one side may be innocent the way the report suggests.  According to the registration of agreements, you cannot take an agreement to be registered if there is no provision of dissolution or termination of the contract.  So, this thing needs to be looked at in detail and this company is obliged, under the African Anti-corruption Convention to engage in activity that does not promote corruption, by accepting to sign an agreement that they are aware that it has no provision of termination. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, you are the same person saying that we should not discuss the matter, and then you are going ahead to do it.  Anyway, honourable Members, the question of the settlement belongs to the Judiciary. There is nothing we can about it.  So, let the debate end now. We have noted the report.  

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT 
RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE 
ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2004/2005 AND THE BUDGETARY 
PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL 2005/2006.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Lule Mawiya Umar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, honourable Members.  I am here to present the report of the Committee on Natural Resources for –(Interruptions)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much.  Madam Speaker. I do not see any Sector Minister present here.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, yesterday I heard you announcing that Cabinet was not going to sit this morning.  There are two Ministers of Trade; I think they expected their report to be presented this morning.  There is one minister.  I hope the NPC will not say he is standing in for the Prime Minister.  Can we know, Madam Speaker, if the Executive is taking this process seriously at all? We talked to the Prime Minister, and agreed that there will be cooperation and Ministers will be here to listen to what Members of Parliament are talking about their various sectors.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, I would like you to protect me against hon. Kamuntu.  The utterances he is making are unworthy of a man of his standing.  

Now, I want to officially state, before this House that the Prime Minister has asked me to apologize to you.  He is unable to come now because he has important business that he is dealing with, and that he charged me with his function in this House.  Hon. Kiraso and other Members must know this. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Prime Minister did inform me that he is unable to come and that you are taking charge of the situation. But our difficulty is that the Ministers of these sectors are not here.  

Honourable members, I do not know whether we should adjourn the House because Ministers who were notified yesterday have decided not to come- Parliament has got its own programme.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, there are many reports pending, especially in my committee. We have the report on face technology.  If people are not available, we are ready to table the report.  

PROF. KAMUNTU: Supplementary comment, Madam Speaker.  Policy Statements of a Ministry are fundamental statements reflecting the seriousness of Government in addressing the concerns of the population, and clearly for a parliamentary committee to present a report when the Sector Minister is absent, it makes the whole exercise ritualistic, and we must express our concern. If I may respond to hon. Kagonyera’s point, Kagonyera is in charge as the Prime Minister, but he is not in charge as a sector minister.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Point of order.  Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I am not Kagonyera in this House; I am hon. Kagonyera representing Rubabo County, duly elected to this House.  Is hon. Kamuntu in order to derogatorily refer to me as “Kagonyera”?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamuntu, the rules are very clear and you have a copy of the rules.  You are required to address one another as “honourable”. So, you are out of order.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I apologize to hon. George Kagonyera, distinguished Member of Parliament.  But on a serious note, of course Kagonyera- I was just only teasing him that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have done it again.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Hon. Kagonyera – Madam Speaker, I was of course making a tangential comment to hon. George Kagonyera that whenever the minister is absent, he becomes the minister of –(Interjection)- I said hon. George Mondo Kagonyera, Member of Parliament.  I have apologized, Madam Speaker, I do not know why hon. Mondo Kagonyera –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamuntu, you are not supposed to engage in a monologue between you and hon. Prof. Kagonyera.  Let us leave that matter.  

Honourable members, I notified the Members of the Cabinet that there would be no Cabinet today. I told them in the morning and I reminded them in the evening.  It is coming to 11.30 a.m., must we really adjourn the business of Parliament because the three Ministers are not here?

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, we take the budget process, the policy statements and everything that comes from the Executive as very serious business and my imagination is that if the line minister is not here, then we have to defer the business of giving us the responses to a later time when they can afford to be here.  

What I am wondering is, are we prepared to have business pushed ahead if we discuss this statement now without the line ministers? We will have to wait for them until they show up and give us a bit of clarification here and there. 

Then, the absence of the Executive here really waters down the whole business that we are doing.  It looks like they do not take us seriously. So what is the purpose of us hanging on here when they themselves, who gave us the policy statements, do not want to identify with their work.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Supplementary, Madam Speaker. I want to supplement my colleague, hon. Alaso.  The statement before us of Natural Resources involves the heart of our economy, including the Energy Sector, which is supposed to be the engine of industrialization here. We all know how it is limping.  The fact that the line minister is not here, is very disappointing and I agree with you.

Mr Lule Mawiya: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and members for raising your concern.  I must express my disappointment to the sectors because the two Ministries, the one of Water, Lands and Environment, has four Ministers and Energy and Mineral Development has three Ministers.  

It is so disheartening, to see that none of them is here. At least they would have divided themselves so that one attends there and another one comes here.  So I do not know how we can move because I am not going to answer all the queries that will be raised. I am not a member of the Cabinet and I do not think that even the acting Prime Minister will be able to handle whatever will come up in the debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Office of the Prime Minister, can you explain to us where your seven Ministers are?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, there is not the slightest doubt in my mind and anybody else’s mind that it is terribly a regrettable situation that all these Ministers should be absent from this House without even notifying the Prime Minister or someone who is standing in for him.  

I want my honourable colleague, who has been on the Floor to note that I am not the acting Prime Minister. I am just standing in humbly for the Prime Minister, and I would like him to take note of that.

Secondly –(Mr Awori rose_)- I am continuing, Madam Speaker, and I do not need hon. Awori Aggrey’s information.  

MR AWORI: I want to help you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: You will help me – seriously, honourable members, we have no excuse whatsoever.  The Prime Minister is going to know about this in writing, and it will be up to the Prime Minister –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Point of order.  Madam Speaker, I have heard clearly the honourable minister, who is taking the responsibilities of the Leader of Government Business in the august House, saying among other things that he is not aware of the whereabouts of the seven Ministers and that there should be no excuse whatsoever.  

Is it in order for my honourable colleague, who has voluntarily assumed the responsibilities of the Leader of Government Business in the august House to mislead us that he is not aware when he knows or should be aware that the most Senior Minister in that sector got permission from the Prime Minister to travel abroad and she is not due back until late today?  

If you are in charge of that Ministry, you should be aware and abreast with that kind of information. Are you in order to mislead the august House that you are in charge when you are not aware of the information? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will not rule on that, however, -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker for your wise ruling. Now, the truth is that I did not mislead the House. I told them the truth according to how I knew it.  I never mislead the House. I have never been in the habit and I will never be because I respect this House and the Members thereof; I am not aware.  

Therefore, as I was saying, Government takes full responsibility for absence of the Members.  However, according to rule 90 of our rules, another minister can always represent the interest of any Ministry in the House and would take responsibility for any transaction of the House, which would be verbatim, reported in the Hansard, would be appropriately responded to by the Ministries concerned. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, what you are saying is that we proceed in their absence then I create more time for them who have disappeared with excuse?  I create more time for them to come here and they – anyway, honourable Members let me suspend the House for 10 minutes. You have to produce the bodies of those 7 Ministers.  The House is suspended for 10 minutes. 

(The House was suspended for 10 minutes)

(On resumption_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION 
OF SESSIONAL COMMITTEE REPORTS

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, I wish to convey- I was going to say condolences, but I wish to convey our apology to you honourable members of Parliament and to the entire country because today the Ministry of Energy was not represented, the Ministry of Water was not represented and yet every Ministry is supposed to be represented here. 

So, I want to apologize and request my colleagues to explain their absence.  Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. As the Prime Minister has directed his Cabinet, can we hear the explanations of the Ministers from those Ministries who have caused us lugubriousness and no work is done since morning? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Madam Speaker, how much more can I say. I am sorry for coming late, “meraqurpa mer maxima aqurpa.” Colleagues, bear with me; I will not do it again, I promise –(Laughter)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament we apologize for what happened. We shall not do it again.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Lule Mawiya): Thank you very much.  Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to present the report of the committee on Natural Resources that oversees the two Ministries, that is, Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment and also that of Energy and Mineral Development. 

Madam Speaker, I will go straight to page 4 that is, the Energy Sector.  The key land programs and activities for year 2004/2005 were as bulletined below as you can see. 

I will go to 5.2, the key achievement for the Energy Sector during the Financial Year 2004/2005.  

1.	The Power Sector Reform was concluded with Government granting concession to UMEME to manage the existing power distribution business in the country.  

2.	 Government procured and installed a 50 MW thermal generation plant.

3.	National access to electricity increased from 5 percent in 2001 to 9 percent at present.

4.	Rural coverage has increased from 1 percent to current of 4 percent. 

5.3 Pending or ongoing activities and programs for the Financial Year 2004/2005.

i.	Increasing electricity generation and rural electrification;
ii.	Achieving security of supply of petroleum products and setting standards for product quality, industrial safety, environmental protection.
iii.	 Staff training.

5.4 Key Planned Activities for the Energy Sector during the Financial Year 2005/2006.

i.	The Sector will continue supervising installations of units 14 and 15 of Owen (Kiira) Power Plant.
ii.	Conclude negotiations of the Power Purchase Agreements and Implementation Agreement for Bujagali hydropower project and achieve its financial closure.
iii.	Initiate the development of Karuma project.
iv.	Execute public sector rural electrification schemes and promote the economically oriented private sector led with government subsidies.

It continues down as you can see honourable members.

Committee Observations

i.	The committee notes that many rural areas are yet to benefit from the grid extension.
ii.	A number of presidential pledges are yet to be fulfilled.
iii.	Thermal electricity generation is too costly consuming 22 billion of the Ministry’s budget.  Government is also providing approximately US$1 million per month in form of taxes for fuel.
iv.	Load shedding is currently still erratic greatly affecting electricity consumers and industrialists. 
v.	Local companies and entrepreneurs cannot compete favourably to procure materials like electricity poles in the sector.
vi.	Provision of renewable energy sources like Geothermal has been hampered by inadequate funds for research and eventual implementation.
vii.	The prices of petroleum products have continued to soar.
viii.	Adequate funds have not been provided for the Kenya-Uganda pipeline.


Madam Speaker and honourable members, you recall that even the other financial year, this pipeline was mentioned and up to now it is still being mentioned.

Productive ventures like fish landing sites have not been provided with electricity.

The Owen Falls Dam is aging with several cracks.  This pauses a threat to the electricity supply.
The fuel currently stored in the National Strategic tanks can only support the country for 20 days in case of emergency.

Both Kiira and Nalubale Dams cannot run at the same time.  The installation of units 14 and 15 of Kiira dam may not greatly increase the power generated.

Electricity tariffs are normally increased at times without consultation with major stakeholders.

Recommendations

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommended the following:
1.	More funds should be allocated to the ministry to implement rural electrification programmes.
2.	A long-term and less expensive thermal generation plant should be initiated to provide the country with a thermal-hydro mix to meet the country’s ever growing demand for electricity.
3.	More mini hydros should be installed since they are less expensive and take a short time to put in place.
4.	Affirmative Action should be given to local entrepreneurs to enable them supply materials of international standard at a fair cost.
5.	Funds should be provided for research and implementation of renewable energy sources.
6.	Government should consider interventions to stabilise the fluctuating petroleum prices.
7.	The Kenya-Uganda pipeline be constructed expeditiously.
8.	Stakeholders must be consulted before electricity tariffs are revised.
9.	Electricity should be provided to support economically viable activities like the fish landing sites.
10.	Proper technical studies should be carried out before construction of the major structures like the daMs

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the petroleum sector. 
The key planned programmes and activities for the financial year 2004/05 are as given below:

Key achievement of the sector during that financial year 2005/2006:

Three areas licensed to oil companies namely: Pakwach Basin Northern (Exploration Area 1), Lake Albert Basin, (Exploration Area 2) and Southern Lake Albert and Semliki flats (Exploration Area 3).

Pending/ on going activities for the financial year 2005/2006:

·	Petroleum exploration and development;

Key planned and proposed activities/ programmes during the financial year 2005/2006:

Committee Observations

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the committee observed that exploration of Area 5, that is the Rhino Camp Basin, which extends across both sides of the Albert Nile in the districts of Moyo, Adjumani and Gulu have not been survey.

Heritage Gas and Oil Company have not concluded the exploration in Semliki Basin.

If the ministry is unable to undertake studies in potential drilling areas, the committee recommended the following:

·	Government should promote unlicensed and relinquish exploration areas.
·	Government should provide adequate funds to the department to survey to map unlicensed areas and monitor licensed ones.

The Mineral Sector

The key planned programmes and activities for the financial year 2004/2005 are as given below.  You can go through those honourable members.  And the key achievements for that sector are:

·	The Mining Act 2003 was operationalised in December 2004.
·	Exploration for gold in Bundibugyo, Kyenjojo, Mbarara and Mubende districts was undertaken.
·	Reviews and packaging of information for investment promotion for tin, wolfram and uranium were carried out, as it continues up to the last one.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the ongoing activities under this sector are: 

·	Subscription to international journals.
·	Prepare terms of reference to formulate a model mineral agreement.
·	Engage a consultant to prepare a model mineral agreement and as it goes up to the last one – 
·	Mineral sector development.

Key planned activities/programmes for the year 2005/2006:

·	The first one is to put in place a Model Mineral Agreement and finalise the Bill to regulate the earth scientists.
·	Promote mineral exploration, development and exploitation and update the geo-data base.
·	Continue to implement the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project.
·	Monitor earthquakes and other geo-tectonic activities.
·	Monitor and regulate the mineral sector investments and lastly.
·	Continue to participate in the regional and international programmes.

The committee observed the following, Madam Speaker and honourable members:

·	Infrastructure provision remains a hindrance to the sector.  Electricity and proper road network are lacking in many areas.
·	An increased activity in the sector leads to increased revenue. For instance, the Government realised over Ug. shs 86 billion from the sector last financial year.
·	Funds to monitor work plans and compliance to regulations are inadequate.
·	Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) review could not be carried out due to lack of funds and lastly; 
·	With the operationalisation of the Mining Act, the legal framework in the sector is now conducive to investors.

Committee Recommendations

·	More funds should be provided to the sector for infrastructure and field activities.
·	Funds should be sourced to carry out Environmental Impact Assessment reviews.
·	Funds generated from the sector should be ploughed back in the sector in the meantime to generate more revenue.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, and honourable members, minerals, petroleum and electricity have been very significant in the development of our economies globally. I, therefore, beg to move that the following funds be provided to the ministry for the financial year 2005/2006.

(I) 	Recurrent Expenditure:    	Ug shs    3,707,144,000
(II) Development Expenditure:  Ug shs     64,156,720,000 

That is as Government contribution and there we should add donor funding of Ug. shs 65,830,000,000.  Madam Speaker and honorable members, I beg to move.

Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment

This committee handles two ministries, now, I move to the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. Madam Speaker and honourable members, the structure is well known, the mandate of the ministry is also well known.  I now go to the water sector under the key plan programmes.

The activities of the water sector under the financial year 2004-05:

These were the following, members you can go through this in the interest of time.

2.2 are the key achievements for the sector during that financial year:

Honourable members, rural water service coverage increased from 57.2 percent, that was in June 2004 to 60 percent in June 2005. 

Water coverage increased from 65 percent to 67 percent in urban areas with a total of 300 new water standpoints installed for the poor and 15 water schemes were completed in the small towns.  
The sector completed 11 strategic reservoirs in Karamoja and commissioned one dam in Kodukul in Kumi district.

243.9 Kms of water line extended and by the end of March 2005, 95.9 Km were extended in Kampala alone.

Lastly, the ministry gazetted 10 towns.

2.3 Pending activities and programmes for the concluded financial year 2004-2005:

Initiation of studies and piloting of bulk water supply schemes in rural areas are going on. 
Ongoing of 280 new water points to serve almost 700,000 people in rural areas.
Lastly, several strategies have been developed that is rural growth, ecological sanitation, water, rain harvesting.

2.4 Key planned activities for programs for this financial year:

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I can skip these and go to the committee observations.

As a result of poor borehole maintenance, the ministry is to spend over one billion on borehole rehabilitation.

Funds under projects are not well monitored e.g. NUSAF funds; there is still disparity in provision of water in some parts of the country.

National Water and Sewerage Corporation is commended for the good work done notable among them was to reduce the unaccounted for water from 38 to 37 percent. Also their collection efficiency has improved tremendously, it is at 103 while capacity utilisation rose to 69 percent.

Camps in Northern Uganda still lack water and people still live under poor sanitation conditions. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not absorbing some grants from donors into the water sector as a result of sector ceiling.

Dredging in Lake Kyoga seems to be causing environmental problems like drought. 

Insecurity in Karamoja has partly caused poor dam construction leading to financial loss. Accessibility is also a big problem there. 

Activities in the sector like sanitation were affected by the budget cut. Planned activities could not be fully carried out. 

Late releases have affected procurement of equipment in the districts, adversely affecting service delivery in the ministry.  

The policy of bulk water supply is a good idea and should be promoted.

Committee recommendations

·	User communities need to be trained for sustainability of constructed facilities.
·	The Government should consider revising the budget ceiling for the sector with a few of accommodating grants for the sector.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, we were reliably informed that there is money from the donors that could not be accommodated as a result of the sector ceiling.  This is ready money, which we recommend that Government reconsiders this as it is a very crucial sector and since water is life, it must be supported.

Similarly, the water sector should be protected from budget cuts.  The water sector should be evolved in the monitoring of funds in the projects related to their mandate like NUSAF and also their activities on Lake Kyoga.  The activities on Lake Kyoga should be under the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment instead of being under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

Affirmative action should be given to drought stricken areas.

The land sector

The key planned activities and programmes, are as given below with their key achievements during that financial year:

(i)	Final draft of the National Land Use policy is in place, sorting and indexing of land records covered in Kampala mailo office and scanning has been initiated.  
(ii)	Six detailed plans were prepared for various towns and trading centers. 
(iii)	 16,390.88 hectares of land purchased in Kibaale and Mbarara under the land fund.
(iv)	Land information system (LIS) designed and put in place.
(v)	Sorting and indexing of Kampala land office completed 
(vi)	Land tribunal staff recruited. 
(vii)	LC courts training manual and guidelines are also in place.
(viii)	Uganda/Tanzania boarder surveyed.
(ix)	Inventory of Government land collected in 3 regions.

Pending or ongoing activities and programmes for 2004/2005.

·	Finalisation of the National Land Policy, which is now in a draft form.
·	Review of land laws.
·	Compensation of people/landlords in Kibaale district
·	Computerisation of land registry and roll out of systematic demarcation 
·	Compensation of ranch owners and acquisition of more land in Kibaale and other districts are also ongoing.

Key proposed/planned activities/programmes for financial year 2005/2006

·	Computerisation of the land registry and roll out of systematic demarcation
·	Development of land information system
·	Development of the National Land Policy and National Land use plan.
·	Continue with the rehabilitation of the land Registry 
·	Monitoring and evaluation of decentralised land services.
·	Compensation of ranch owners and acquisition of more land in Kibaale and other districts.
·	Rehabilitation of the geodetic network.
·	Piloting of systematic demarcation.

Committee observations

·	Although the Uganda/Tanzania boarders were surveyed and demarcated they are not yet secured, that is, people and their property still occupy the no man’s land.
·	Capacity of LC courts to handle land cases is still low.
·	The Kampala land office is still a problem since substantive work on the land registry has not yet commenced.
·	The land fund is still inadequate to cover the whole country.
·	Insecurity in some parts of the country has curtailed work for example on the national geodetic network.
·	Unavailability of required base maps have reduced date collection on national land use plan.  Existing maps are of 1967 series.
·	The district land offices are not yet equipped to deliver land services.
·	Districts boundaries are still unsurveyed due to lack of funds.
·	Land tribunals are still slow in settling land disputes prolonging conflicts among the masses.

Committee recommendations:

·	No man’s land between Uganda and Tanzania border should be secured.
·	Land fund should be adequately provided for to operate nationally.
·	District land offices should be adequately equipped.
·	The computerisation of the land registry should be hastened.
·	Training of LC courts should continue to enable them build capacity to handle land cases.
·	Existing national maps should be updated for social, political and economic benefit.
·	Work on the National Land Policy and National Land Use plan should be finalised.
·	Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the Environment sub sector: The key planned activities for the previous year are given below, you will go through them.

Key achievements for the financial year 2004/2005

·	16 districts inspected for environment activities 
·	34 district wetlands supported
·	96 lead agency officials gazetted and trained as environment inspectors.
·	29 District Environmental Committees formed and trained.
·	27 districts identified and formulated five community projects each for implementation.
·	NFA launched and supported. 
·	District Forest Services launched and supported.
·	950 kms of forest boundaries reopened, 79,000 sq/kms recovered from encroachers and 1,000 hectares of forest planted.
·	1,490 hectares were contracted under the sawlog production scheme to be planted by private investors over the next three years, partly on central forest reserves.
·	8 trainings done for 180 private sector participations.
·	Awareness campaigns on investment in forestry for poverty eradication were carried out in 3 districts.
·	Two byelaws at district level formulated.
·	National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) was able to get its own vote on the National Treasury.  That is a great achievement, Madam Speaker and hon. Members.

Pending or ongoing activities and programmes for the financial year 2005/2006.  I now move to the key planned activities and programmes for the current year.

·	Institutional set up of district forest reservoirs.
·	Strengthen meteorological observational network and early warning system.
·	200 Environmental Inspectors and Environmental Focal Point Officers trained and equipped to enhance enforcement capacity.
·	Lastly, they are planning to increase tree planting in partnership in communities and private sector.

The committee observed the following:
·	Though National Forest Authority has planted a lot of trees in some parts of the country, more tree planting is still required. Most hilltops are bare countrywide.
·	National Forest Authority has been carrying out evictions in several Central Government Reserves.  Unfortunately, the evictions are sometimes brutal.
·	Government issued out land titles in several forest reserves. In addition Government has put up infrastructure like schools, health centers in some of these reserves.
·	There is no meteorological policy in the country currently.
·	The civil aviation authority is not paying for services that the meteorological department provides to the aviation sector.

The country is experiencing a loss of bio-diversity and wetland functions and services due to lack of enforcement mechanisms for wetlands management, for instance, water storage and filtration.  NEMA is still largely donor funded; Government counterpart funding is heavily required.

Recommendations

The metrology department should be organised as has been done in other East African countries.  NFA should encourage and support private commercial and smallholder forestry plantations. Government will support NFA and NEMA financially to make them sustainable. Government should consider acquiring hilltops and re-afforesting them.  The private sector involvement in the forest sector should be encouraged; Government should seek means of solving problems caused by encroachment on central forest reserves.

Communities should be sensitised about environmental management; Government should gazette a national tree-planting day and encourage the population to plant trees.  Madam Speaker, and hon. Members, I recall that in that act that was passed there is a provision for a tree planting day which should be gazetted.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, and hon. Members, the ministry of Water, Lands and Environment is a key ministry whose activities directly impact on the livelihood of the people of Uganda.  I therefore, beg to move that the following funds be provided to the ministry during the financial year 2005/2006:

Recurrent expenditure: Ug shs 7,074,000,000. This one may not be in the policy statement, but the figures were harmonised with finance Bills.  

Lastly, the development expenditure –(Interruption)  

MS KIRASO:  Sorry, can you please read the figure for the record because we are going to pronounce ourselves on it.

MR MAWIYA: Okay, recurrent expenditure: 11, 074,000,000.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is that for environment? 

MR MAWIYA: I think I am very clear.  11,074,000,000.

Development expenditure: Ug shs 134,020,000,000.  Madam Speaker, hon. Members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you chairperson and your committee. Honourable Members I have examined the report and 14 out of 23 Members have signed it so it is eligible for debate.

12.55
MS SARAH NANSUBUGA (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also wish to thank the committee for the good work done but I have a few concerns. On page four in the Energy Sector we have seen at least- the achievements we have seen are the access of electricity has increased from five to nine percent, rural coverage has increased. 

I would like to know from the minister because as I talk now I have not realised this increase in my constituency.  What is the criteria being used for gaining this increase; and according to the committee’s recommendation, more funds should be allocated to the ministry to implement rural electrification programmes. Now that Busana Sub-County in Ntenjeru North has not been considered in this increase, could I know it will benefit when Government releases these funds for the rural electrification programme expansion?

Secondly - it is for emphasis; last year we talked about this national land policy and national use plan. I would like to know on page 19 what is delaying them from getting this national policy and national land use in place when we needed it actually yesterday! What makes you delay in bringing it?  

Lastly, Madam Speaker, it is emphasis, I am glad the committee observed that more trees are still required, and went ahead to recommend on page 22 that Government should gazette a national tree planting day maybe, for example, in a small country like Lesotho they have a national tree planting day which is a public holiday.  What is the Uganda Government doing about declaring a national tree-planting day because in that country all Members of Parliament and ministers come purposely to plant trees on that day? What is Government doing to get this day in place?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.58
MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I have got a few observations to make.  One; I have observed in this report that, our local companies are finding a very big problem to compete and supply electric poles. Yesterday you remember that we had a heated debate here where Ugandans were complaining that even the petty jobs have been taken over by aliens, Indians and others. 

I can see that there is a growing trend whereby we are going to make our country unpopular because for a long time it is the Ugandans who have been supplying these electric poles for the last 50 years and above.  You cannot turn around and say that these poles are inferior yet they have been sustaining this country for all this time to supply electricity.

Madam Speaker, I would like to learn from the minister what is the problem?  I know the problem could be basically to season these poles and treat them, what is the problem now?  Don’t we have the capacity to treat these poles so that they can serve for sometime?

MR BYABAGAMBI:  I thank you, Madam Speaker, and the Member for giving way.  The information I want to give you, ESCOM from South Africa, it owns forest reserves; and ESCOM South Africa took over power generation and distribution; and as I talk now, they even procure for the only remaining company called Uganda Electricity Transmission Company.  Therefore, they supply and procure to themselves.

MR ERESU: Further information. UMEME, which is the distribution sector, is composed of CDC and ESCOM.  ESCOM is in charge of generation and it is also now creeping through a new name of UMEME to be in the distribution.  The danger is that ESCOM, which is a good company, is also constructing a dam in the Congo.  Likely is the case that when they take over the distribution and generation in Uganda, varying the costs of generation which will be much lower in the Congo will produce a situation where they can connect the grid within Uganda to that one of the Congo because of the lower cost of generation thereby rendering a strategic investment, which is power in Uganda, useless because of the higher cost compared to that one from the Inga Dam in Congo.  That is the strategic problem that we are likely to face in future while planning the economy of this country.

MR YIGA: I would like to thank my colleagues for that information.  Madam Speaker, what I am saying basically, I think we should take a policy stand as a government, such that we allow Ugandans to continue supplying these electric poles.  It is very dangerous and self-defeating for this economy if we are going to continue rendering Ugandans redundant. We talk about fighting poverty, at the same time we are trying to impoverish our Ugandans!  

Two, Madam Speaker, I have got a problem concerning one electricity project in my constituency that is lying from Kaliro to Buseke to Nabutongwa embarked on by this government but was never completed.  I contacted the hon. Daudi Migereko when he was the Minister of State for Energy but no action was taken.  

I contacted hon. Werikhe, now Minister of State for Energy, to date no action, and basically the line was never completed.  What is required is ideally only one or two transformers to enable this line be completed.  

People have complained, they are complaining even up to now and they are saying that I am not delivering; I am the one maybe who is weak, and I know very soon His Excellency is going to visit Masaka, the same issue is going to come up. 

I would now like to learn from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, should we wait for His Excellency to direct us when things are going to be done, even completing some of these simple things?  We should give His Excellency some breathing space so that his ministers do what they are supposed to do. Otherwise, this is really absurd.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to inform the entire country that government is doing a lot of things without waiting for His Excellency the President to direct.  Even today I was handling very vital matters, that is why I requested hon. Kagonyera to take charge, and so the ministers will be answering that question very specifically.  So please, do not insinuate that we are not working.  We are working day and night.  Yesterday we were at Cabinet until 1.00 a.m. and by 7.30 a.m. I was in my office working.  So what are you talking?  (Laughter) 

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, I am glad that the Prime Minister has come in.  But if you write letters to the ministers and they do not reply, what do you expect us to do?  You are left with no option other than referring the matter to His Excellency to direct them to take action.

Madam Speaker, the third question concerns water, and I am glad the minister in charge of water is in this House.  I would like to thank the ministry for reducing the charges because some time back, I complained about the high cost per cubic meter for my people but I am glad that the ministry has responded and the charges have gone down.  

However, I have another problem that a number of people have paid to be connected and to date, the connections have never been done in town by Kalungu Water Supply.  So they would like to know when are you really coming in to connect them since they paid the money?

The fourth question, Madam Speaker, I reported the matter to the honourable Minister in charge of Water about the problem of boreholes and shallow wells in my constituency, which had broken down.  Like her colleague, she has not also responded to my letter.  But since she is here, maybe she should educate me whether among the one billion shillings earmarked for repair of boreholes in her budget, she is going to the rescue of the people of Kalungu so that they can also benefit from clean and safe water.

Madam Speaker, another question, I have a problem of landlessness, and since we have the Minister in charge of Land, he could assist us.  Many youths in my constituency are really unemployed; they do not have land.  You know now it is not very easy for people to move from one district to another unless the government intervenes.  I would like to learn whether the Ministry of Lands has a plan to resettle landless people and how can I advise these youth? Should they come to the ministry or there is a format, which can be followed so that the Government can listen to their outcry.

1.06
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (Bukanga County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to add my voice to those of my colleagues to thank the committee and the Ministries of  Land, Water and Environment for the commendable job they have done.  I think we need to put credit where it is due.  Especially some of us when we are moving around from Kampala as you go along, you see water works being done.  At least I see the rural water service coverage has increased from 57 to 62 percent.  But I feel that the ministry should go back to the drawing board so that it can be able to see, those areas, which are naturally water stressed so that while giving other areas tap water they also avail water by sinking boreholes and digging valley dams for the animals and even for people, in these water stressed areas.  

Madam Speaker, I can assure you that Isingiro district comprising of Bukanga and Isingiro Counties are naturally water stressed areas.  They do not have water.  That is why the committee has said that people have refused to leave Tanzania in the no man’s area, it is because they rushed to Tanzania for water, and I think it should have been the policy. When you look in the Budget Speech, Bukanga came highly, but I also do not see it, somewhere featuring high as a place that needs some consideration. People are using rain harvesting and how many people can afford it?  

So I would want us to go back to the drawing board.  Actually leave your offices a bit, take a walk around the country and be able to set priorities and see which area requires water, rather than accepting political influence whereby all of us have to come to your office or to go to the President. 

It is indiscipline for Members of Parliament to go to His Excellency and tell him, “I do not have water, and I do not have a borehole.” Definitely the President cannot create money for water, but I think it is the ministry to provide those facilities.

Madam Speaker, I want to commend the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment for the job well done but you are using rudimentary methods in the way you are trying to survey Government land. I understand you want a land bank, but when you were making borders for Tanzania and Uganda, you never consulted the people, especially the LCs so that they would know what you were going to do.  Tanzania came in and had to sensitise their people and they have even paid them to leave the no man’s land.  But for our place we have not been able to do it, and I feel that things should be smartly done in order for people to know that they should leave the no man’s land.  

Thirdly, recently the Minister of State (Lands) went and attacked the county of Bukanga that he wanted to secure land for the Government.  He went with armed men - the UPDF - without using our local people to secure land.  People were terrorised, banana plantations were cut down and I made that report to the Prime Minister’s office.  But I am forced to say it here because no action has been taken.  

The Minister has gone ahead to survey people’s land, even Byanyima’s land, which I got from the Omugabe. I own the whole of it, but it is being taken.  So I feel, Madam Speaker, that we should use a good method whereby the ministry uses the local leadership and elders to show them where the demarcations of the refugee settlement can start.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Point of information.  Madam Speaker, the issue of land is even grave.  We have a convent, which existed before independence, before even there were refugees in place.  But these people attacked them and they actually came here at Parliament, we told them to go back that we would handle the matter.  I think it is very important to consult the local authorities when they go there.  

MR BYANYIMA: So, Madam Speaker, while we appreciate the work done by the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment and especially the ministers who are really first class people; they are able to do a good job, I appreciate.  But in this particular case some of us had to come in to be so diplomatic that this Government has never taken anybody’s land.  But the fear we have is that you might go ahead and have a title in the names of Uganda Government, including our land.  Our people are peasants, we feel another method should be used - you should go back on the drawing board so that all of us are involved and we know which land you want.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I feel water is life.  Areas like Karamoja – not everywhere, we should be able to know – we know that our resource envelope is very small, but I think we should be able to see which area is most hard-hit so that at the end of the day we should have everybody having some water.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.13
MR IBRAHIM KADDUNABBI (Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the committee for a good report.  It has been noted that some money has been approved always to cater for water, to cater for the energy sector and other ministries in this country.  But I think some of the money we pass here is wasted in a way that we cannot explain either.  

I have one trading center called Kabasanda.  Money was approved and water was piped towards Kabasanda, but when they were repairing the road they uprooted all the pipes and up to now Kabasanda has no piped water.  But there is gravity water there, it needs nothing much other than doing the piping and the town will have water.  So I wonder how we waste the taxpayers’ money when at the same time our people do not get the services.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to know; there are some projects in rural electrification, which were not completed, and poles were put in my constituency sometime back but nothing was done and yet we saw some other people coming carrying away the poles after sometime.  So we wonder, Government has paid for these poles for rural electrification, the people have not got the services and we do not know what is happening.  

I have a sub county called Budde without power, and there are many cries that these people should get power.  But with these wastes, we are sure that we cannot provide the services to our people.  So I call upon the Government to be very conscious when they are releasing the money and if they are to do a project, let it be done and completed.  

I would like also to know, Madam Speaker, I had talked to the Minister of State (Energy) and he told me that there was a scheme for private people to provide power, to provide electricity, something of that sort.  I would like to know how far it has gone because in my place some private people are willing to do the job and they can get some money out of it.  

Lastly, Madam Speaker, regarding land, because we have been slow at implementing the structures, which we approved here in Parliament, like the Land Tribunals, so many people have used that chance to chase away people who are occupying the land.  Like in Ngando there is one landlord who sold off the land to other people and they came and started destroying all the houses, which were on that land.  We have been using the services of the Resident District Commissioner (RDC), but I think if the structures of the Land Tribunal were in place it would do a better job for our people.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I think we had agreed that we change the format of our debates, because if everybody is going to report the problems in all their Gombololas, I do not know when we shall finish this matter.  Can we focus on policy issues; for instance, you could have asked the Minister of State (Water) why they allow pipes to be dug out without liaising with those who make the roads?  You could ask the Minister of State (Lands) when he actually intends to activate all the Tribunals, so that we move.  Otherwise, if we report from our constituencies we are going to have a problem. 

1.18
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank the committee for presenting this report.  Madam Speaker, you see in the planned activities the conclusion of the power purchase agreement of Bujagali.  We would like this Parliament to be availed with a copy of this agreement because I remember in the Sixth Parliament we saved this country; we saved this country - Bujagali because the Government had guaranteed the water level of Lake Victoria, but now it is consistently going down. 

In addition to that, we request Government to move very fast. We need to know the time frame for the completion of the oil pipeline. Madam Speaker, people who are now putting up structures by the roadside where the pipeline may pass need to be told in time, to avoid probleMs This will increase the cost of the project. 

Madam Speaker, the other time we asked the Minister of Energy and Minerals to present to us UMEME’s capital investment. According to reliable sources, UMEME may not have invested a reasonable amount of money. Instead, they are collecting from us in order to invest. That is why they use South African standards, which will change our sockets and switches. In turn, the cost of power per unit will increase. 

I should remind you that UMEME’s engagement is contrary to the Electricity Act we passed. In that Act, monopoly was to be avoided as much as possible. We did away with monopoly by allowing UMEME and ESKOM. Now, we have returned to monopoly contrary to the law. I would like –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you hon. Ekanya for giving way. In this country, we do not have anti-trust laws; otherwise, we would avoid monopolies and oligopolies. Therefore, we really call upon the Government to come up with anti-trust laws that will bar that kind of situation in future. Even the ESKOM you are talking about run into problems in Nigeria because of monopoly. They are being dismantled in Nigeria and will soon wind up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya has reminded me that two years ago, the Minister of Tourism, Trade & Fisheries promised to bring us the Consumer Protection Bill.  We have not seen it and maybe, he will tell us where it is. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Last time, the minister also informed us here that the cost of petroleum products was higher in Uganda than Rwanda because of the mode of investment in as far as the depth of the tanks is concerned.  We have visited Rwanda and found out that the same standard applies. The tanks should be secured and yet some tanks in some of the small petrol stations here are very shallow, which makes them insecure.  Therefore, we request Government to justify this. When the price of petroleum products goes high, automatically all other sectors are affected. 

As my colleague said, Government should also let us know when they intend to secure the poles that were distributed all over the country during the last Presidential campaigns. Most of these poles are already rotting. The programme of rural electrification has not been effected in my constituency. In fact, the President one time came to Tororo and declared himself a Member of Parliament. He pledged to give them a borehole, which my people have not received up to now. He also pledged piped water from Busiu to Magodesi, which we have not seen. As you can see, this MP, who is also the President, pledged many unfulfilled things.  

Madam Speaker, the people of Tororo county have for a long time suffered pollution from Tororo Cement Industries. Most of them are now suffering from cancer-related diseases; their dental formula is as brown as that of Indians. Most of the girls there have very poor eyesight, the women cannot pick any vegetables because it is polluted by cement, people cannot rear poultry and all the other dangers you could think of.  

I have consulted with the sector, which has persistently made pledges that are never fulfilled. This Parliament instituted a committee on worker’s right, which visited the place. However, because of time, the report has not been presented.  We went with the Committee on Environment and in fact, the NEMA boss wanted to close the factory.  

For how long, because when we talk about this here, we have told the President, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is here, and I should remind him that the President pledged to see to it that this investor does not continue to put people’s lives in danger.  What can the people of Tororo do, more so the women there who cannot survive by growing local vegetable?  This is a gender and human right issue, madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying that there is deliberate pollution?

MR EKANYA: There is deliberate pollution, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But why doesn’t NEMA take action?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the committee on Local Government, which I am a member of, visited Karamoja and the only valley dam operating in Karamoja was built in the 60s and 70s.  I am so surprised to see in this report that there are 11 reservoirs in Karamoja. In fact, when the Minister of State (Water) went there to commission one of these reservoirs that very day, the windmill failed to operate.  So, which 11 reservoirs, where are these? It is so sad that the Members of Parliament for Karamoja cannot talk for themselves. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, I want you to withdraw that last part. I have not yet given the Karimojong members opportunity to talk. Therefore, you cannot accuse them of not being able to speak.

MR EKANYA: I withdraw it.

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you hon. Ekanya for giving way. I know something about the dam in Kotido that was supposed to have been commissioned. That day, the staff from the Ministry of Education & Sports transported chairs from Kampala and lied to the minister that the things were ready. The people there demonstrated saying, “Do not supply us air.”  The people of Kotido confirmed that very day that what the ministry officials claimed was ready, was not at all. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, during the Budget debate last year I heard about this matter of Kailong Dam. Could the minister tell us whether the dam was commissioned?

1.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE, WATER (Mrs Maria Mutagambwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honorable members for raising this question.  Indeed, I went to commission a dam but found out that the windmill was not in a working condition.  We had sent a team there a week before, which found out that the windmill was not working. We immediately sent the contractors to do the work. However, unfortunately, they did not start on the work until the very day that I went there.  They were still trying to fix the windmill when I arrived. The windmill could have worked but the pipes had got clogged with mud. When the Karimojong realised that the windmill not working, they pulled the pipes and somehow damaged them. At the end of the day, they demonstrated.  

However, what he is raising about the Members of Parliament from Karamoja is unnecessary. I wrote to the director and told him it was unnecessary to transport so many people to Karamoja. They should have given the Karimojong the opportunity to prepare their function. From that day, we changed our style of operation.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I need clarification from the minister. The issue is whether the dam is working. Instead, you are telling us about your journey and what you commissioned. I do not believe that the same Karimojong who are badly in need of water pulled out the pipes.  The minister should address the issue of the dam, not the journey.

MRS MUTAGAMBA:  Madam Speaker, I cannot say for sure now that the dam is working. However, according to the reports on my desk, the team we contracted to do the work should have stayed behind to complete the work.  

Secondly, the destruction of these dams was done and in fact, even some windmills have been broken down.  We are trying to address this through community mobilisation, because we realise that the contractors did not mobilise the communities to make them understand that these dams were for their own good.  The budget that we are going to approve has provision for sensitisation of the communities so that they can take over. Otherwise, there is no point in putting up a facility for an unprepared a community.

MR ALONGA: Further clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, let me ask the chairperson.  This statement came from your report. You said the dam was commissioned, are you satisfied with the work done?

Mr Lule:  Yes, Madam Speaker. Surely, the members are right and the committee to move there very soon.  The specific areas under consideration are Karamoja and Sembabule. We were meant to understand that the same case happened in Sembabule. Dams were poorly dug and yet, a lot of money was spent. Elsewhere, money is sent to districts as grants for valley tanks and dams are not well constructed.  

For instance, in my constituency, I took the minister to commission the dam. Up to now, two years down the road, this dam has never worked, having spent so much money there. Therefore, it is a general problem and the committee will eventually move to ascertain all these cases.  Thank you.

1.32
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I have just been informed by Engineer Mugisha that the dam in Karamoja is working.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think they should tell us which particular dam it is, so that the members get to know.

MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, I think I still hold the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, you hold the Floor, but this matter will be in the Hansard. Which dam, Engineer Mugisha says, is working? Is it the one that the minister commissioned? Is it the same dam the chairman is reporting on to this House?

MR APUUN:  Madam Speaker, what the Minister is referring to is a dam in Kalongo, in Kotido district.  That is the only dam, which was done, in hon. Ael Ark Lodou’s constituency.  We went there and know what is happening.  However, everywhere else, like in Moroto district, there is no single dam.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Apuun, you came in after the report.  The chairperson reported that the dam was commissioned and members were not convinced. The named dam is what we are all concerned about. Which dam was commissioned?  We should conclude this matter.

1.33
MR PETER LOKERIS AIMAT (Chekwii County, Moroto):  I thank you Madam Speaker.  The dam we are referring to is called Komosi.  On the day of commissioning, the dam had water but the system of pulling water into the traps had failed. When the system failed, the Karamajong allowed the animals to go direct to drink water, which was in the dam.  I would like to inform this House that 16 dams were constructed even though some of them broke down.  The problem was poor workmanship, which I hope the engineers and the ministry concerned will explain. Therefore, we cannot say there was no dam constructed.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on Finance as well as that on Budget.  I am aware that money for these dams was disbursed.  Why are you paying for poor workmanship?  Why do you approve such projects?

MR MULENGANI:  Madam Speaker, there are many controversies on this item and yet chairperson of the committee knew it would be put in the Hansard.  I seek your guidance, therefore; is it necessary for us to continue debating this particular part of the report, which has controversies?  Isn’t it better for the chairperson to withdraw this item because –(Interruption) they cannot verify it, yet it has gone in the Hansard as a commissioned dam.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the reason we have been trying to establish which dam was commissioned and which the chairperson reported is because of the Hansard.  Next year, the report will say, that these dams were done.   Chairperson, are you still insisting on your report?

Mr UMAR Lule:  Madam Speaker, I am still insisting on what I reported. The dam was commissioned, as the minister said.  However, there could be a few areas that are not functioning now.  Therefore, I cannot withdraw the statement because of a part that is not functioning on the dam.  The fact is that the dam was commissioned and as I said, the committee intends to move to Karamoja, Sembabule and other areas where these problems are.  However, this is part of our report and I cannot withdraw it.

1.36
CAPT DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am concerned about page 15 of the report. In the committee’s observations, the last bullet says; “There is still disparity in provision of water in some parts of the country.”  

On page 16, under recommendations, it calls for affirmative action to be given to drought stricken areas.  We were polite and did not want to mention Kooki, Karamoja, Sembabule and Bukanga. These colleagues from Karamoja have repeatedly raised their concerns here. I have always done the same for Kooki and I even feel shy that I come from the same district as the minister.  

We need Government’s intervention in these drought stricken areas. These are in the cattle corridor, which is permanently dry and always begging for food. I am ever in the Prime Minister’s office for food, as if my people do not have hands. Therefore, we really need affirmative action, in order to liberate our people.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the information you are giving us came from the Policy Statement.  So, why don’t we skip this matter for now and give members of the committee time to look for fact? 

MR LULE: Madam Speaker, I think I should correct the impression this has created. Kodukul dam, which was commissioned, is not in Karamoja but in Kumi district. The eleven strategic reservoirs are the ones in Karamoja. The report of the committee is very clear. I can repeat for the benefit of the members. “Key achievements (page 14): Completed 11 strategic reservoirs in Karamoja and commissioned 1 dam at Kodukul in Kumi district.” That is how the report reads and that is what is on the ground.  It is in Kumi and I am sure members from there know it. Dr Esele should know this.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the Committee on Natural Resources, does not need to go to Karamoja. We in the Committee on Local Government visited Karamoja under the Chairmanship of hon. Yiga. I am ready to testify on oath that none of the dams built by the Minister of State (Water) is operational. A dam has a water reservoir –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Ekanya, the Chairperson has just said that he did not talk about a dam in Karamoja. He talked about reservoirs. That is what he said has been done.

MR EKANYA: Yes, Madam Speaker. I am talking about Karamoja. He said 11 strategic reservoirs were completed in Karamoja. The Minister admitted that she commissioned a dam there, which was not functional. This is in the report of the committee on Local Government. We visited these reservoirs; some of them built in the 1960’s and 70’s were even destroyed by the contractors.  

MR ARK AEL LODOU: There were 16 dams constructed in Karamoja. Two of these in my constituency are working, just as those in Jie. The dams in Matheniko and Bokoro are all not working. In Pian, Upe and Chekwi, there is only one dam working in each of the places. I am concerned that you are giving misinformation to the members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the case has been made. It is clear that Karamoja needs affirmative action. Let us take note of that and move to another point.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I now move to Tororo. We hope that the Government will work on the valley tanks that need de-silting. I invite the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment to come to Tororo and demarcate land. People there should get land titles just as those of Bushenyi to enhance development. I am sure they will like to use these titles to acquire loans from banks.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I hope the minister will come to Tororo and appreciate that we have offered office space for the Regional Land Office. Experts have told us that Lake Victoria is likely to burn up because of the rate at which it is silting. Having met experts on Lake Victoria, and compared the studies about fish in Tanzania and Kenya, we have proved that the fish is really getting depleted.  

If you look at the maturity in terms of size of the fish these days as compared to 10 years ago, you realise that it now matures when it is very small.  We have also discovered that this is caused by over fishing and pollution. We would like to hear from the minister when this lake is likely to catch fire. What is the life span of this lake? Experts have said this lake will die any time. We environmentalists are concerned because this lake is a source of our livelihood.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who are those experts and where is that report? I am sure Members of Parliament would be interested in reading it. This is a serious matter. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, we visited Tanzania under the Committee on National Economy, Mr –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: I would like hon. Ekanya to clarify to the House why he is making such an alarming statement about the lake catching fire.  As far as I know, the lake is mainly composed of water, which is not volatile. What do you really mean by saying the lake will catch fire? What kind of fire is capable of burning water?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know really, why we should allow people who are not experts in those areas to speak with authority. Can you, honourable member, bring that report and lay it on the Table.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the Head of the Lake Victoria Management Project, Dr F.L. Orach-Meza has compiled a report. It was even reported in the Monitor. I have evidence on this matter; the lake generates thermal gas, because of de-silting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, I have read your Curriculum Vitae, I think you are not an expert on those things. Can you arrange for that report to be brought here? Lay it on Table so that you alarm the country, you know.

MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, I am a Sociologist and I hold a Masters in that sector. I am ready to ensure that Dr F.L. Orach-Meza, who is the Head of Lake Victoria Management Authority, justifies the claim in his report. It will lay it on the Table of this House.  I want to end –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Who is the minister in charge of Dr Orach-Meza? In what ministry does he belong so that we know which minister to ask about that report?

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENVIRONMENT (Lt Jeje Odongo): I have just recovered from the accident and I am not feeling well. Hon. Ekanya is raising something completely new to me and I would be very interested indeed, Madam Speaker, as you have said, to read that report. I would then keenly follow it up to a logical conclusion.  However, as of now I cannot really respond because this is something new.

MR LULE: Thank you Madam Speaker.  I am glad that hon. Ekanya said the Committee on National Economy sought leave and visited different areas in Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania. It is over a year now but this committee has never come up with a report on their findings.  I have just met with them and I am aware that they even got their per diem.  

Madam Speaker, the report by Dr Orach-Meza, which hon. Ekanya has talked about should just be appended to their report. Otherwise, without their report even that of Dr Orach-Meza will not have any effect.  

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I think this is a very serious allegation from the chairman and I want to end –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What allegation?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the Committee on National Economy presented a report to this House on the status of the economy. To this very day that report has never been debated.  I want to end by saying that we have Prof. Okedi who is an expert on Lake Victoria. He is an expert of the World Bank who has also presented a statement to the effect that Lake Victoria is dying –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, you have ruled not once but thrice that hon. Ekanya should lay the report he is referring to on the Table for the Members of Parliament to see.  Is he in order to disregard that and continue to lie to this House about the report that we have not seen?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, you based most of your argument on that report. Please look for the report and lay it on the Table.  Otherwise, for now, you should abandon that subject.

MR EKANYA: I am sure that if the Committee on National Economy is given opportunity, they will present the report –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Committee on National Economy should produce that report and lay it on the Table. I will direct where it goes.

MR EKANYA: I oblige.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Madam Speaker, you clearly indicated that we should raise issues of policy so that we are able to move fast. However, hon. Ekanya has indulged in matters of technicalities and quoted unknown sources. Without the report, you cannot start talking of a professor who is not clearly identified in an authoritative report.  Besides, he is taking too much time. In my view, we should all be given an opportunity to contribute to this and finish with this business. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has concluded.

CAPT. MATOVU: I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I declare my interest first, that I am a member of the committee –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you are a member of the committee, no. Sit down.

CAPT. MATOVU: Madam Speaker, I have an issue, which is very fundamental for my people, which I want to raise and have it on record. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Matovu. Since we started this debate, we have not allowed members of committees to contribute.

1.50
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro count East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I thank the committee for the good report.  I would like to know what the committee plans to do about the generation of energy in relation to the policy of industrialisation. The incremental rate of generation may not be a good answer to our long strategic interest of industrialisation.  We should look at the issue of energy generation vis-à-vis the industrialisation of this country. We have always talked about this and it should be reflected in our projections.

Secondly, we should also consider the issue of energy vis-à-vis rural transformation.  The coverage in rural areas is far below the average that we would require for serious transformation of the rural economies. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): We have just approved the development budget of over Shs 64 billion. The total of recurrent and development is about Shs 67 billion for the Ministry of Energy and Minerals.  

The money put aside for the next financial year is Shs 42 billion, and the following financial year, it is Shs 59 billion.  Therefore, the nature and strategy of what we are doing is reflected by these figures. I am sure you would have some of your questions answered if you looked at that.

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much.  For the water sub sector, we look at the water supply as part of the urbanisation process. In this regard, I would like to look at the extension.  Some of these developing townships have been designated as water areas. Yet, National Water and Sewerage Corporation has the projection of extension. In some areas, this has brought about conflicts as water authorities and National Water and Sewerage Corporation extends water to those areas. The water authorities do not have enough capacity to handle the process of urbanisation.

This is something that should be harmonised between the water authorities designated under different interventions of Government and National Water in their routine mandate of extending water to certain areas. 

On the land sub sector, we have the land fund. I go by the committee’s recommendation that if possible, the basic scenario would be to give it a national coverage.  We have problems in the countryside. Our Constitution recognises ownership of private property. There are landlords who have titles and there are tenants. The land fund would be the best intervention in order for a win-win situation to prevail, to avoid problems in such areas.

Therefore, the land fund is something that needs to be considered seriously, if we are to solve this problem.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I should remind you again that we have changed the format of our debate. We are not making submissions. Just ask questions of policy. I am giving everybody only two minutes.

1.56
MR MOSES PAUL LUBOWA (Budiope County, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am concerned about the Ministry of Energy and Water. Every financial year, we get submissions of reports and policy statements. In the reports, we get observations and recommendations; in the policy statements, we get objectives. I wonder whether the minister takes into account the recommendations and observations of the previous years. 

For instance, I remember in one of the reports, it was indicated that if electricity was to be extended to a new area, administrative headquarters and institutions like learning institutions were to be taken as priority. Here, I have seen another area of priority where the recommendation is that electricity should be provided to support economically viable activities. I think they meant economically viable areas, like fish landing sites and related activities.

My question is, if the minister took administrative headquarters and institutions as priority, I wonder whether I should not talk about a particular constituency as an example. Why does it take one quite sometime to convince the ministry that as you take electricity to a fish landing site, for example, you should consider in which area you would kill two birds with one stone.  In that case, you would have also considered administrative headquarters and institutions.  

I have talked about Budiope constituency, where there is only a difference of 10 miles. It seems the ministry is not yet convinced about taking that line. I hope the minister is in position to answer.

Now about water, on page 15 section 2.3, I see pending or ongoing activities and programmes for FY 2004/2005. Bullet 1 indicates initiation of studies and piloting of bulk water supply schemes in rural areas.  Section 2.4 concerns key planned and proposed activities for FY 2005/2006. It still says, “Initiate studies and piloting of bulk water supply schemes in rural areas.”  This one worries me, why do we have to repeat initiating studies in the FY 2005/2006, yet the same programme was done in 2004/2005?  Does this mean that we are not moving? By the following year, we should not be initiating. Piloting would be a better thing to do. Otherwise, if you are still initiating and piloting after a whole year, I think there is a problem.  

Madam Speaker, I am also pleased that at national level rural water coverage has increased from 57.2 in 2004 to 60 percent in 2005.  I am happy that the committee said there is still disparity in provision of water in some parts of the country. For instance, Kamuli district is about 56 per cent.  However, there are some areas, which are only 26 per cent.  What remedial action are you taking?  

The committee said that affirmative action should be given to drought stricken areas. There are those areas, which are not hit by drought but greatly in need of water because of rocks. What special programme do you have for such areas? The rocks in such areas make drilling of boreholes almost impossible.  Is that programme under this bulk water supply?  Thank you.

2.01
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE KIFOMUSANA (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am concerned about the water sector. On page 14, section 2.2, bullet 2, I see increased water coverage from 6.5 to 67 per cent in urban areas, with a total of 300 new water stand points installed for the poor and 15 water schemes were completed in small towns.

I have followed the project of building water schemes in the fast growing small towns, which were 11 in number. One of those towns is Nakifuma in Mukono district. When this scheme started, they came, inspected the area and went away without doing any work. I would like to know whether Nakifuma is among the 15 water schemes that were completed. In the pending and ongoing activities, I do not see the water schemes in small towns.  What is the criterion of choosing places for these water schemes?

Madam Speaker, I also want guidance on what one should do in order to get grid power. We put in our application but these applications remain pending without any indication of how long one should wait. Thank you.

2.04
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi):  I thank you Madam Speaker.  I thank the water sector for the good job. I was very impressed recently when I was in Mwanza, northern Tanzania. I found regional officers who had come to Uganda as a case study. This implies that there was something good here for them to learn. 

Madam Speaker, the achievements in water should apply to the rest of the sector. Rehabilitation reconstruction is budgeted for just as construction. I realise now that the minister is providing Shs 1 billion for rehabilitation of boreholes.  Poor maintenance or even lack of it seems to be a culture in our nation.  I wonder whether the ministry this time has any item on maintenance.  We would spend less money if there were provision for maintenance year after year. 

I was amazed last weekend when I attended a fund raising function. This was for a 73 year old school, which has never been maintained.  Bricks were worn off and the glasses had all broken. I am aware that even the police posts are never maintained.  Honourable minister, I wonder whether you included any item on maintenance to avoid big budgets of rehabilitation for some of these boreholes.  To me, that implies that these areas with boreholes, which were broken down without maintenance have no water at all.  Therefore, maintenance would be the answer.

Lastly, I would like to talk about minerals. Madam Speaker, I wonder what the policy is on exploration of non-metalic minerals, which are valuable. I have given examples of some of those minerals, which we import and yet we could get them here. I do not see any report on this exploration. I would like to know what the policy is.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.06
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for whatever they have accomplished. I will comment on the efficiency in the economy of this sector.  I raised an issue here that the ministry was going for a very expensive alternative. There was no need of upgrading our power requirement. The minister came to here and denied it.  However, I should draw your attention to Page 6, bullet 2. Thermal electricity generation is too costly consuming Shs 22 billion of the ministry’s budget.  Government is also providing approximately US$ 1 million per month of taxes for fuel.   

Madam Speaker, we are entrenching poverty.  I do not see why people move around standing.  You go to save a country from an energy problem and yet, go for a very expensive alternative. How can you pay US$ 1 million per month for the person generating fuel? (Interruption)

MR MULENGANI: I should inform hon. Rwamirama that the purpose of installing this generation was to curb the load-shedding problem. However, this load shedding in Kampala is still on UMEME’s programme.  Thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I do not want to waste my time. We could own a very cheap alternative for quite sometime, until we finally develop our hydro capacity to generate power for this country.  However, we insisted and went for a very expensive one. Load shedding still greatly affects electricity consumers and industrialists. We are here because people pay taxes. We must water the tree to enjoy the fruits.  If we are concerned about the progress of the private sector, we should not leave individuals who recommend and go ahead to implement very expensive and inefficient alternatives. Madam Speaker and honourable members, we shall not revive the economy of this country unless we are efficient.  

The price of petroleum products has continued to rise.  What is happening?  First, somebody has accepted to take on an efficient method of generating power. You import fuel, the same fuel we use in the cars. We pay taxes for it and yet, cannot control leakages.  The committee should have come up with a recommendation of controlling leakage of this diesel.  

I am told that in town now, one can get fuel at only Shs 21,000 and because of that, the taxi drivers are very happy. The third last bullet says, “The fuel currently stored at National Strategic tanks can only support the country for 20 days in case of emergency.” You are all aware that we are land-locked; this is a security risk.  We must wake up and do something.

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I want to talk about water for production. If we have to industrialise agriculture, we must first consider increasing production. You cannot put up an industry unless you have adequate raw materials. 

There is something that developed in the recent times. This rift valley region was formerly known as the interlacustrine region before all of a sudden, the international community baptised us Great Lakes Region.  Have you ever sat down to think about the reason they did this? This is because of the very rare and expensive resources we have.  How do we live in the Great Lakes Region and afford to cry for water?  It is a shame that we have reached an extent of dying for lack of water.

 Madam Speaker, we have tributaries of River Nile.  The Nile flows because we have preserved our environment and rain can fall.  However, if we do not preserve our environment, if we do not irrigate it, if we do not provide water to starved areas, the water levels hon. Ekanya is talking about will go down. I would like to urge the Government to realise its pledge of providing water for production.  

In addition to all that, I have a problem with the policy of rural electrification. When you dig a hole to fill another, you are not making any progress. I have a long-standing problem in my constituency. Some electric poles and wires were put up to connect to areas that did not have any electricity.  This has been budgeted for three times and yet, the project has never been complete.  

Madam Speaker, the policy on land is another case in which Government should intervene. In order to increase efficiency in the economy, transport must be cheap. Our roads are very narrow and there has been linear development on all our roads.  So, why can’t Government title its own road reserves so that people who are in the reserve are there illegally?  When you want to expand your roads, you have to pay because you do not have a title.  How can a Government in power fail to have titles for its roads?  Are we considering the 2035 plan? Do it now so that you can compensate the few that you cannot avoid. With those few remarks –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, honourable Member this information. If you have a development in reserve, you are not entitled to any compensation.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Honourable minister, I think we should look at this matter more seriously. I do not know whether you are aware that there are even schools and health centres built by the Government in the reserves, at least in my area.  Therefore, I do not know what happens if the people are evicted and those schools built by the Government are there.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: These people have got land titles.  I will give an example of Entebbe road; people were compensated and they are still there and they still own land titles. The Government is still issuing land titles in road reserves. If I want to tell this House, I will draw you to an example of where the Government has erred. They created a by-pass on Masaka to avoid development and now people have also developed on the by-pass. They did it in Lyantonde, now the town has shifted. I do not know whether government is going to shift now. Why don’t you get a land title and you can authoritatively chase these people away? And so is Mityana - I can name so many towns. We need to plan ahead for this country otherwise we are heading for doom.  

2.15
MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. For the last four years since I came to this House I have heard just a few things in this committee and they are the ones I am going to echo again. I would like to thank government for having shown signs that this time they intend to take power to Kibaale and Kagadi. I pray that they do not stop at promising and they really actualize the electrification of Kibaale and Kagadi as I have got all hopes that power will be there. I hope they will not reach and do the Rwamirama type.  

Madam Speaker, the other issue I have always raised is land. I would like to thank government that it is making an effort to put in place a land policy, but the speed at which they are doing it - because they have been promising this land policy for the last four years since I came to this house and now, God willing, my term is about to expire - just because I have not yet renewed it. But they have been promising to put it in place. I urge them to bring the land policy before the House so that we can really see it.  

Then the usual problem of land in Kibaale, Madam Speaker, when the Land Fund was put I think in the Land Act, the main target was Kibaale. But what is interesting is that the biggest chunk of this money has not gone to Kibaale. The Land Fund has not gone to Kibaale, it is handling other issues and this is very bad for the people of Kibaale because the whole essence of starting a Land Fund came out of the cry of the people of Kibaale wanting some affirmative action to help us sort out the historic long standing injustice that has been meted out on us.  

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, honourable member for allowing me to give this information. I would like to inform the honourable member that this policy of compensation for Kibaale was developed in the Constituent Assembly and it was not only for Kibaale. It was for the whole country because the whole country has populations and communities that are faced with land shortage. In fact it was for Kasese as well. 

I remember when hon. Baguma Isoke and the Members of Parliament of Rwenzori region sat to agree to support this position and provision in the Constitution. We are embarrassed and shocked to find that all the money is going only to Kibaale and the rest of us are over waiting. I would, therefore, like to ask the honourable member to explain to us what has happened to all the money that has gone to Kibaale. I have served on the Committee of Natural Resources before and been ably informed that other districts are on the waiting list after Kibaale. When is Kibaale land compensation going to end? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please ask specific policy questions.

MR BESISIRA: I would like to thank my colleague, I think she has helped me to strengthen my argument, that when is our problem going to end, since government is not doing enough to end our problem? They tell us the thing requires Shs 20 billion and I do not know if Shs 20 billion is a lot. It is not coming. We are saying that there should be some affirmative action to make sure that the problem of land in Kibaale ends so that all the land is bought off, the landlords there are compensated and then the people who are there sitting are given interest for the land they occupy.  

I want to propose, Madam Speaker that government should look at the possibility of compulsory acquisition of this land because we are there. We are not going away. Nobody should deceive you that whoever owns a title mile that you will come and displace us. That one you should forget. I know my friend one time said one thing here and people said, “Nobody is going to displace us, we are there and we are not going away”. But we are saying, “If we are there and we are not going away, why do we stay on something when we do not own it?” Government is promising that we are going to own it. 

I want to propose to government that they should think about a possibility of compulsory acquisition then they pay off all the landlords. That would be affirmative action once and for all. I know there could be these legal –(Interjections)- -(Prof. Nsibambi rose)

MR BESISIRA: I know the Prime Minister is going to tell me the law. That is why I am giving a proposal. Let me listen.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, hon. Besisira for giving way. I am sympathetic to the issue you are raising but I would like to refer you to Article 26(2); “No person shall be compulsorily deprived of property or any interest in or right over property of any description except where the following conditions are satisfied:
(a)	The taking of possession or acquisition is necessary for public use or in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health …”

The Attorney-General is not here, I would have asked him to see whether your proposal does not offend Article 26.  

MR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, is the honourable Prime Minister, the Leader of Government Business, in order to impute that there is public order in Kibaale when our property, land, our right to land was violated in 1900 and we still have a claim over this land? Is there public order, therefore? Is the Prime Minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, you stated in your opening remarks that you sympathize with the situation for our colleagues but I think we must agree that it has gone on for long without resolution. I think the longer it takes the more difficult it is going to become because if you say that there is good order in Kibaale and members say, “We are squatters on our land”, that causes the problem. Hon. Prime Minister, you need to find a solution quickly and end that matter once and for all -(Interjections)- compulsory requisition, but I am sure you are going to discuss them. He is just making a proposal, which you will go to Cabinet and discuss or reject for the reasons you give. But let them make their proposals and you pick out what you want.

MR BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for that ruling and I would like to thank the Prime Minister for appreciating that we have a problem. I would like to urge, just as I said, to urge him as the Leader of Government Business to ensure that there is a way we solve the issue of Kibaale. Why should we stay with problems all our lives? Why should we live in slavery like this? Do you want us to create disorder as it is written in the Constitution so that you can come in? 

I remember the other time there was some little bit of - in 2002 everybody came up and everybody was in Kibaale, but we do not want to go back to that. That is why we are suggesting that we look for some solution, which is actually amicable, which is workable, which is agreeable to all the sides so that this problem is put to rest. I was born in the problem. Should my grandson - because my son has found it already, my grandson, my grand daughter - should he also find this one and be told that, “Your grandfather was a Member of Parliament all those years and he did not sort it out?” Madam Speaker, we are not going to go to the bush. That is not how we solve probleMs  

That is what we wanted to suggest - compulsory acquisition, affirmative action, all the mailo land is paid for, demarcated, given out to the sitting tenants and the problem ends and we move forward. That way we shall also be happy and feel that government cares for us because government created the problem. Whether it was a colonial government or it was what, it is a problem of government and governments inherit problems created by others. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.26
MR OGWEL LOOTE (Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me way to contribute to the debate on this committee’s report. I would like to thank the committee and appreciate their work for at least having given good observations and recommendations, some of which I think government should at least take as a drive from the policy. 

My comment will be on page 6 of the report on the fuel we currently have in stock for emergency. I think as my colleague has alluded to that, as a country we should take this one very carefully. Our country is important. Vehicles every other day and almost our streets of Kampala are full, so government should be very serious. Actually we should develop our own where we can be able to develop. 

Then the next point I wanted to raise is on page 7 on the rural electrification. Madam Speaker, this song about rural electrification has been there for the last I think ten years or so. The electrification for Karamoja has been also in books for some time and has also been in the speeches of the President for the last 20 years almost although we have not reached the 20 years. 

In the policy statement of the Ministry of Energy, there is a line from Sironko to Katikekire mining centre, but even last year it was there and even this year it is there. According to that policy statement they have to invest Shs 6.5 billion to work on the power and the country will earn about Shs 92 billion annually from that site alone. It will employ about 700 people. This is in the policy statement and even it was there last year. The people of this area have been looking forward and they had already prepared to go and get plots and wanted the economic activity to start immediately. I do not know whether the policy really discriminates. 

In 2001 the people of Arua and West Nile gave the President a vote and the tarmac now is being finished and the electricity. These are the people who have been faithful supporters of the National Resistance Movement and they have not – they are being isolated, they are being marginalized and they are being victimized. Therefore, could the Minister of Energy tell us if the policy discriminates against the people of Karamoja?  

Then come to water; I have listened to my colleagues. Water is life and we need water for production, water for consumption and water for energy. I would like to find out from the Minister of Water whether Moroto Municipality, which was once in the plan, still exists in the plan within the 36 water schemes for urban areas. 

Right from 1986, Moroto Municipality has never had piped water and I have walked to the water department, consulted the minister, walked everywhere. Others said they do not have time; they are too busy for the issues of Karamoja. In fact today I was a bit disappointed when I told the Prime Minister, “I am coming to your office” and he said, “I am too busy”. I am disappointed; the ministers are not there. For the issues of Karamoja, you are too busy and yet they belong to this country. I think the Government must be very serious in terms of service delivery to the people of Karamoja.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, NORTHERN UGANDA RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAMME (Ms Grace Akello): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my honourable colleague for giving way. The information I want to give him is that I do appreciate that he has to put across a case for support for Karamoja but I would like him to moderate what he has to say because if he says the Government of Uganda is marginalizing and neglecting Karamoja, or is not doing anything to support the people of Karamoja; that is not strictly accurate. I think that it would be proper if he argued his case for water then some of us even within Cabinet, who have a lot of sympathy for Karamoja would come and support him quietly. 

But if he puts it in that way, I would want then to remind him that we do have a Minister for Karamoja Affairs, we have a NUSAF project, which is helping Karamoja in various ways, we have Karamoja special projects funded by EU, which are Government of Uganda supported and there are many other interventions, which are for developing Karamoja. While you argue the case, please do not make it look like we do not know and think that Karamoja exists, because we do and we love Karamoja.

MR ERESU: There is KDA in Karamoja.

MR LOOTE: Madam Speaker, I would appreciate the minister if she got my statement. I have said that some of these policies discriminate against Karamoja even if they are there. I am talking of water and water has been a persistent problem in Karamoja. I am talking of power and electrification. In my municipality there used to be water for 24 hours a day using a generator.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please cool down. 

MR LOOTE: When the minister says Karamoja Affairs, what is there in Karamoja Affairs, what resources do you have? If you are talking of the European Union Fund, I was –(Interruption)- that project and we wrote to that project, there is no money. That Karamoja Development Agency should actually be dissolved.

MR ABURA PIRIR: Madam Speaker, thank you very much and I would like to thank my colleague hon. Sam Loote for giving way. The issue of Karamoja ministry, when was it established? It is about ten years ago. There is no single time that the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs has ever given a budget for Karamoja here. The ministry is not facilitated at all. It is just there, a rubber stamp, it is just for prestige. Let us scrap it if it is not facilitated. (Laughter).

MR LOOTE: Madam Speaker, that is what my colleague has actually said. We are saying, I remember one time I told the Prime Minister, Mr Kintu Musoke, “You have given us KDA - wonderful. You have given us Ministry of Karamoja Affairs - wonderful, but they are suffering from -(Interruption)- There is no money for them.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I can understand the honourable member trying to put a case for Karamoja to exonerate himself for the future but only sometime ago I was on a visit to Karamoja accompanied by him. We visited a number of projects in Karamoja; admittedly some were not properly handled. We made reports accordingly. We even at one time provided transport for Members of Parliament from that area to help us monitor and supervise what is going on in the area. 

I took the honourable member to a school, which was badly constructed by people from that area using money from the Government and I am only hoping he helped to remedy the problem. Therefore, is the honourable member in order, when in fact even Members of Parliament from Karamoja have had several meetings with the Prime Minister on Karamoja problems - is the honourable member in order to allege that the Prime Minister often says he is too busy and he has no time for Members of Parliament from Karamoja? Is he in order to allege that Karamoja is marginalized when we can produce tonnes of evidence that there are actually projects especially for that area? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for the municipality, we all understand the problems you have but I think you are judging the Prime Minister very harshly if you say that he has not taken an interest in your affairs. A number of times he has reported to this House that he has set up committees to deal with your matter. It is in the Hansard and we have it. I think let us moderate. You have problems but let us not act as if there is nothing completely.

MR LOOTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is out of disparity and I think the minister should focus on what I am saying. I am talking of persistent problems of water in Karamoja. I am not saying government does not deliver. Education is doing very well; health is doing very well in Karamoja but this problem of water and electricity is becoming very political. That is what I am trying to stress.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The water minister wants to say something.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, WATER (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Madam Speaker, I feel that the honourable member needs to get more information about the activities of government in Karamoja, and I believe the honourable member should be having this information. I want to go back as far as 2001 and quote the three districts in Karamoja.  

In 2001 for water conditional grants, Kotido received Shs 423 million; Moroto received Shs 343 million, Nakapiripirit was not yet created then.

In 2001/02, Kotido received Shs 309 million, Moroto received Shs 268 million, Nakapiripirit was on board then and received Shs 309 million. These are conditional grant that go directly to the districts to work on water alone, not money that is spent from the centre, not money that we have given to contractors. I think it is unfair to come here and tell lies that the Government has not committed money.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the whole country and this Parliament appreciates that so much money has been appropriated for Karamoja. I know since I came to this Parliament that the Government has put a lot of money in Karamoja District. In fact some of us who come from water constrained areas have not received due attention. But the problem we have is that this money does not do the right job. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you want the Government to take over from the centre again to construct water or to stop sending conditional grants. What is happening to conditional grants in your districts if they are not being applied to water? What are we doing about it?

MR LULE MAWIYA: I thought I should give this small information to honourable members. This financial year - I think I should tell the honourable minister to supply this to the members of Parliament - I would like to mention that Kotido alone in this financial year’s conditional grants, is going to receive Shs 199 million for water for development. Moroto is going to receive Shs 511 million, Nakapiripirit, Shs 265 million, -(Interjection)- yeah, this financial year. So, surely we should do justice, we should not be totally negative but should appreciate. I gave my committee report and in fact there is nowhere else I reported on like I did Karamoja. Surely, we should be supportive where necessary and negative where necessary. Otherwise, we should not negate the good work done.

MR LOOTE: Thank you my honourable colleague for giving that information. Just like my honourable colleague said, this money, I think at one time I made a statement. Government offered a lot of money on the dams, billions of Uganda shillings but they do not appear on the ground. This money goes there and comes back. Who does not know that corruption is a disease in our country? You send money but where does it go? It is not seen, some comes back for the dams, the rest within the structures of local government. It disappears yet the rural poor woman, child, mother, needs water. That is what we are saying.

Then Madam Speaker, I want to conclude –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now that we have an idea that the money actually goes and comes back, what do you want the Government to do? What are you proposing?

MR LOOTE: Madam Speaker, we even discussed with the minister. We even put the memorandum to the President that the water for the dams should be decentralized and we form a committee, whether we put it in a regional tier or we put it in the district but have a committee so that the people can construct the dams locally, so that people receive the money and also get their water. That is the proposal we discussed and we put it down. We have made suggestions.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, WATER (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Madam Speaker, that request has been put to us but it is the Government policy that any project apart from the conditional grant that we send to the districts, the figure that has been read to you and which hon. Mawiya has got in that sheet, apart from that, any money beyond Shs 100 million has got to be managed at the centre. It is a policy, unless this Parliament sits here and changes the policy. That is up to now the policy that we implement and in any case, if the local governments have failed to manage a project of Shs 260 million in conditional grants, how does the centre release the project of Shs 6 billion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a proposal sometime back when we were discussing I think the question of cattle rustling. The Minister for Karamoja said that if he could be assisted to go and reside there he might do better work. I do not know what people think about it. Would that help if the minister were able to –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I think the problem they have had, especially water for Karamoja, it has been handled by one particular company called Zzimwe, which has proved to be untouchable. I do not know why you cannot blacklist that company and we get good services. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Please, conclude.

MR LOOTE: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague. That is the company, which brings back the money for daMs I would like finally to look at the water in the urban areas and also pacification for Karamoja. We have been lobbying, we lobbied for some money from the Karamoja programme of KPIU through the European Union, which can help, and this money is meant to help in the electrification fund so that it can be able to take power to Karamoja. 

Also that very money we requested for from the European Union through the Karamoja programme is also to help supply water in the municipality. They had already donated Shs 128 million and had even written a letter to seek for a deficit of Shs 130 million so that the piped water for the municipality can be granted but the European Union were ready to give 100 percent and we have requested for the money from the Ministry of Finance and the letter has been lying on the table for three years waiting to be signed. We need authorisation for that money to cover water, pacification, and rural electrification for Karamoja. 

For three months, nothing has been done and the money is from the European Union. Can we now ask from the Minister or the Leader of Government Business, is this a sign of inefficiency in the Ministry of Finance so that the National Authorizing Officer should sign for that request of funds so that these three programmes can be implemented in Karamoja quickly? Thank you.

2.47
MR MATTHIAS KASAMBA (Kakuuto County, Rakai): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee for having presented a good report, which is creating debate and I would like to thank the ministries under this committee for the work they have done to go through the last financial year. 

However, I have a few concerns. First of all is the energy sector, bullet No. 4, which is on implementation and monitoring of rural electrification scheme, on page 4. The key achievements under 5.2, rural coverage has increased from 1 percent. I would like to pose a question as far as the rural electrification programme is concerned. Has there been equitable distribution? That is a very big question we need to pose to you who are in charge of distributing the resources to the NGO sector. Have you done equitable distribution? It is a very important one. 

I have a working document, which I got from the committee, completed project 204 there were 64; under completion between 50 percent to 90 percent, and there are 61. Rural electrification under 5 percent to 49, there are 37. Schemes, which had been surveyed, costed and ready for implementation, there are 76, which make a total of 228, but when you look at the composition of this distribution you can shade tears. I am going to lay this document on the Table. 

The policy statement states there are short-term interventions and priority projects as my colleagues have been saying, which shows you benefit from the projects from which we can earn revenue. They show you so many projects like the one in Karamoja where we expect Shs 96 billion, we go for Kacita gold mine where we expect Shs 11 billion as revenue, we go to Bukakata landing site where we expect Shs 1.9 billion, you come to Wakawaka, that one has been completed. Kasenselo in Masaka, which produces 5,475 tonnes of fish annually, employs 7,000 people and it is earning Shs 1.4 billion. 

The list is endless in the policy statement of the beneficial aspects, if electricity is provided to those areas. But when you look at the distribution format for rural electrification programmes, those, which have been completed; those under 90 per cent completion; those, which are ongoing; and those, which are surveyed and costed, you shudder.  

The problem is I have made a percentage costing of one of the regions, for instance Mbale. I got interested that the Minister of State is from Mbale, the former electricity manager was from Mbale, Madam Muloni, and I have seen that 14 percent of the areas of these projects have gone to Mbale. When you go to Luwero in particular, you find the percentages are very high. Let us become Ugandans, let us become nationals, and let us look at areas where we can generate revenue so that we can be able to spend on social deliveries.

I am very much beaten, I have been crying, I have been moving up and down in the Ministry of Energy, I have written letters so that the landing site in Kasensero will get power where there is a processor who is employing over 500 people. He is using over 1,000 litres of fuel every day –(Interruption)

CAPT. DAVID MATOVU: Thank you, colleague for giving way. That line of Kasensero was costed at Shs 1.3 billion and these investors are willing to contribute Shs 5 billion but they are only saying that when the power line is connected, can they be assisted that this money is recovered from the monthly billing? Can you imagine somebody has Shs 5 billion, he is going to give you jobs, he is going to give you revenue but power is going elsewhere? We are not going to demonstrate, we are going to keep struggling and supporting the Movement but we want power.

MR KASAMBA: I thank you very much my colleague for giving that information but the message has been made as far as rural electrification is concerned. We need to sit down as government, as ministries and review how we are going to allocate this crucial resource as far as making sure that generation of income for this country is well taken care of –(Interjection)- I will take your information.

MR MULENGANI: Thank you very much. I only wanted to put the record right. The argument you are following is very correct and I support you. You remember last financial year I actually stood up and objected to the minister’s submission, I also wanted to lay on the Table the policy statement that they have changed the format this time.  

In the 2002/2003 format it had all that information you have computed but what I wanted to put right on record is that Wakawaka line is not yet completed. It is among the projects that have stalled. They have not moved since they privatized to UMEME but it is also sad that the committee in its report has not really captured all these pending lines. We do not know what the ministry is going to do with it. We do not know the fate of these lines that have stalled since they privatized to UMEME. It is important to note on record that Wakawaka line is also incomplete.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Kasamba for raising this, but in fact we should not penalize the Minister of State who is from Mbale as the honourable has said. He has just moved there in the first place and even if you looked at our working document, Mbale has regional offices. You can see here that Mbale appears about four times on the whole thing and the impression created here is that 16 percent of the total rural electrification schemes has gone to Mbale. So let us not put a wrong message. There are districts in the Mbale regional office, that is UEB districts, but it is not Mbale per say as the honourable member perceived it.

To give clarity to what the honourable member is saying here, I could not put all these details in our report because of the format that we had to follow. But for your information, I can table this so that he can look at it.  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the completed rural electrification schemes, also the rural electrification schemes under construction by UEDCL (50-99 percent) and also rural electrification schemes under construction by UEDCL between the percentages of 5 to 49 percent and those, which have been surveyed, costed and ready for implementation. I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When is it dated?

MR MAWIYA: It is not dated. I can date it myself.

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, here we have a document purportedly authenticated and it should be an authoritative document from the ministry or from the Government as such. And you have rightly questioned whether that document has an authentic date and the member on the Floor, who is a member of the committee, has admitted that it is not dated. Now he wants to lay it on the Table and he scribbles something called a date of his own, which I think is not proper. Can we accept this kind of forgery and this document to be laid on the Table? I beg that we object to the laying of the document on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the contents of that document may be important for the information of members but I would like to ask the minister whether he knows the document. Minister of Energy, do you know the document?

MR KAMANDA BATARINGAYA: Yes, Madam Speaker, that is an extract from a document. It is authentic.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: An extract from which document?

MR BATARINGAYA: Our own documents in the office. We had to give it to the committee to look at the schemes, which we have completed, which are about to be completed and which we are also going to work on. If the Members of Parliament so request, we are ready to provide the one headed and also the date.  

MS KIRASO: In the interim I would like to propose if members are really in need of that information that the minister signs each page and puts a date to it.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, I am a member of this committee but the way members are reacting to this paper is puzzling. Do they think that this is a concoction of the committee? We received those documents from the ministries from which information we complied our report. If the ministry is not denying that this document did not come from their office, why all these necessities of signing, dating and all that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiwalabye, if that document had come together with this report, there would be no question, but it has come separately. However, once you lay it on the Table, it is the property of this Parliament and anybody can use it in arguments here. That is why we are asking the minister to acknowledge it so that it can be laid on the Table and it becomes property of this House.

MR KASAMBA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I think you can see the work methods of producing this document. We need to seriously consider this document and we see the equitable distribution of resources. It is not the content, which is there, but the equitable distribution of resources, which we should analyze as far as –(Interruption)

MR MUGAMBE: Madam Speaker, I rarely rise on a point of order but the honourable member insists that I see the working methods. This is a committee of this House and in the report we have just tabled there are many documents with me here actually a full file, and this report is actually as a result of these documents provided. I already gave the method of our work. Is it in order for the honourable member to impute bad motives on the committee that we are working haphazardly when I have already reported the way we proceed with our work and even this actually was part of the documents that you have provided to us? Is he in order?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know we gave power to these committees to handle work on behalf of the 300 people, and I think they have done their work. The chairperson is actually trying to assist you to buttress your point and to give information to other members of this House. So, it is out of order to insinuate that he has underhand working methods.

MR KASAMBA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I apologize to my colleague for that consideration. The document lacked authenticity; that is what I was saying. I appreciate the whole situation we have gone through.

My next point still is on the energy sector. When you go to page 6, the committee’s observation that the Owen Falls Dam is aging with several cracks poses a threat to electricity supply. I think as government, much as we put in place temporary solutions with thermo electricity, which is very costly to this country, as my colleagues have presented, we need to seriously look at the generation of power for this country. 

The old dam - it is true it is aging. We go to the Nalubale dam, which is creating a lot of problems as far as water flow to River Nile is concerned and there are lots of question marks in as far as continuously opening the second dam vis-à-vis the old one. We need to review the capacity of the generation of the old dam.

The Government should come up with a position to seriously consider whether we can continuously run both dams concurrently, considering that they have started cracking. It may even collapse at one time. We seriously need to review that aspect because it has come out very clearly that the old dam is aging. It is cracking. What are we going to do? Can the minister come up with a strategic plan as far as what we are going to do with both dams running concurrently is concerned?

I want to move on to the land issue. I appreciate the committee has reported well that the survey of the Mutukula Tanzania-Uganda border has been carried out. I agree with the situation that the ground surveys have been completed and compensation has been carried out by Rakai District whereby Shs 130 million has been paid to the affected people, but the biggest problem is the buffer zone. Tanzanians have already started even destroying property, which are within the no mans’ land. The Ugandan side has not yet effected any buffer zoning on the side of the no mans’ land. I would like to ask the minister what plans they have in creating a no mans’ land to improve on the security situation across the border to ensure that there is smooth observation by the security agents and that movement is streamlined and those who are in the no man’s land are well monitored. 

Our colleagues have done it very well on the Tanzanian side. We can also do a similar exercise on our side. Otherwise, our colleagues in Tanzania have been very well disciplined; they have already destroyed some of the structures, which have been compensated on their side. On the Ugandan side, we still have so many people who are still within the no mans’ land in those areas, and we need to create a smooth and a clear borderline. Otherwise, I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for having submitted the report and I thank the ministry.        

3.05
MR AMON-REEVES KABAREEBE: (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this good report and I will start from where hon. Kasamba has stopped. On the River Nile at the dam, the water flow is 1,300 cubic meters per second. The old dam was releasing 900 cubic meters per second, leaving behind 400 cubic meters per second at the reservoir. 

The second dam was built almost in the same line, it is parallel to it and it consumes or it allows the flow of 600 cubic meters. Added together, the flow goes to 15,000 cubic meters. That means there will always be a continuous loss of water and soon both dams shall drain because there will not be any reservoir. That is what the ministry must note and they should advise us on whether we should continue running both dams, or whether we should run one efficiently with the proper flow in order to maintain the reservoir. Even if it rains cats and dogs everyday, you will never recover that water so long as both dams are open.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, honourable member. The information I want to pass to you is that even if the ministry decided to run one dam today, it will take five years to come back to the normal level of Lake Victoria as it was before UMEME came in to open all the dams to run at a go.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister of Energy, last year we had a special debate on this particular matter. Is it possible that the matter ended on the Floor of this House? There was a very lengthy debate here; we had the engineers talking about this matter, what has happened?

MR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, on that issue, which is very technical, I remember hon. Engineer Hilary Onek was raising that issue and I recall very well recently the Committee on Natural Resources had a retreat and they also debated the matter. When we were appearing before the committee for our policy statement, most of the members actually that time were convinced because they got the explanation. But the chairman - this time we were dealing with policy issues - could not raise that matter here. 

I would request my colleague who is raising that matter to get in touch with the chairman of the committee after the policy statement and they discuss what the way forward is and how far they have gone with that technical issue. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, honourable minister for that information and guidance. On energy, I am looking at petroleum in the report on page 9, bullet 4. The ministry is unable to undertake necessary studies in many potential drilling areas for petroleum. What can save this country is petroleum, but where the ministry is unable to enhance any drilling, I would also like to ask, “When are we going to get the first barrel of petroleum so that we can be rescued from these high prices?”

As regards water on page 16 in the report, they are talking of Lake Victoria being dredged and causing an environment threat. One time Lake Kyoga was blocked and we were assisted in clearing the blockage. However, the ministry went ahead and contracted some company to go down at the base of the lake and knock the rock that forms the basin in the lake. That means that instead of having a water mesh as Lake Kyoga you will have River Kyoga. All that mesh and the surrounding swamps will dry because the rock that used to work as a basin has been knocked off. The water will run straight and there will no longer be a lake. Is the ministry aware of what is happening at the base of Lake Kyoga and how much money was paid to that contractor to do the damage?

Madam Speaker and honourable members, in a water stricken area the Ministry of Finance has for example on several occasions refused to allow most ministries and especially the Ministry of Water to go above their ceiling saying that it will cause national macro-economic instability. It is shocking that even when a grant to bring in materials and not money is secured, the Ministry of Finance cannot allow this simply because if the pipes of water are brought in from another country they will cause macro-economic instability. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I will give you an example and I want hon. Kamuntu to hear this. The Ministry of Water negotiated with the African Development Bank and obtained US$ 70 million for the purpose of rural water. The Ministry of Finance refused to grant the permission. Later on the Ministry of Water changed and said, “Fine, instead of bringing in the money let us bring in the materials so that we can distribute them.” Still the Ministry of Finance refused. Therefore, this business of budget ceiling referring to even commodities other than money is wrong.

Similarly, at another time the Ministry of Water had secured an opportunity from Japan to install water supply for seven small towns but still Ministry of Finance refused. UN Habitat had brought in –(Interruption)

MR MULENGANI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Muzoora for giving way. Can you clarify to me that when the Ministry of Water budgets for implementing those projects like the small town projects for water and the Ministry of Finance considers that budget and can own it? Is it true that in the event that the Minister of Water goes out to lobby and get funds the Ministry of Finance can deny them? Does the Ministry of Finance thereafter fulfill the budget or is what you are talking about usually out of the budget?

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much. When we are talking about ceilings, who originates the budget ceiling for the ministries? Individual ministries draft their budgets and take them to Ministry of Finance for ownership. When the ministry asks for a certain amount of money, Ministry of Finance can say, “No. If it is Shs 1 billion, please we can only manage Shs 60 million”. Should the minister solicit for the Shs 40 million, it would not be approved because the ceiling was put at Shs 60 million. I hope it is clear to him. If it is not clear I can re-explain.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you do not have to explain again. I can only say that this is a very serious matter. We had that situation in the health sector where for a long time people there were complaining that they had procured money and the Ministry of Finance had stopped them from utilizing it because of macro-economic stability. But when you have Ugandans drinking water from cattle passes and using muddy water for cooking and the Ministry of Finance continues to say that you are going to destabilize the economy, then I do not know. Can we have an explanation from the Leader of Government Business about this matter because it is unacceptable?

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, we are in the middle of the Budget debate and in most cases when we are debating the Budget the Ministry of Finance is supposed to be here to listen very attentively. I was expecting some response in this regard because I have also raised this matter twice. There was even a time when the Ministry of Internal Affairs secured money to build accommodation for the Police and Ministry of Finance refused arguing macro-economic instability. Yesterday I mentioned the word “sabotage”. I am being proved correctly that there could be some form of sabotage from Finance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but sabotage that affects the lives of human beings in this country to the extent that some people do not have water, is unacceptable. In parts of Bugiri and Mayuge the coverage is only 20 percent. The people in the islands are also having a problem and this applies to other parts of the country as well. Honourable chairperson, can you advise us?

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I will attempt to give an explanation. If it is not satisfactory, you will bear with me, honourable members. When this money comes, it does not come in Uganda shillings but in dollars. If these people were actually bringing water, machinery or pipes, it would be different. But the argument is that even regarding pipes, the people to install them would have to be paid using Uganda shillings. However, when they bring hard currency, how will it be absorbed? I am attempting to explain this macro-economic stability argument. 

How will the hard currency be absorbed? It will only be absorbed by changing it into local cover, which local cover is not backed by real production. What does this do to the exchange rate and how does it affect exporters? These are the questions that the macro-economists argue about. Therefore, we can insist that if help is going to come, it should come in terms of tangible machinery or a small component of money but to receive a bigger component of machinery, and mind you some of this money comes with conditionalities where the donors escort it with technical assistance and consultants and it ends up going back anyway. These are things we should not ignore.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, from the argument forwarded by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, if this money is escorted and ploughed back as she has put it, what will the effect be on the macro-economic instability anyway? 

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question of macro-economic stability has been a big thorn in the flesh particularly for people who are not well versed with economics. However, on the other hand, even from a layman’s perspective it does not make sense to say we should not allow in extra money because it will disturb our macro-economics, cause our shilling to depreciate and affect our exports. You cannot say that in order to avert the depreciation of the shilling and prevent exports from losing value we should not export. Instead I would think that we should have a manageable economic growth and inflation rate of about five percent. 

Furthermore, you cannot say that we stop accepting drugs or water and let people and cows die due to lack of water and those who survive 30 years down the line will enjoy a vibrant economy. If you analyse our exports very well you will find that the people working outside Uganda bring in more money than all our exports put together. At one time even if you added all the money that came from the export of coffee and flowers you would find that it was less than that got from Ugandans working abroad. What I am trying to drive at is that as a country and as laymen we need to invest more in human development, being healthy, having enough water and whatever else we need. 

We should stop saying that we do not need to invest in people. Stop saying that we need to turn away the monies and grants, keep inflation low and keep the macro-economic stability intact when our people are dying. It is very shameful –(Interjection)- let me finish. Even as we speak there are people who want to establish a very big hospital to treat heart and kidney problems but Ministry of Finance is blocking that. Meanwhile we are left with people begging in newspapers to go and be treated abroad.  

In the education sector the same thing is happening. People who would have wanted to come and support education, particularly secondary education by setting up laboratories, are being discouraged from doing so because of this macro-economic issue. It is a big issue and I have found out what happens in other countries in the area of HIV/AIDS. It appears that not every country has these MTEF ceilings that we are talking about in Uganda. If we reject the dollars now, what will happen when we can no longer get them? Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wonder whether our Budget Committee is satisfied that this matter requires attention. Can’t our team sit down and work out a solution? How long are we going to report 20 percent or 15 percent water coverage yet there are all these opportunities?

MR ERESU: I am a Member of the Budget Committee and this is the same paradox we are facing in the committee. If we consider the human face vis-à-vis the physical changes in the economy in terms of economic instabilities and embezzlement of funds such as those being alleged about Global Fund, wouldn’t it cause what you would call macro-economic instability? What happens to the economic setup and the macro-economic situation? These are the factors we have to look into when money is misappropriated. 

What we wanted to project in the report is that we think that this matter should be approached from another angle if we are going to develop this country. It is a question of moral attitude, moral change and projections to ensure that money is submitted and administered so that the country progresses instead of making academic gymnastics.

MR KABAREEBE: I want to thank all those who have contributed to this issue and I want to give them an example of the Asian Tigers. I was in Bangkok, Thailand, Changsha in China and Malaysia trying to find out countries that were poorer than Uganda 40 years ago in terms of per capita income and GDP. We found out that Thailand fell in that category but now has its GDP at ten times that of Uganda, and we are still here. 

Furthermore, I discovered that all grants and loans that were given to Thailand were absorbed and that all investors were classified and regionalized. Martial law was put in place to fight corruption and non-performing departments, among others. All the monies that were absorbed were used for electricity, roads, industries, water, housing, communication and any other infrastructure that brings development. 

In 30 years they are through with their development but we are still here holding on to money saying, “No, if you give those people who are starving a lot of money for water we shall have problems with macro-economic stability.” However, those who are saying this are only two percent of the population of Uganda. Those are the ones who are worried that their businesses will get shocked. The rest of Ugandans are suffering. 

I think we need to look at the desk officers in Ministry of Finance. Some of us are very good economists. Let us sit down and change our heads. Otherwise –(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: We have a problem. The managers of our economy have been blinded by figures, which they follow blindly. They say inflation must be below five percent and so on, but it cannot work. In matters of macro-economics we have to allow some room for inflation if the economy is to grow. That is the modern economics, but our managers are very primitive. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR KABAREEBE: By the time he came up I was concluding that point. Finally, I want to ask the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment whether she has managed to cost how much money Uganda is putting in Lake Victoria to keep its PH at around seven so that this water is available for export to Egypt. Can we know how the negotiations are going before we table the report? I thank you very much.

3.28
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to raise three fundamental questions relating to the ministerial policy statement for the Ministries of Energy and Lands. I will begin with the remarks by the Prime Minister asking the members of the Front Bench to explain why they were conspicuously absent in the morning. The ministers simply apologized but never explained why they were not in the House. They only pledged never to do it again. I would like them to answer the question that if they absent themselves again, what action do they expect the Parliament to do? That is the first question.  

The second question is related to the whole purpose of a policy statement, which must be the extent to which it contributes to the overall national goal. The national goal is to eradicate poverty and transform the present economy, which is predominately peasant and traditional, to a commercial, industrial and competitive one. I would like to know the extent to which the policy statement of the Ministry of Energy and Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment contributes to this.  

If you really want to answer that question look at page 4 of the report of the committee. In the achievements it is stated that national access to electricity increased from five percent in 2001 to nine percent at present. If you want to know the magnitude of this statement and its implication then consider that a population of 25 million people would amount to about 5 million households. The average Ugandan family consists of about five to seven people. This means that only nine percent of the households in Uganda, which is about 540,000 Ugandans, go to bed with the sunset and for 12 hours they are sleeping while the rest of the world is working.  

Consequently if you really want to transform this economy and eradicate poverty it is practically meaningless for only nine percent of Ugandans to have access to electricity. This is a very serious matter. If you are to interpret figures to show what they imply in practical terms, you will realise that you cannot have 91 percent of the population being controlled by the elements of heaven and not by the science. Therefore, the Minister of Energy must recognize that the transformation of the economy can never happen with only 5.9 percent of the population having access to electricity. The national objective cannot be achieved in foreseeing the future unless this percentage is addressed.  

My second point is also related to water. If you look at water on page 14 of the report, the indicator they used is not very clear. They said that rural water service coverage increased from 57 to 60 percent. However, this indicator does not show you how many Ugandans have access to clean and safe water at a reasonable distance. It simply says coverage but does not specify whether it is coverage of an area. 

The moment the population of your country is spending 80 percent of their time fetching water and collecting firewood, which are routine chores, then you know that the productivity of their labour is being denied. This is a serious matter. Let me add that if 80 percent of an African woman’s time is spent fetching water and firewood, that means that she simply cannot go to the garden and do productive work and therefore she cannot produce economically. 

I am serious, Madam Speaker. If you put water on the doorsteps of Ugandan households, you would have relieved 80 percent of their time to be used in the gardens and for other productive work. I want to say that the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment has done quite well. However, I would like to propose that we harvest rainwater. I know we can do it and I am speaking from experience. Uganda receives a sufficient amount of water, which if we harvested would create time for our people to engage in productive work.

If you look at the amount of money spent on boreholes, on page 15, as a result of poor borehole maintenance, the ministry is spending over Shs 1 billion in borehole rehabilitation. I am saying that the priority can change from putting focus on boreholes to focusing on rainwater harvesting. Every house that is roofed with corrugated iron sheets has the capacity to harvest rainwater and have this water right on their doorsteps. 

Finally, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That should be the last point. You have finished really.

PROF. KAMUNTU: No, I want to elaborate on hon. Kasamba’s point, which is very serious. The question of inequality is potentially very dangerous to national unity. If you look at the background to the Budget on page 5, it is observed that inequality is measured by the Gin coefficient. The Gin coefficient is a statistic that shows the equitable distribution of incomes. In the report it shows that inequality measured by the Gin coefficient increased from 37 percent to 41 percent between 2000 and 2003. 

This indicates that we have to address the issue of who is benefiting from growth when it is achieved. The moment you ask this, issues will become very evident and we will no longer be blind to how this generated income is being distributed amongst the population. The statistics are very clear. Gin coefficient is increasingly high showing inequality of income and service distribution. Once that is not checked, there is potential for social tension. I caution the minister to address this issue early enough. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a problem of time since we were delayed this morning for extraneous reasons. Those who have not spoken on this will speak on trade, which is the next one. Let me ask the ministers to answer starting with the Minister of Energy. You each have ten minutes.

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE, MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank all my colleagues who have contributed to our policy statement and I want to assure them that we are going to consider what they have expressed. I would like to start with some of their concerns.

Hon. Sarah Nyombi, hon. Yiga, hon. Kaddunabbi and hon. Ekanya mentioned projects in their areas that have not been completed. We are planning to complete the power projects in these areas using the Shs 20 billion that we have asked for this financial year. This money will complete the uncompleted projects as well as aid us in those that we have in plan. I want to assure my colleagues that their projects will be worked on this financial year.

MR MULENGANI: Clarification.

MR BATARINGAYA: That was my first point. Hon. Sarah Nyombi raised the issue of her sub-county, which is Lusama sub-county, which should be benefiting. However, we have projects, which we have planned, those we have started on but not yet completed and others, which were presidential pledges. This is how we have categorized them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister you are on slippery ground. I have not mentioned the uncompleted projects in my area. What will happen to those? If you are saying that those four people are the only ones who will have their projects finished, then what about Dr Kagonyera or hon. Balemezi?

MR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, what I want to say is that much as these people have raised their concerns, we have a programme. We have requests by Members of Parliament, there are presidential pledges and what we have planned to do as a ministry. Right now I am simply responding to what my colleagues have raised. However, all the projects, even those that have not been raised will be worked on using the Shs 20 billion, which we hope to get this financial year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shs 20 billion?

MR BATARINGAYA: Yes, Shs 20 billion.

MR MULENGANI: Clarification.

MR BATARINGAYA: If my brother would allow me, because I am sure he wants me to clarify on Wakawaka–Kasensero road, there is another question, which was asked by hon. Yiga. He asked, “What criteria does the ministry use?” We use the following criteria: we have district headquarters, economic activity areas and vandalized lines that were vandalized during the wars. We also consider other cases, as the need may arise. 

Hon. Mulengani’s project, the Wakawaka, falls under the economic activity areas that include mining areas and landing sites. That is why I did not talk about them. On the other hand hon. Sarah Nyombi was talking of a sub-county in which case schools and hospitals are covered under that and that is why I did not want to elaborate further on that. 

Hon. Ekanya raised the issue of the PPA. As regards the PPA, negotiations are going on and when the need arises we shall provide for it.

Concern about Kiira Dam was also raised. On the dam there is a wall that prevents water from flowing. We also have Nalubaale as a power plant. It is the Nalubaale power plant that has some cracks. We had a look at Kiira Dam and it had no problem. 

You also asked what strategy we have. Our strategy is to use Nalubaale power plant as a peak load power plant and Kiira Dam as a base load power plant.  

Hon. Mike Sebalu was asking what we plan to do in terms of electrification and modernization. In the mid-term we intend to put up two power plants, that is Bujagali and Karuma, which would give us 400 megawatts of electricity. We are also thinking of renewable sources of power such as mini hydros. Currently we have Hydro Max, which we are getting from companies in Seruka, Nyagak, Rukungiri and Kasese. These will give us about 75 mega watts in addition. From municipality waste and others we expect to generate another 75 mega watts.  

In the long term we intend to construct dams south and north of Ayago in addition to promoting thermal electricity. As I speak we are working on this and we have plants at Tiburo in Hoima, Kikolongo in Kasese and Buranga in Bundibugyo. We expect all these plants to give us an additional 75 mega watts.

MS TUBWITA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard the minister mention a number of places where they are going to have their activities for 2005/2006. There is a long standing request for constructing Ishasha Dam project that was later on changed to connect the national grid to Kayanza Tea Factory. This work had commenced last year but it stalled suddenly. I would like to hear from the minister what he has to say about the status of this connection. Thank you.

MR BATARINGAYA: In your area we have a mini hydro plant under SNV and a Norwegian company that is also working in Masindi. The Norwegians have taken over that project and are going to generate power from Ishasha. 

You mentioned another project, the Rukungiri-Ishasha project. That project is also on course and we are still negotiating with them because they asked us to give them some time to consider the project bearing in mind that some areas, for example a line from Buhenju and another from hon. Kamuntu’s constituency, were removed from that project. Because of this we had to go on board and renegotiate. As soon as we finalize, the project will go on.

Madam Speaker, my colleague hon. Bikwasizehi asked a question about the mining sector and specifically about quarrying and limestone. We already have a lime policy but currently we are collecting data, packaging and promoting these minerals so that private investors can start exploitation. Of course we have given them the necessary facilitation to enable them to mine and sell as they wish. The quarries are in Rakai and Bushenyi but the amount has yet to be established by collecting data and that is what we are doing.

Hon. Muzoora asked when we shall have the first barrel of oil. The process is not that easy but we are doing all we can. As I speak, last week the two companies that were licensed in Semliki finished doing their seismic study and are ready to dig a well in an area called Buhuka in Bundibugyo District. They have also just finished their seismic studies in Kibilo. In October or November they hope to drill their first well in Area II, which is the Hoima area, with the help of a company called Hardman. 

With petroleum, there are various stages to go through. We explore the area, develop it and only then can you be ready to produce. The exploration is going on and this includes drilling and testing. After this we shall develop that particular area where we are going to drill and we start production. I cannot commit myself to 2006 but we are on course. 

I would like to thank my colleagues once again for supporting our policy statement and I request that they pass our budget. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is one matter you did not answer, the question of ESKOM importing timber and the creation of a new monopoly.

MR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, as regards the issue of ESKOM, our ministry does not have a policy on whether one has to buy poles or not. We do not even involve ourselves in the procurement of poles and as far as I know, ESKOM is one of the companies that took over the generation of electricity. Currently we have three companies that are involved in generation, transmission, which was formerly run by UEDCL, and distribution that is currently run by UMEME. 

As regards generation and transmission, the two companies do their procurement following the PPDA procedures. In other words they give people who want to provide poles the opportunity to bid and of course they have to take the best bidder. The only problem that our local people have is their standards, which sometimes do not meet those set by UMEME and ESKOM. As a ministry we do not deal with procurement and companies are free to procure following the guidelines as laid down by PPDA.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the Hansard, what is PPDA? I do not know that word.

MR BATARINGAYA: It stands for Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has not answered your question clearly. Our concern as Ugandans is, why is it that Ugandan poles are not bought and why is there preference to import poles from abroad? The money we are using is from the taxpayers of this country and they should be the ones benefiting. There are poles in this country that are not being bought. Why are you buying poles from outside the country?

MR WAMBUZI: I think it is very important for the minister in charge of the sector to settle our minds on why in a situation where eucalyptus grows very well with abundant water, sunshine and soil fertility we are continuing to import poles. The people of Nawaikoke are seeing power just across the border in Pallisa yet since 1954 they are waiting for poles to arrive moreover they are capable of growing those poles. 

You should come out clearly and state that we should not import poles unless we need to. Furthermore, we should encourage our people to grow eucalyptus and the minister should instruct the company that took this concession even if it is the PPDA, to first exhaust the available eucalyptus within the country. He should not tell us that the PPDA agreement is final so we must become surfs, slaves and dependants of the South African economy yet we know that it is possible for our people to sell the poles. Madam Speaker, I think the minister should clarify on this before we really approve his paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I want you to look at the totality of the picture. We are sustaining the economy of South Africa and giving them employment and money through the sale of these poles and Ugandans are not earning money out of this. Meanwhile in the same economy we have an influx of aliens selling mandazi and chapati here thereby taking away the jobs of Ugandans. 

In the same economy we have people in the hotel industry, majority of whom are foreigners, also taking away the jobs of Ugandans. When the people of this country are being disadvantaged, we would think that you would take the interest of the people of this country as a priority.

MR BATARINGAYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad that my colleagues have expressed their concerns on ESKOM because it is the focus here. As I told you previously, UEDCL was not purchasing its poles from South Africa. It has now been raised that ESKOM is actually purchasing poles from South Africa; with the backing of my colleagues we are going to look into this matter and we shall report accordingly.

I would like to say that UDECL and our transmission company were buying poles from local companies like Kilembe Mines Wood Company, Kabakwa Saw Mills, BM Technical Services, Kampala Pole Treatment Plant, Kampala Hides and Skins, Walunaku Enterprises, 600 Family, Nakanwagi and Asumani Juke. All these have been supplying poles to UDECL and transmission. However, as I mentioned earlier, there has been an issue of standards. Since we have raised concerns on ESKOM and UMEME that is just five months old in the country. We shall look into the matter and then report accordingly.

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee and colleagues who have really given us deep insight into our ministerial policy statement. I wish to start by making another correction in the quantum of the money that I seek Parliament to grant to my ministry. I beg that you look at the report of the committee on page 23 and make the following corrections in the summary. During the course of the debate I touched base with the Minister of Finance and a corrigendum was sent to me pointing to the recurrent expenditure that the chairperson of the committee had earlier given as Shs 11,074,000,000. The one from the Ministry of Finance as at midday today now reads Shs 11,074,000,014.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you read it again?

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, at the end of the debate we are going to adopt the report of the committees. I would like to request procedurally that the honourable minister examines the figures that the chairman of the committee read and revises them when he is winding up so that we can adopt the report and the figures therein. This is because the figures should be part of the report and the honourable minister cannot amend the report of the committee. 

I think we may have to revisit these figures or lay on the Table the figures that are now changing for the third time. The figures that were previously read by the chairman and the figures that the honourable minister is now reading are three different figures. Let the chairman reconcile them and amend his report at the end so that we do not go according to you honourable minister but according to the report of the chairman.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is the person that distributes the money? Maybe the Minister of Finance is the one who knows the exact figure because the chairman gave me a different one. I understand the clerk has sent for the corrigenda so that we can look at it.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Now straight to the remarks by colleagues.  Madam Speaker, the land use policy has been formulated and in the not too distant future I will be presenting it to Parliament. It is being printed as I speak. The land policy is still on the drawing table because the Works Committee is really busy. 

The same people are behind the amendment of the Land Act, and they are in the process of revising other land laws, sensitizing and translating the Land Act as well as working on these policy statements. We promise to progressively report on how far we have gone with these matters. That was hon. Nyombi Sarah’s intervention.

On the landless youth in Masaka, my ministry is not the lead agency on demographic issues. I know that the Office of the Prime Minister has initiated a policy on resettlement and the question of landless youth and other landless people all over the country will be handled under this policy and the department responsible for resettling people.

Thirdly, I thank hon. Biennia for the report on what we are doing in surveying and titling government land. I wish to state that the work he did in Singer really involved the local leaders. A survey committee was set up and this committee consisted of two very prominent members that included one counselor who doubled as speaker of Mbarara LC V council, Mr Kashaki, and another counselor who is Secretary for Defence of Mbarara LCV, Capt. Rwakanuma –(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: I want to thank you honourable minister for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. Unfortunately, the two people you have mentioned each took over 100 acres for themselves.

MRS MEHANGYE: Honourable Minister, on a similar issue like that one in Mbarara, which is in Rwamwanja in Nkoma sub-county in Kamwenge, the local leaders were not involved and actually half a battalion of army men were escorting the surveyors so that the local people were dispersed and could not even ask questions. And according to the local people, even the right boundary was not followed. So what happened to that one of Rwamwanja because the local people were not involved? When I tried to intervene as a Member of Parliament they had planned to cause a scuffle so that I could be shot by mistake. So, what happened to this Rwamwanja land, why did not the local people get involved?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, the information my friend hon. Muzoora has given me about Nakivale and Orukinga implicates the two leaders being encroachers and resisting the exercise. Such is the magnitude of the problem we have. Even as we go to survey a title for road reserves we expect to encounter similar probleMs

In Rwamwanja still a committee was set up. I do not have the names at my fingertips, but we involved the LC III leaders of the place and others who had encroached on the same land to be part of the survey team to show the surveyors where the demarcation line would pass. I will, under the Office of the Prime Minister, be reporting to an inter-ministerial committee presenting the deed plans of these parcels of land and invite my colleagues, the Members of Parliament, whose communities are adversely or otherwise affected by these surveys so that we settle this matter once and for all.

The Orukinga and Nakivale land historically is land for the Omugabe of Ankole and in 1960 this land was shopped for government land in Nyabushozi and Kazo. So we are just re-tracing the line where the survey was around 1910 in Ankole. When people see a surveyor extending a line to put a geographical reference point, which is called a controlling point, people take it that our land has also been taken. So we shall be sitting in the Office of the Prime Minister to put the record straight and all stakeholders will be invited to see where they stand in this survey of government land.  

We are keeping a bank for the future. If there are no refugees today, tomorrow that land could be exchanged for prime land in town if we have a big project. A landowner in town could exchange his or her land in town for this rural land that we have now put in the Government land bank.

Hon. Ekanya, thank you for your invitation. My ministry has picked Tororo County and Kaberamaido District in the systematic demarcation and titling provided the money I am seeking to get is granted by this Parliament.

The Land Fund, hon. Sebalu requested that the fund gets a national character. The law provides that the Land Fund will be used in four categories as a grant to solve historic problems and as a loan for especially bibanja people on titled land. We are also drawing up regulations under the Land Act to indicate how the Uganda Land Commission, which does not disburse money, which does not handle loans, will manage this land fund to benefit bibanja people on titled land.

MRS SSENTONGO: I want to seek from you, honourable minister, and this is in regard to the conmen that are surrounding the office of lands when people are pursuing their land titles because it is becoming a daily routine. I do not know what strategy you have put in place to save the population in that regard.

REV. SSEMPANGI: The minister informed me that the Land Fund covers Kasese and Kibaale and not Mubende. Has it not become national or not?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, debate on the Land Fund has been on since 1994/95 Constituency Assembly time and during the July 1998 enactment of the Land Act. The Land Fund is to be used in four ways. One is as a grant. The grant element goes to solve identified and recorded injustices on land allotment during the coming of the British in Uganda. 

If Mubende did not voice its problem and that problem was picked during CA or at the enactment of the Land Act, honourable representative for Mubende, it is now time to come up with documentary and other evidence to convince the minister to table the matter in Cabinet and come out with new policy guidelines to apply the Land Fund grant element to Mubende. But as of now, the grant element goes to Kibaale, Kasese, Bundibugyo and West Ankole.

Resettlement of other people; I will respond to that but it does not come from my policy statement. This is “any other business”.

MRS SSENTONGO: It is connected because you are dealing with land. There is no way you can run away from this. You are serving the population, honourable minister. People are being cheated at your office. We have evidence.

MR BAGUMA:  You see I am an operative in handling conmen. I cannot reveal my methods in a live broadcast. So, I thank you hon. Ssentongo for the information. I am going to take action, and you know when I say so, I do so.

Kiboga people know what was happening, yes. Whoever was tantalizing people there is no longer doing so. 

I thank the hon. Kasamba for explaining that my ministry well accomplished the reopening of the Uganda–Tanzania boundary line, valued and compensated property owners who are affected by the demarcation line and the no man’s land. We did that together with the LCs of the place. It is a stretch of over 150 kilometres and we are persuading the individuals affected to leave within a time frame we gave. We do not want to use force or we shall do it gradually. I know if we used force in Mutukula, hon. Kasamba, your vote would be at stake. We are taking a bit of time but Mutukula town is going to be planned. 

Yes, I had to provide for the cargo-handling yard for Uganda Revenue Authority and the immigration station. Already the Uganda Prisons Department has surrendered part of the prison land to become part of the town that will be planned during this financial year. 

Madam Speaker, my colleagues, the Minister of State for Water and Minister of State for Environment will cover the other sectors in our ministry.

4.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENVIRONMENT (Lt Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues. I will not take the ten minutes allotted because I will be extremely brief. 

First of all, I would like to thank colleagues for the support they have rendered to the statement from the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, and indeed to the committee for the clear position they have done. In the course of the debate three issues have been raised, which I would like to respond to.

The first one was raised by hon. Sarah Nyombi. Indeed in the National Forest and Tree Planting Act, the Minister is to designate a National Tree Planting day. Colleagues will recollect that in April this year when I was responding to the question for oral answer by hon. Munyira, I did indicate that I was consulting with State House on the question of designating a National Tree Planting day. We have now done that and soon we will be able to announce it.  

However, even before we do that I would like really to encourage colleagues, we all know what is at stake and I think it is incumbent upon all of us to encourage our people to plant trees at every opportunity that we have; we do not have to wait for the National Tree Planting day to be designated.  

Hon. Ekanya did raise a question of pollution by Tororo Cement Industry. It is true that what he stated is happening. Some time last year, around October and November indeed there was a visit by the National Resources Committee to this area. I think about November NEMA did write to the management of Tororo Cement Industry, pointing out the question of pollution. 

I do recollect that the management responded to the effect that they were going to develop a system that would suppress the emission of dust, which was part of the problem.  Unfortunately, I do not have the latest information as to how far that has gone. If nothing has yet happened, I will be able to cross check, confirm and report back but I know there was correspondence in this direction.

The third and final issue was raised again by hon. Ekanya on the question of the level of Lake Victoria. It is true there have been changes in the water level of Lake Victoria but as to whether those tantamounts to the drying up of the lake, I am not sure. Indeed I would be very happy - hon. Speaker, you did point out - if we could be provided with documentation, such documentation would be laid on the Table here so that all of us could be able to look at it and indeed verify. There is no doubt, all of us are very interested in the future of Lake Victoria and it is in our interest that it is safeguarded –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, you have undertaken to bring the report, why don’t you just bring it and lay it on the Table? 

MR EKANYA: I have part of the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, we do not want part of the report, and it is not your report, you are not the author. So, you should not edit some things.  Bring the whole report and table it, please. If it is there, lay it on the table but do not bring some parts.  

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, if you give me time I will bring the report here and can it be debated tomorrow because I have been studying about this lake, I have interest in this matter? Hon. Kahinda Otafiire is aware of this report. I have just been talking to Prof. Okedi and experts on Lake Victoria. I have also been communicating to Dr Orach Meza. The Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment participated and received copies of this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you want to lay it and debate it tomorrow that means you are going to speak to yourself because you are the only one who has read the report. Lay it on the Table. I will appoint the time for the debate when members have internalised it.

LT GEN. JEJE ODONGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. So we will take your advice on the question, which hon. Ekanya did raise.

Finally, hon. Muzoora did raise something, the issue of Lake Kyoga. My colleague, hon. Mutagamba, will say something about this. I thank you all indeed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, did you say that you are not going to gazette a day for Tree Planting, because it is in your Act?

LT GEN. ODONGO: No, I said that in April I had said I would carry out consultations with State House. Consultations have now been carried out, we are now ready to designate a Tree Planting day and soon we will be announcing it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

4.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE, WATER (Mrs Mary Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I want to thank honourable members for having raised passionate concerns on the water sector. I really feel that water is very crucial and of course it is life. Allow me to answer some of the honourable members who raised some questions, which I think are general to all of us.  

First, I think it was the hon. Yiga from Kalungu who was wondering when the people of Kalungu township would be connected to the water system. Of course, I know Kalungu like all other water systems we have worked on, we have got a minimum connection when we are implementing the project, that is, those that are covered within the costs. But thereafter we normally pass on the project to the town authority, which we call the Water Authority, and the Water Authority recruits a private operator.  

This private operator is normally given an operation and maintenance amount, which is within the budget. This money is supposed to support that private operator to run the operations and at the same time plan for extensions. We have got a technical support unit in Masaka, which is supposed to be supervising those projects, and a District Water Officer to see that these private operators perform according to the performance indicators that we have set. So, we keep reviewing and I will call upon my technical support unit to review the performance of the contractors or private operators. These people are hired for three years, so if they have not performed well we definitely change so there is competition in there.  

You also questioned the boreholes that are drying up and what plans we have for them. I think somebody else also put that question. We have got a problem of shallow wells. Most times when we send this money to the districts for boreholes, districts find it easy to drill shallow wells because they are cheap and you can drill more out of a given amount and for purposes of equity and other things. 

As such, because of a prolonged drought for the last three years – you know we have been getting short rains – these shallow wells have dried up and they are so many in the country. So we are now going to look at what exactly is being done by the districts in terms of drilling boreholes because this time the policy should be going for deeper wells. 

However, we are also changing the policy, trying to resort to surface water instead of underground water. In any case, within the budget we have a ten percent allowance on the conditional grant for rehabilitation of boreholes, so that money is available at the district. Besides that we have established what we call chain stores or supply stores in every region –(Interruption)

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and Madam Minister for giving way. In the case of Kayunga, we have pipes lying there where there is water that can be tapped from the River Nile to supply the five towns. I have been to your office several times and nothing has happened. Our boreholes are dry and our shallow wells are dry. We only have that source, which can supply at least part of the district and it has not taken any effect. Can the minister, please, clarify why this is the case? 

DR NABWISO: The minister has made a very important statement that there is money at district levels to repair boreholes. I am wondering whether this is actually true because in my district a lot of boreholes have broken down and when people go to the district councils they do not get the money instead they are asking me and I believe some other Members of Parliament to do the needful. So, could we get that clarification?

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This issue of repairing boreholes, communities are requested to pay a certain percentage as counter funding and if a village does not have that amount of money, there is no way the district can come in and repair the borehole. I do not know whether it is a policy of government for these people to contribute compulsorily?   

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much. Let me start with Kayunga. I know the problem and the honorable member has brought it to my attention. We have referred it to the technical committee. I have received the first report of the problem and we are going to work on it. Just keep on my bumper.  

Secondly, about boreholes, definitely in the budget there is 10 percent of the conditional grant for every district to go towards repair of boreholes; that is for sure.  However, each borehole has got a water users committee. We worked on this. For every borehole we put in place, we create a water users committee and we had trained two technicians to repair. But most times these people move away, because they have acquired skills they go elsewhere. So you find that some villages have got a borehole without a technician. That means they have got to look for a technician elsewhere to come and do the work.  

Secondly, the water users committee was supposed to contribute a certain amount. That committee has a secretary for finance, who is supposed to have some money such that if there is a minor breakdown, that breakdown is attended to. And that is why we are now establishing chain stores so that people can go to those depots and buy spares. But if the repair is major, then it is supposed to be reflected in the district plan for us to handle. Otherwise, if it is not reflected to us, it is very difficult to monitor which borehole has broken down and most times those of you who have been coming to me, I have been requesting you to help identify which boreholes are down so that we can synchronize at the center.  

I want to answer the hon. Member from Bukanga; unfortunately he is not here. He was talking about water-stressed areas. We have identified these ones and under the backwater supply we have already started. I think it was the hon. Member from Budiope, hon. Lubowa, who was also asking the same question of initiating and piloting. This is where we are. 

We have identified some areas, dry or stressed areas, where we want to pilot on backwater supply and these include – for a start we have included Bukanga, Isingiro, Kazo, Rwampara, Kabula, Kooki, Nakasongola rangeland and South Bukhooli in Bugiri. Of course more are going to be identified, that is why we are saying initiating. It is an ongoing process; we are going to continue. So these ones have been identified, we have hired a consultant to give us real implementation strategies so this is where we are and we hope it is going to take off soon.

The hon. Member for Butambala asked about Kassanda, that a contractor came to do the road and destroyed their pipes. I am sure that contractor has got the liability to repair, to correct whatever mistake he made; and if he did not then the local authority should have taken him on, otherwise I do not expect a contractor to come do his work, walk off with money, and then government comes in to do the repairs. So, I call upon the honorable member to take it up with the local authority such that the contractor makes good what he made bad.

Then my friend, hon. Ekanya, I am afraid you are swearing against wrong premises because at least you were saying there was no valley dam in Karamoja. But I was vindicated by somebody from Karamoja, so please do not swear again.

Secondly, I want to talk about the pledge by the President. I know I visited your area. I actually made an offer but because of the cuts in the budget I always find it difficult but this time I have already got communication from the President to the effect and I hope with the release of this budget we should be able to honour the presidential pledge. 

Hon. Sebalu was talking about new water authorities that have been created in the rural setting and then National Water coming in to extend water. That is a policy matter. I want to assure hon. Sebalu that I have referred that matter to the Water Policy Committee, which is chaired by my Permanent Secretary and they are reviewing it. We shall soon come up with the correct procedure of handling National Water and small water authorities for purposes of encouraging them to grow and become big water authorities. 

Hon. Mugambe, you asked about Nakifuma. Honourable members, in our ministry we do forward planning. At the time when Nakifuma came on board we had 11 towns that we wanted to work on, but that year I think we managed to work on eight and there was an overflow.  

As I speak now we have designed 23 small towns, Nakifuma is still on but unfortunately the funds I have can only do three if not one because I have Shs 3 billion for 23 small towns. One town alone, Kamwenge, requires the Shs 3.5 billion, so you may realize it will depend. Where do we start from? That is why I have a problem. The designs are there, the technical people have done their work, they are only waiting to be able to implement. 

Then, the hottest issue was that of Karamoja. We have indicated as government that we had done a lot of work in Karamoja and the people of Karamoja should be grateful. As I speak now there is another contractor who is going to use nearly Shs 300 million to work and install windmills where others have failed and this is in Matheniko. Everybody was saying – because we know dams failed in Matheniko and in order to make good we have identified other sources and we are putting windmills and the contractors have moved today so at least by the weekend they will be there -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister. When you talk about the valley dams in Karamoja there is actually this set of dams, which you commissioned and one of them I think is called Poro in Moroto District. A committee of this House went there and found that that dam has never existed, completed dry ground; it had not been excavated. But, honourable minister, you had commissioned it when you went to commission all the dams that were recently dug in Karamoja. I am now wondering why –(Interjection)- just a moment. Let me finish up this sentence. I am wondering whether your ministry has worked out a method of recovering money for that non-existent dam from the contractor –(Interruption) 

MR AACHILLA: Honourable minister, I just want to give my honourable friend, hon. Alaso, the correct version of the story. Poro is one of the dams the minister is saying they have now identified so they will go and put windmills. You are right on that point but the one she commissioned is Komosi in Jie County, which I represent, although, it was poorly done but it was commissioned under those conductions. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think our chair offered that the committee is going to physically establish the existence of these dams and then come back to us. This morning we were talking about Kumi and then you said the dam is in Karamoja, maybe we hold on until the committee reports back?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable member for Jie. It was Komosi dam that I commissioned. According to the technical person I have here, he has confirmed that now that dam is working and it is full of water. We have realized that most of these dams get washed away because of the disperse nature of the soil and workmanship. That is why we are now resorting to other methods. Karamoja is endowed with a lot of ground water and that is why we are resorting to deep pumping and we use the windmill to provide water both for animals and human beings. That is cheaper and more satisfying because we get clean safe water for both humans and animals - (Interruption)

MR PAUL LOKERIS: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for giving way. I do remember one time you said in this House there is a need to tap water from Sironko to pipe it to Karamoja. I do not know what is happening with that programme. 

Secondly, what is the plan about water for towns especially district headquarters? Is there any plan you have put in place?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, honourable member. Sironko and Nakapiripirit range is also being considered for the bank water supply. It is one of the areas that we are taking on. Then for water harvesting as a policy, we are having it officially accepted in our next joint sector review, which is third week of September. You know we have got a method where we meet as stakeholders of the water sector, including donors, and we have got to agree on how to move. So, this one was brought in last year we have been testing it in various pilot areas. Now it is a policy that we want to introduce to the joint sector review and I think it will be implemented. 

Finally, I want to talk about the coverage that hon. Kamuntu talked about. I can see that 57 percent or 60 percent of the population of 25 means that 10 million are not yet served. In either 2002 or 2003 I stood here and told you the average coverage. I needed to make every year about 980,000 people per year. By today’s calculations we have got to cover at least a million people per year and our working budget as it stands now can only allow us about 780 per year so we have got a shortfall and that is a request that needs to be considered. Otherwise, every penny that is being put there is utilized to improve water coverage. I am grateful that you are getting what you are getting.  

I also want to thank the honourable members for having articulated it but of course as government we have got to balance the economics that is why we are now trying to look for alternative financing. We are actually trying to entice the private sector to come in and support government in the provision of water. This we did in our joint sector review. Those of you who will be able to attend in September, please, find out how the private sector is going to be working with us. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think other things you can clarify separately with the minister, please.

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Speaker, there is a question, which was not answered, on Lake Kyoga.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the dredging?

MR KABAREEBE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dredging Lake Kyoga?

MR KAMUNTU: The one, which I think is overall, is the excuse that grants from donors are not being absorbed in the water sector as a result of sector ceilings by the Ministry of Finance. I submit to you, Madam Speaker, the stability of the economy. We know we can look at the exchange rate, we can look at interest rates, we can look at inflation and we can look at government deficit. If you bring water pipes into the country what instability does it cause on the micro-economics stability? The Minister of Finance should answer this question so that it’s not used as an excuse. The Minister of Finance should answer it or the Minister in charge of Water.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Minister in charge of Water is telling you the problem she has encountered trying to get water for the country and the stumbling block is the Minister of Finance -(Interjection)- it is a lie? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: This argument that if you bring in water pipes it will cause instability in the microeconomic arrangement is not true. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, we did say that we were going to ask our Committee on Budget to engage the Government on this matter so that we can look at alternatives, because she says she has a problem. That is what she put in her statement. Anyway, let the Minister of state, Water finish her part.

MS KIRASO: Further clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, some of you came here in the afternoon. We have been sitting here since morning, please! Minister of Water, answer the questions.  

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much. There was the sector ceiling, I cannot add much. I think Ministry of Finance will help us on that. I would love to have my sector ceiling raised a bit.

About Lake Kyoga, we have had this problem for quite some time but it is a problem between the Ministry of Water and the Ministry of Agriculture. In the last joint sector review in September last year we agreed to put up a task force between our ministries to work towards amicable solution of monitoring and the dredging of this Lake Kyoga.  

This task force has been working, I think they have had about two or three meetings and we hope at the next joint sector review they should be able to report back. But what I need to say is that within my ministry, within the Department of Water Resources Management, we are supposed to monitor and within the budget there is a component of monitoring Lake Kyoga. We have been doing that; we have been giving reports to the stakeholders to know how we are moving. So, after giving the report then the stakeholders, mainly agriculture, has got to respond to that. That is how far we have gone.

Last week on Friday the Prime Minister convened a meeting, again this issue came up and he has called us again on Friday to resolve this problem or come out with a policy on this. So we hope these joint efforts will be able to yield results to this effect and Parliament will be notified to what next. Thank you very much, honourable members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, have the figures been synchronized?

4.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Lule Mawiya): Yes. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the members of this august House; they have surely done justice to both our sectors. Just one or two questions were posed to the committee, which I will go through very briefly.  

One was raised by hon. Sebalu and may be amplified by hon. Kamuntu. The question was, “How does the committee look at the energy generation or the energy sector in totality vis-à-vis industrialization of a country?” Prof. Kamuntu’s question reads, “To what extent do these two ministries contribute to economic transformation?” He gave the increment form five percent or nine percent, that is, under energy and one to four percent under the Rural Electrification Scheme.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, hon. Beatrice Kiraso, attempted to help me out and she pointed out that under the MTEF the Ministry of Energy is going to be provided in the next financial year with Shs 49 billion and then it will come to over Shs 50 billion in the other financial year. So that is how this sector is being considered.  

But also you remember in my committee report, on page 7, bullet 2 and I think 9 - that is the way forward as per the committee. That is how we are trying to move under these sectors. I am glad that this concern cannot be over amplified, already justice has been made towards it and the two sectors are key for economic development; they are actually an engine to economic transformation. 

So, this issue of saying of the sector ceiling is totally making us lag behind. Giving the scenario of Asian Tigers as was pronounced here, these countries at first developed a system; they actually had two digit inflation. They had two digit inflation and that is why they managed to develop very fast. Even in the developed countries they start with an upward inflationary rate. We should not hide under the macro-economic stability and looking against the need and concern of our people. If I have to develop and move ahead, we must agree that development cannot go on without allowing a degree of inflation to take place.

The issue of Karamoja and other areas has been also mentioned very heavily. Like I said before, my committee – and we shall also bring on board members from these regions when time for us comes to go to the field. Yes, soon or later we shall be there. Madam Speaker, like you guided, the committee will present a report to this august House when it is ready.

I would also like to comment on the issue of VAT in these sectors. Like we did for the Ministry of Works I think last financial year, it helped a great deal. We cannot see these sectors as engines for development and at the same time be subjected to all these, for instance the VAT, I said before, taxes alone in the energy sector that is on fuel will be about US $1 million a month. So even if this sector can be looked at, I am intending to maybe bring it up when we are considering the Finance Bill so that we can exempt these sectors as far as VAT is concerned.

Finally, I would like to move some amendments to my report and that is on Vote 012 that is Water, Lands and Environment under the recurrent expenditure. It is Shs 11 billion, Vote 021, page 23. It is not Shs 11 billion; it is Shs 10 billion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, can you really stop confusing us? First, it was 8 and then it became 11, now it is 10. Are you certain about the figures?

MR LULE MAWIYA: Madam Speaker, we have the latest information and I have been trying to harmonize these positions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think I should be doing the work of the Ministry of Finance. He should come here and clarify figures because what we pass today will be binding.

MS KIRASO: The document, which the chairman has and the figure that he was going to read, I think it is very clear. What you have, Madam Speaker, the corrigenda, there is money in the bracket, which has been removed from that vote for a specific purpose, which purpose is arrears on utilities for Uganda Post Office and that money has been transferred to the Ministry of Justice for onward transmission to post office and other relevant authorities that we owe arrears. So that explains the difference between what he had read earlier and what the chairman is going to read. I said this because I did not think we needed the Minister of Finance to come and read the figures for us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, you see the figures we pass will be binding on us. Suppose we make a mistake - that is what I am asking - and adopt a figure, which is at variance with what the Government intends to provide?

MS KIRASO: But when we pronounce ourselves today, we will not have passed the Appropriations Bill. The Appropriations Bill will come and if there is any mistake that we have made, that will be now the final binding document from the Minister of Finance. 

MR MWANDHA: We need not be bothered. We can even take the figures, which appear in the report because when we pass the Appropriations Bill, even at that stage, there will be corrections.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not going to do the work of the Minister of Finance. He should be here to account for his work and for his Budget because by the time we get the appropriation you are the same people who will say, “On the other day we passed something different and now the Bill says something different.” So we shall not take a vote on this today. Can the Government ensure that the Minister of Finance is here tomorrow?

Honourable members, we are unable to deal with Trade today for reasons, which you know. The House will reconvene at 10.00 O’clock in the morning. We shall take the report on Trade in the morning; at 12.30 we shall take the report on Public Service; at 3.30 we take the report on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs –(Interjections)- yes, honourable members, we have got a schedule. So the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10 O’clock in the morning. We do not expect absenteeism, which is not explained or excused. The House is adjourned to tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.55 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 1 September 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)


