Monday, 31 August 2009

Parliament met at 3.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)
 
The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am happy to welcome you to this sitting. Thank you for coming. 

3.05	MRS MABEL BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me an opportunity to brief this august House on the plight of the Guramwa community, Nkooko sub-county, Kitegula parish, Bugangaizi County, and what they have been going through in the past two weeks. 

The Guramwa community were allocated land in this area by government agents in the 1990s. In 2001, some forest officials from the district came and warned them to leave the place saying that it was a forest reserve. Subsequently, some of their leaders were arrested and charged with encroachment. 

In their defence, they pleaded that they were not aware that the area was a forest reserve and believed it to be public land. Court observed that while part of the area was gazetted as a forest reserve in 1932, there was no evidence to show that any demarcation took place. Accordingly, it was not clear whether the accused persons were resettled on a forest reserve or not. 

Court dismissed the case and ordered that government should open the boundaries for the 220 acres mentioned in the gazette and any persons found to be within the boundary should be compensated and they leave the place. It is disturbing to note that whereas the gazetted acreage was 220 acres, the district officials went ahead and opened the boundaries of 3,500 acres putting the population of more than 2,000 people at risk. From that time, the district officials started a campaign of harassment and intimidation of this community. When it became unbearable, the community engaged lawyers who issued a notice to sue the Attorney-General in 2004. 

Subsequently, as the affected community was waiting for compensation, the district forest officers arrived with a truck full of thugs on Friday, 21 August 2009 and started burning down and demolishing their dwellings, cutting down their banana plantations and robbing them of their meagre resources. The following day, the district officials told journalists that the people they had evicted were Rwandese refugees who had escaped from Nakivale Refugee Camp in Mbarara District, and that some of them were coming directly from Rwanda and some from Kisoro.

Mr Speaker, this is not the first time that my constituents are being subjected to terror by government agents. You will recall that in September 2007 I came here before you and reported a series of schemes hatched by government agents to disposes my constituents of their land in Nalweyo Sub-county. At the time, this august House accepted government’s request to be allowed time to go and investigate and report back in a space of two months. It is now two years and no report has been brought to this House. 

Worse still, district officials have taken advantage of this gross inaction and have gone ahead to process land titles on land that is settled on by the community for whom I was seeking protection. As you will recall, at the time, more than 2,000 families were being threatened. As we speak now, some of them are already being issued with new threats of eviction. 

In light of the above, I appeal to this august House to intervene and cause the Executive to restore the rights of my people, protect them and their property and put in place a mechanism that will provide a permanent solution for them. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.10
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable member who has raised the issue concerning my sector, the forestry sector, but in particular NFA as a managing agent. 

I would like to request that I get that communication because the honourable member has not provided me with it and details of the case. I will take it up and then we can discuss it together or I can come back here and make a statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mutagamba, how soon can this be done?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: If I get the documents today, I will request for one week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, honourable member, you will give her the details or get to meet her and give her all that she needs.  

3.11
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Mr Speaker, this issue which hon. Bakeine has raised on this Floor is not a new one. This matter came on this Floor two years ago. A similar promise was made and nothing came before this House. 

By the time this happened, I had done some consultation with the minister in charge. The information which I have is that this issue was raised with the President and he sent his political assistant. By the time the President sends his political assistant to Kibaale – You know that this issue falls directly under the sector of THE National Forestry Authority, and it is affecting more than 2,000 people. Recently when similar evictions were taking place, the President gave some directives and action was taken. So, why is it that in this case nothing like that is happening? These are 2,000 people affected and there is no intervention at all. 

In this case, I would request that we make the minister come here, maybe tomorrow. There is even a ruling on this matter and I will table it in the House. The people in that district are operating in disregard of the court order, which is contempt of court. 

I had also wanted to raise the issue that hon. Bakeine raised, but I was advised by some of my colleagues that the area Member of Parliament should raise it and she has done that. So, it is very urgent that the minister comes here tomorrow and issues orders so that these people are not harassed. As of now, they are living at the mercy of the President’s political assistant who told them to return to their homes, but anytime they can be harassed again. 

The residents are being harassed. They have been evicted; at one time they were staying in schools and in church. I had consultations with hon. Kabwegyere. Mr Speaker, the matter is very grave. Let the minister come here tomorrow. 

I beg to table this court ruling so that whoever is doing this in the ministry should operate according to the law. This is a court ruling regarding the matter where people were evicted. The people who were evicted took the matter to court and an order was made. Briefly, it says that the government must open up the boundary of 220 acres or so and any person found within the boundary must be compensated. Any obstruction of this order is tantamount to contempt of court. I beg to lay this court order on the Table. The judgement is dated 28 October 2002.

3.15
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, in every page of any newspaper that you read today, there is an issue regarding the management and administration of laws relating to land. It looks like it is now very difficult for the three arms of government, that is, the Executive, Legislature and Judiciary, to carry out their duties independently with respect for one another.

There are instances where people who have legitimate land titles cannot get access to their land even when ordered by court that they should have access. Today Ugandans have adopted a new culture of violence; where even when a court order is issued, they put on defiant faces and say, “We have been living on this land all this long.” By the way, evictions are not easy; nobody would want to be evicted even if he or she is in the wrong. There is always that urge to involve the police or LCs. 

Can the Leader of Government Business, his line minister for lands and the Attorney-General educate this institution and tell Ugandans what has became of the administration of laws related to land management? Are people going to be allowed to kill each other just because they hear that if there is an eviction one must get permission from His Excellency the President? (Interjection) No, please do not put words in my mouth, Madam Minister for National Guidance. These are serious issues! 

Today it may be some people in Kayunga suffering - yesterday I read in the papers that the Christian University in Mukono had been denied access to its land and a Colonel comes up and says, “Over my dead body.” Where are we going as a country? Can the Leader of Government Business, the Minister for Lands, and the Attorney-General help us so that we know who is who? 

If an order is issued by court, does the President legally have the right to override it without any consultation, without even getting to know what is on the ground? People are taking the law into their own hands. One of these days we will wake up in morning to find lawlessness in this country. The NRM Government, please help us; we do not want people to operate as if there is no law in this country. Help us so that we do the right thing at the right time in the right manner. I thank you.

3.18
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much. I would like to thank the honourable member for raising this issue of evictions in the so called forest reserves. I have a similar problem in Koboko, which I would like to voice so that the honourable minister can also look into it and give me information.

I have a place called Cakulia; it is a parish in Lundrara sub-county but half of that place is a forest reserve. When we came back, they had extended the forest reserve up to Keyi and parts of Yumbe. The National Forestry Authority is now evicting those people - over 2,000 people - and that is the only area that is very productive. We have schools there and we also have a health centre being built there, so the people are really on their toes. They have requested me to ask the Minister of Lands to show them the boundaries of that forest reserve so that they are not disturbed. It is a serious problem that I would like the minister to consider. This is in Cakulia in Lundrara sub-county. Thank you. 

3.20
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you. I stay in Kyadondo North constituency in Wakiso and yesterday the residents who are my neighbours approached me. Some few days ago, officials from Buganda Kingdom raised a tent near my house and they were asking people who are staying on Kabaka’s land to register and pay Shs 200,000 and that this will be a regular fee to be paid to Buganda Kingdom. They ask for your details like your tribe and you provide a passport-size photograph.

A group of residents came to my house because they know I am a Member of Parliament. They wanted to know whether this money is lawful, whether they should pay or whether they should place their names in this register of the officials of Buganda Kingdom. I promised them that I would raise this matter in Parliament and get a response from either the Speaker or the Leader of Government Business. So, they are waiting for my response. They said they are not paying this money until they have understood why they are being charged.

To my understanding, I do not think the Buganda Land Board or the Buganda Kingdom is mandated under the law to charge money. It should be the District Land Tribunal to set such fees –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the subject before us now is Bugangaizi. It is specifically about her area but it has now degenerated into a general debate on land policies. Let us address the issue raised by hon. Bakeine about the eviction. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. The reason I raised this is that the issue raised by hon. Bakeine is leading to evictions. The residents in Kyadondo also fear that they may be evicted by the landlord if they do not pay the Shs 200,000. 

THE SPEAKER: From the account you have given, I think the owner wants to know the people there. So, they register by paying a fee and then he will verify them. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue raised by hon. Bakeine is very pertinent. All of us here are quite aware of how people are being treated in forest reserves and how forest officers have been killed in this struggle. We want to discuss this issue so that we get a way forward. 

As the minister has said, she will respond after one week. I am seeking guidance as to whether it would not be prudent for us to consolidate it and debate it exhaustively and come out with a way forward, or should we respond to our colleague and when the minister brings the report, we again talk about the same issue?  

THE SPEAKER: What you must realise is that these people are staying in schools. Maybe they are staying in schools because their children are on holiday but by next week schools will start, so where will these people go? I think this matter should be handled as a case on its own. Since the honourable member has a statement, let the statement be given to the minister. Maybe on Wednesday the minister will be in a position to brief the House about this matter. I think this ends the debate on this issue.

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: I indeed agree with your ruling. It is important that the minister gives a presentation on that. However, I want to inform this House that as the Committee on Natural Resources, we have spent a lot of time visiting these forest reserves and wetlands. We have gone to Kazooba, south Busoga, Kooki and many other places and we made a report. However, our report has not been given time on the Order Paper although it was ready sometime back. 

I suggest that we give adequate time to this report so that all the members in this House can listen to what we established on the ground and then we debate it efficiently and make resolutions. We can then see where we want to go as a country. 

This will be handled as a special case, but the observation that we made was that people stay in forest reserves and they know that they are on forest reserves. When you give us time to establish what we found out in the different districts, it will come out clearly that many of the people did not deny it. They said they know that these are forest reserves, but they would want government to carry out some action – they either live together with the forests or get somewhere else to live. 

Mr Speaker, I would request that you give us sufficient time to debate this issue so that we come up with recommendations about where we want to go as a country - do we want to occupy all forest reserves and wetlands? If we are given time, I am sure we shall expansively debate this issue. 

THE SPEAKER: Certainly, you will be given time but let this matter be handled the way I have said. 

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.28
THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as you recall last time we abruptly adjourned the House because of the differences about the figures in the estimates. I hope now the concerned committee members and the ministry have settled the matter. Is that the case? Okay. 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Mr Chairman. As you have rightly said, it is true that we had to first correct the figures due to the fact that when the Committee on Social Services was making its presentation of the budget estimates, we noted that there was a problem with the National Medical Stores. I think the figures were not tallying as we thought. Secondly, we also had a problem with the Cancer Institute. 

I would now like to give a small explanation as far as the National Medical Stores is concerned. I would like to inform this House that the health sector draft estimates for FY 2009/10 include a total budget allocation of Shs 110,723,620,000 intended for the purchase and supply of medicines. These funds are all allocated under the Ministry of Health, regional referral hospitals, district hospitals and the local government budgets.

Following a resolution of Parliament, it was agreed that adjustments be made to the medicines allocation budget. In particular, we agreed to transfer 100 percent of all medicine resources held by the Ministry of Health and 70 percent of the drugs budget held by other Votes to Vote 116, that is, National Medical Stores, effective this financial year. 

Owing to the fact that in the Vote-on-Account we appropriated 33.33 percent of the budget to the respective accounting officers, I would like to inform this House that the remaining allocations under the respective votes are now 66.6 percent. Therefore, from what we see, it is not possible this financial year to implement the 70 percent transfer basing on the fact that 33.33 percent was taken on Vote-on-Account. However, we have agreed with the Ministry of Finance that with effect from next financial year, this will be considered so that the policy sheet is fully taken into account. 

I would also like to make another observation in regard to the allocation of the drugs budget of the district hospitals. As Members will recall, Parliament passed this motion for appropriation of the budgets for the ministries of public service and that of local government. In effect, Parliament appropriated all the medicines allocations under the PHC district budgets to the respective local governments. The appropriation did not take into consideration the resolution that we made in this Parliament of 70 percent to National Medical Stores and 30 percent to PHC. I, therefore, request members to take note of this omission. 

With the above clarification, I request Parliament to approve the budget allocations of the Ministry of Health institutions as I am going to read them. Of course, I would request the Ministry of Finance to consider this policy shift especially in regard to the local governments. It is unfortunate that we have already approved this as Parliament and we may not do much right now, but I know the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Health can do something to ensure that that very important decision is effected. 

With this, I would like to present to this august House the right figures for both the Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health. For the Ministry of Education, for the recurrent budget, it is Shs 178,074,826,000 and for the development budget, which includes Shs 1.8 billion taxes, it is Shs 175,641,097,000. 

For Busitema University, the recurrent budget is Shs 4,872,476,000 and the development budget is Shs 1,677,520,000. For the Education Service Commission, vote 132, the recurrent budget is Shs 3,643,150,000 and the development budget is Shs 53,060,000 only. 

For Vote 136, Makerere University, the recurrent budget is Shs 44,792,820,000. The development budget includes Shs 700,000,000 for taxes and therefore the total is Shs 18,143,764,000. For Mbarara University, that is Vote 137, the recurrent budget is Shs 7,402,070,000 and the development budget is Shs 4,785,770,000. For Vote 138, Makerere University Business School, the recurrent budget is Shs 5,175,090,000 and the development budget is only Shs 1,000,000,000. 

For Vote 139, that is Kyambogo University, the recurrent budget is Shs 18,536,345,000 and the development budget is Shs 222,845,000. For Uganda Management Institute, the recurrent budget is Shs 425,504,000. There is no development budget for the Uganda Management Institute. 

For Gulu University, Vote 149, the recurrent budget is Shs 8,946,372,000 and for the development budget, we have Shs 2,408,928,000. 

I beg to present –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I want to thank the chairperson of the committee. You have been talking about the National Medical Stores and the clarification I want to seek before we get those figures: I thought all hospitals, with the exception of district hospitals, know what belongs to them. Why should we move money belonging to drugs for referral hospitals to the National Medical Stores, which may procure drugs that are not necessary for the people?

MR OKECHO: Mr Chairman, in this one-page print out, under Makerere University we have a development budget, which talks about Shs 700,000,000 as taxes. I do not know why Makerere was isolated yet the others do not have development budget components in terms of taxes. What is the reason for this? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, when these figures were being computed in some institutions, taxes were included in the figures; in others this was not done. What I am saying is that when the figures under a given name, for example, Ministry of Health were being computed, in some institutions the taxes were included. There was no need for corrections to be done. What the chairperson of the committee has done is to indicate where these taxes were included. That is why we have varying figures here.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, to answer hon. Nandala’s concerns, I would like to say that I remember that the Committee on Social Services presented a report to Parliament, making recommendations that money for – we know very well that initially money for PHC had been 70 percent. While the one for credit lines was 30 percent. Because of these problems the committee was forced to request Parliament to make an amendment in the policy. That is why we brought that recommendation to this Parliament. 

I do not know whether my colleague hon. Nandala was around or not, otherwise it was a serious debate before this House approved that recommendation.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, the recommendation was saying that since the hospitals have got accounting officers, why we don’t we leave it to them to – but I think the fear was that the districts would end up diverting it to other things instead of buying medicine. That is why that money is supposed to be deposited with the National Medical Stores so that they cannot have any excuses of failing to send drugs to the hospitals for the people. (Applause)

MRS SENINDE: In addition, Mr Chairman, when we got to the ground we found that although all along Ugandans had been complaining about lack of drugs in hospitals, government was busy releasing money for drugs to the districts. Unfortunately, whenever districts had money problems, it is this money that they encroached on. At the end of the day, there were no drugs in hospitals with excuses that National Medical Stores was not supplying them with the required drugs.

On that note, let me inform the House that the committee took an initiative to visit National Medical Stores to get to know where the problem was –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, colleague for giving way. I would like to give this House some information to back up the point she raised about resources being sent from the centre to the districts, yet when you go to see the utilities, there are only complaints.

From my district, Moyo, here with me is a report of a probe committee of the Moyo District Hospital, which probed into the misuse and losses of not only drugs but also equipment that had been purchased for the hospital and the office of the District Director of Health Services, and all the health centres. The following things were discovered to be missing: generator from the hospital laboratory; power regulator, solar panels, vehicles and motorcycles brought to Kampala for repairs, which had not been taken back. 

This report was submitted to the District Council, but no action was taken. The people implicated in the report are still busy doing their work. I lay this document on Table in support of your position. I am suggesting that districts be controlled from the centre –(Interjections)– yes, because the capacity of the local governments to monitor doctors – they for example ask the district councilors what they have in terms of academic papers and you know many of them do not have good academic papers – a district official will say, “I have a Masters Degree or PHD.” Most of our councilors, including the RDCs, feel inferior; they cannot monitor and supervise such people.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Surely the matter that hon. Nandala raised was also indicated in my response to the ministerial policy statement. I indicated that the change of policy in allotting funds for medicine is good in order to address the continued stock outs of drugs for all health units. 

It is being done in good faith but when the chairperson of the committee was making her explanatory notes relating to the National Medical Store’s 70 percent funds for medicine, she said that the Vote-on-Account, which we passed, had 33.33 percent, adding that this financial year we may not be able to achieve the 70 percent. 

I thought that since we already know what we passed on the Vote-on-Account as 33.33 percent in order to achieve the 70 percent, we must top it up by allocating the 36.7 percent to the NMS for drugs. I am saying this because from the sheet I have received, once we allocate the 36.67 percent, we will have achieved the 70 percent this financial year. I think it is still possible.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, because they have already started using the Vote-on-Account, they might have already remitted it to the users. That is why I said we cannot get the 70 percent; it is a third of the total budget. Anyway, I think the policy has been clearly explained.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I just want to remind my colleagues that I have just appealed to the Ministry of Finance to ensure, as they make that adjustment on the Vote-on-Account, that they put that policy into consideration. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to give information to this Parliament that this is not in vain. We can still achieve what we want. The 70 and 30 percent can go to NMS and the districts respectively, but this House can still appeal to the Minister of Finance that although this money was supplied to local governments –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Minister of State for Primary Education and hon. Pirir from Karamoja to start exchanging words in Parliament when we are discussing serious issues?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, my attention had been directed to the Chairperson of the Budget Committee. (Laughter)

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was saying that there was a policy shift, which was recommended by Parliament and adopted by the Executive for implementation during this financial year. The problem is that we already supplied Public Service and local governments with the PHC element covered in there, based the old policy. 

What I am trying to say is that all is not in vain. That policy shift can still be maintained by this Parliament requesting Ministry of Finance not to release the PHC component to local governments; they should come back to Parliament to request for a supplementary to shift that money to NMS.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to congratulate the chairperson and the committee for having brought out such an innovative idea. It will help us in closing avenues of corruption in districts.

However, I would like to point it out that this is not going to be easy. This policy shift is to the annoyance of those who have been benefiting from the old system. 

The issue that I would like clarified is whether the committee took into account measures that will deal with any frustrations that may arise from the hitherto beneficiaries of the old arrangement. I am asking this because what is going to happen is that hospitals will requisition for drugs according to disease patterns in their areas from NMS - my understanding is that NMS is going to be overburdened. The ability of NMS to very quickly respond to requests is going to arise.

Secondly, there will also be the issue of fake drugs or districts saying the drugs supplied by NMS are substandard or expired. They may also say the drugs are not from the right manufacturer. At the end of the day the effort will be frustrated with patients suffering. What measures have you put in place to control such? Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. To respond to what hon. Wadri and hon. Nandala-Mafabi have raised, I would like to say that we have the National Medical Statute, a law that was passed by this Parliament. It mandates NMS to procure drugs and other supplies for all public health institutions in Uganda. What has been happening is that most of the institutions have been flouting this law.

Like the chairperson of the committee said, though we have been raising the budget allocation for drugs in this country, when you go to the health centres, there is an outcry of drug stock outs all the time. 

As you maybe aware, the money for drugs has always been divided into two components – 30 percent of the Vote would go to the credit line that is managed by the NMS. That meant that when money is passed by Parliament, the Ministry of Finance will first release it to the Ministry of Health, which will in turn remit it to NMS.

In the last report of the Auditor-General it was discovered that some of this money has been transferred to other areas by the Ministry of Health. That is why we agreed with the sectors that there be a specific Vote function for NMS to ensure the credit line is channeled to it directly from the Ministry of Finance. That credit line has been 30 percent of the drug budget.

The primary health grants that go to districts and hospitals – the guidelines have been that when the PHC grants go to the districts, up to 50 percent should be spent on drugs. And for hospitals, 40 percent should be spent on drugs. But for them to spend this money on drugs, they should first of all make a requisition to NMS and when there are no drugs, NMS should issue a certificate of non-availability.

The committee findings were that a number of hospitals and districts were forging these certificates without going to NMS and then buying from private providers. 

Also, some studies have shown that a number of hospitals and districts were spending about 10-15 percent on drugs instead of 50 percent and that is why there is chronic shortage of drugs even when the money is available. So, our recommendation is that to cure that problem, we put most of the money to NMS directly and then the districts and hospitals requisition regularly.

We have also assessed the capacity of NMS and I want to confirm that the capacity has greatly improved. They have new management, they have put structures in place and I think they are able to deliver.

We want to assure you, as a committee that we have looked at all these issues and we want to urge the Ministries of Finance and Health and the entire government to implement this recommendation this financial year.

We have also agreed with the Ministry of Health and NMS that all the drugs procured by NMS will be labelled or embossed so that the consumers out there will know the government drugs, which should not be sold in private clinics. 

The measures are there and we are confident that the drug supply situation in this country will improve if this is implemented this financial year.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the explanation is clear, let us move on to another issue.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am getting lost. We have a policy on decentralisation, which has worked for many years. Now, it seems that we are going round in circles trying to come back to recentralise. Would it not be better for the committee to recommend to Government that decentralisation has failed, let us recentralise rather than singling out a sector? This is because what is happening in the Health Sector is happening in all the sectors. I am not sure whether corruption at district level is worse than at national level, I do not know.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise to seek clarification from either the Chairperson of the Committee or the Ministry of Finance. We seek to get some money for the NMS by moving amounts of money from different Votes. I have noticed under the explanation column a small discrepancy of about Shs 20 million. Whereas you claim that you seek to move Shs 55.59 billion from other Votes to NMS, what you are actually moving is Shs 55.57 billion. You can verify that by some simple arithmetic. I do not know whether you would like to correct this before we proceed or you would accord this House an explanation as to why that figure is short of Shs 20 million.

MR WADRI: This is in the report of the Committee on Social Services, pages 41 to 44 of the draft estimates. On the same budget line of Vote 116, NMS –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, there are two documents that have been circulated. They first brought the other old one that confused us last week and there is a new one. So, Members are reading the old one, which is a wrong one. Can we really get the proper document? Can we be guided on that?

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we allow her to read out the various figures as far as she is concerned before we can decide? This is because those figures have not been presented as far as I am concerned. Why don’t you allow her to present the figures then we can seek clarification thereafter? She presented for Education.

MRS SENINDE: Hon. Members, I have not yet -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: I concede.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I beg to proceed. Before I present the budget estimates for the Ministry of Health, I would like to make a small explanation.

For Vote 114, that is, Uganda Cancer Institute, Members will recall that on Thursday when we were discussing the report of the committee, we had a problem of Shs 2 billion. I am glad to inform this House that this problem is solved. The Cancer Institute has the full amount that had been requested and budgeted for and that is Shs 3 billion. So, that problem is now solved.

On the issue of Mulago Complex, Members may recall that Shs 1 billion had been deducted from the Cancer Institute to leave the Shs 2 billion that I have been talking about and had been transferred to Mulago. As such, the budget of Mulago had remained Shs 4 billion. 

I would like to inform this House that the Shs 1 billion that had been transferred from the Cancer Institute to Mulago was specifically for the purchase of the Cobalt machine. 

I would like to inform this House that at last we in the Budget Committee have agreed with the Ministries of Finance and Health that money must be found to be added to Mulago Hospital complex so that we still get the Cobalt machine. 

I would like to inform this House that we have succeeded as a committee and therefore Shs 1,005,000,000 is going to be deducted from the Ministry of Finance budget to Health to cater for the Cobalt machine. I would like to thank the Ministry of Finance for having accepted.

I am now going to read the figures as they are. (Interruption)

MS AKOL: Thank you, Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services. I would like to inform the House as we proceed to read the figures for the health sector that there is corrigenda, revised corrigenda No. 1 that was presented today to the Budget Committee as we were looking at the issues that affected various sectors. It is copied to all chairpersons and the major adjustments are only two. 

One will answer the question that was raised regarding the figures for NMS. They have been revised upwards by Shs 55.59 billion and the new total should read Shs 63,269,418,430. That is the adjustment for the recurrent budget estimates in the revised corrigenda, which has been given to chairpersons.

The second adjustment is on the National Planning Authority -(Interjections)- I am only informing the House that there is an adjustment, corrigenda No. 1. 

Two, it is true we sat as the Budget Committee and adjustments were made as pronounced by the Chairperson of the Social Services Committee and Shs 1.5 billion will be moved to Mulago Hospital Complex from the Ministry of Finance. The particular Vote affected here or where this money is coming from is industrial parks -

THE CHAIRMAN: I think let us have the figures read and if there is any clarification required it will be given.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I thank you. I think I have made that explanation.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, read the figures.

MRS SENINDE: And now I am going to read the figures for the Ministry of Health. The budget estimate for Ministry of Health, Vote 014, the recurrent budget is Shs 48,517,825,000 and the development budget is Shs 275,190,910,000; the Cancer Institute, Vote 114, the recurrent budget is Shs 781,667,670 and the development budget is Shs 3,100,000,000; Uganda Heart Institute, Vote 115, the recurrent budget is Shs 64,400,000 and the development budget is Shs 1.5 billion; National Medical Stores, Vote 116, the recurrent budget is Shs 63,269,418,430 and the development budget is only Shs 200,000,000; Health Service Commission, Vote 134, the recurrent budget is Shs 2,212,729,000 and the development budget is Shs 346,799,000; Uganda Blood Transfusion Service, Vote 151, the recurrent budget is 3,130,370,000 and there is no development budget; Mulago Hospital Complex, Vote 161, the recurrent budget is Shs 29,070,408,000, while the development budget is Shs 5,120,000,000; Butabika Hospital, Vote 162 -

THE CHAIRMAN: I am shaking my head because I have got a document here which says, “This is the final copy ….” but you read a figure, I think for the Cancer Institute, and you said, “Shs 781,667,670” and yet the figure I have here is 68 and not 67 in the middle.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I sent you the right copy but unfortunately you had not picked it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok, proceed.

MRS SENINDE: And that right copy has been circulated to the Members.

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman has the right copy now. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok, proceed.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, for Vote 162, Butabika Hospital, the recurrent budget is Shs 4,222,244,000 and the development budget it is Shs 44,678,873,000 and Votes 163-175, the Regional Referral Hospitals, the recurrent budget is Shs 30,044,601,647 and the development budget is Shs 17,000,000,000. I beg to present.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am seeking clarification from the chairperson about two issues. First, Butabika Hospital is not transferring any money to National Medical Stores. Does it mean for them - because Mulago has transferred but Butabika has not.

The second point is, still on Butabika. What are those development plans which are going to take Shs 44.7 billion yet referral hospitals which are ten in number are going to take only Shs 17 billion?

And finally - 

THE CHAIRMAN: I thought the explanation was given last week. He did explain - he did! It is on record.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. When you look at the figures that have been given and you refer to page 43 of the draft estimates book, under NMS, there is a provision for Shs 200,000,000 as taxes. But when you look under development budget it is nil. On what goods are the taxes of Shs 200,000,000 going to be paid when there is no provision under development budget for NMS? I refer you to page 43 of the big book. It is zero under capital development and yet you have budgeted Shs 200 million for taxes. On what goods are you going to pay those taxes if you have not made any provision under capital development? 

I do not know whether there was any provision during the presentation, or the interface between you and the National Medical Stores officials, or whether there was any plan for procurement under capital development. If it is there, why isn’t it being reflected? -(Interjections)- You do not get me? Please, go to page 43, Vote 116 - National Medical Stores; it is zero for development expenditure and Shs 200 million for taxes. So, on what goods are you going to pay the Shs 200 million that is not reflected under the budget line of development? You can consult with your technocrats and we want an explanation. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, it is true that on page 43, as quoted by Hon. Kassiano Wadri, there is an amount provided for and the items are not indicated. But in the detailed work plan submitted by the National Medical Stores, using their internally generated funds, they will be able to buy and purchase trucks and drugs for distribution and, therefore, the taxes provided here are for that purpose. Thank you very much. 

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, on the surface I may be tempted to accept the explanation of the minister, but procedurally, it is not proper. Procedurally, you cannot just come up and make such a presentation on the Floor of the House when there is no documentation to that effect, because at the end of the day, we are going to ask for accountability. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, my Chief Whip, for giving way. Mr Chairman, if this is a parastatal and they are going to get their own money to buy trucks, then they should pay for the taxes and not from our money here - from the Budget. In fact, this is completely wrong, hon. Prof. Kamuntu. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I wish to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for bringing in the other angle to this problem. Now that the Uganda National Medical Stores is a parastatal institution to which we put money, and from the explanation of the minister, it is going to buy trucks using its own locally generated revenue, why then don’t we leave it entirely to them to pay the taxes other than asking the Uganda Government to put Shs 200 million as taxes on goods that are not ours; on goods which have been privately procured? (Interjection) According to your explanation, you have just said so. So, where is the procurement proposal? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, I am providing an explanation which hon. Kassiano knows only too well is correct; that in the Budget process, you have institutions which provide services. For instance, the National Medical Stores charges user fees on its services, and it has the capacity to do that; and given that these resources fall in the category of non-tax revenue by nature, they are not reflected in the tax budget. That is why the figures you have seen in this big book are provided, and having been a civil servant, hon. Kassiano knows this too well. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are here to help the country. Mr Chairman, thank you very much. We have so many parastatals in this country. Let me give you an example of one that is close, the Uganda Revenue Authority. It collects taxes for you and it is providing a service; but when registering vehicles, they pay taxes. 

For this tax element, if the Ministry of Finance wants to pay, it must be in another form; but not for them to come here and say that they want to provide for it in the Budget in form of development taxes when we are not procuring the vehicles. These are not our vehicles; these are vehicles for that entity. They can even use them to do other things where they get user fees, and not necessarily for our referral hospitals. So, I suggest - 

THE CHAIRMAN: I am inclined to suggest that we deal with others and this one will come afterwards - maybe when a good explanation is cooked. (Laughter) 

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I just want to make clarification on the question that was asked by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who wanted to know why Butabika Hospital’s budget for the drugs has not been transferred to the National Medical Stores. 

The point I would like to make here is that we know very well that the drugs for psychotherapy procured for Butabika Hospital, are of a special nature, and because of this, it was observed that the National Medical Stores would probably not be able to provide the drugs on time. 

However, much as we made this observation, the committee made a recommendation, urging Butabika Hospital to ensure that they put in place mechanisms to order these specialised drugs on time, in order for the National Medical Stores to be able to purchase the drugs and avail them whenever they are needed. 

We had made that recommendation, but of course, for the time being we realised that it was going to be a problem. That is why for this financial year, we shall let Butabika Hospital have its budgets; I mean, retain the status quo. I wanted to make that clarification

THE CHAIRMAN: Read out the Vote. I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 178,074,826,000 under Vote 013 - Ministry of Education, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

MR NANDALA-NAFABI: I have a proposal on the Shs 178 billion, because we are about to vote. I have some problem on this Vote before we vote on it.

THE CHAIRMAN: A question?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have a problem with this Vote before you put the question, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, as you are aware, this Vote of Shs 178 billion includes Shs 4 billion to be given to KIU; that is Kampala International University, which is a private university.

There is no criterion as to how Kampala International University got the Shs 4 billion, and yet we have so many universities in the country which are government-owned: Makerere University, Mbarara University, MUBS, Kyambogo University, Uganda Management Institute and Gulu University - where our people are crying that the fees are high because of operational costs. We are giving Shs 4 billion to a private entity which makes its own profits, and letting our own universities, where we all pay taxes to, to surely be deprived of this resource of Shs 4 billion!

Given that the Shs 4 billion is lying there and the universities are crying, I propose that we move the Shs 4 billion and divide it among these public/government universities, so that the cost is lowered for those who are paying fees there. I thank you.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, I am sorry; but we made a presentation, and it was debated. The Ministry of Education made very clear clarifications on this, and I think we agreed on it.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, but let us first deal with this issue then we come to another.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to amend hon. Nandala-Mafabai’s proposal so that this Shs 4 billion provided under Vote 013, which was initially allocated for Kampala International University, we change it to Shs 0.5 billion - like all private universities are getting this financial year - and we move Shs 3.5 billion to Mbarara University to help it develop the Kihumuro Campus. That is my proposal.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This question was raised and the explanation is very clear. This Kampala International University is launching one of the biggest teaching hospitals south of the Sahara, and that hospital is a new institution which requires quite a lot of input to make it operational. 

It is not like Makerere which has had the School of Medicine for very long. This hospital is going to serve as a teaching hospital, but at the same time render services to the people in that area. The investment required there now to make it operational - after the initial capital - requires that we sink in money as government, because we must have a hospital which will supplement other hospitals or teaching hospitals that we have.

We are looking at a situation where students from private and government universities; where there are particular disciplines offered; and where they can exchange students. So this hospital requires capital investment at this time to make it operational, and where need be, students from government hospitals and schools of medicine can go and have exchange programmes in that hospital. So I believe that this input is not going to benefit the proprietor, but is going to help this country to produce students of medicine, in addition to the existing institutions.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, my understanding of hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal is that he is expressing displeasure with the policy. I think that is something behind the amendment. But if this is the case - and he is entitled to it - he has to consider the provisions of rule 128, in that you can move a motion to reduce the amount of the Vote by a sum of Shs 10,000. That is an expression that you are not happy with the policy; that is what you can do. (Laughter) I think we leave this because the explanation is given. But should you want to, that is the only motion you can now move on this one. Do you want to reduce it by 10,000?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, to show you that we are unhappy. Because, surely, if you went to the village now, people are failing to pay school fees; let us reduce it by Shs 10,000 so that everybody knows. I move a motion that we remove the Shs 10,000.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Mr Chairman, I just wanted some confirmation -

THE CHAIRMAN: So, can you work out the Shs 10,000? Yes, here. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I just wanted confirmation from the chairperson and maybe the minister, because in the committee report, Mountains of the Moon is not mentioned, but in the big book, on page 345, it is provided for. Can I take it, therefore, that the report just missed including what is reflected in the book and that is all? I just wanted that clarification from the minister. They had earlier on discussed. I thank you, Mr Chairman

Yes, hon. Minister.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, the draft estimates indicate the figures which the Ministry of Finance is putting under the education sector. So, what appears in that draft estimate should carry the day. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I see. It is okay. But why don’t I read the figures?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The clarification I want to seek - you know, in this country we have meagre resources. How should people who are in private business without a policy here access these government resources? Because, as much as you have removed Shs 10,000, I am still perturbed. First, KIU is a private university, it is -  

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Members, don’t you think private universities give service to the country? Don’t they? Should the people who go to private universities be disadvantaged? Shouldn’t they get support from their country simply because they are in a private university? 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I still have a problem with the very rule we have invoked regarding a reduction in the amount allocated to a particular vote; that is rule 128(11)(a). When the House is in the Committee of Supply to consider annual or supplementary estimates, any member may move to reduce the amount of the vote of the estimates, and such motions shall take the form that - my understanding is that Shs 10,000 was used to illustrate how the member would like to - 

THE CHAIRMAN: The answer is no! Actually, many Commonwealth countries reduce the Vote by Shs 1. But for us in Uganda, we became more generous and we said Shs 10,000. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We must thank you very much for the guidance. But what we are looking at is a clear policy; so that everybody can see. Because frankly speaking, if the university is going to teach people medicine; Mulago also teaches medicine; Mbarara teaches medicine; Gulu is going to teach medicine; Busitema is going to teach medicine; we need to expand. 

There is a law which should govern private entities, because they have a profit motive. As much as it is a private university, it is geared at making profit. Makerere University is not geared at profit, it is a service. 

So, given that criterion, I plead with you that when we bring some of these things here - they are really hurting all of us because the Shs 4 billion is being paid by all the people from Bugisu, from the North, and you give it to one individual! And, we have given this same person Shs 22 billion from Bank of Uganda; and he has never paid it! I think this is so painful for this country, unless there is somebody with a motive. 

THE CHAIRMAN: What I would suggest honourable members is that, maybe after this programme of the Budget is finished, you will find a day and we put allocation on the Order Paper so that we discuss policies of the Ministry of Education, including this one. But right now – here - we may not be able to debate this matter exhaustively. 

But there are merits in your argument; should the government help private institutions? Should the government help hospitals, for instance, Rubaga or Namirembe? Should it use taxpayers’ money - Namirembe Hospital is a private hospital. This is the case. That is why recently, we heard the cries of private schools about paying taxes, and the policy was passed, stopping them from paying taxes because they are providing a service to us.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I appreciate that it is important for us as a country to support private initiatives that benefit the country. I am not going to dwell at length on what my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, has already said. There are many private universities in this country. 

Our concern is only that, year in, year out, it is that one organisation, which is taking the lion’s share. I mean it is comparable to a situation where if you are a parent and you have five children; year in, year out you see presents and good clothes being bought for only one child and the others are going naked. Then, that is ground for disharmony in that family.

Having said that, the question I want to ask now relates to these presidential pledges. The Shs 4 billion which is being chopped from the Vote - Ministry of Education, has already deprived the Ministry of Education as far as government commitment to government-funded schools is concerned, because the Shs 4 billion is within the MTEF of the Ministry of Education. 

Is it not possible for the President who goes around either with envelops or giving promises to make sure that those pledges are fulfilled by the vote that is responsible for it? So that it is the MTEF of the Vote for the Presidency which is affected rather than these other line ministries which are already crippled with little money. I mean, in the long-run it may be better that way. Otherwise, as of now if every other ministry is going to have its budget chopped because of presidential commitments - presidential pledges - and yet the Vote for the Presidency is left intact for other uses, I think it is not fair. 

At an appropriate time we will really want to have a detailed debate on the pros and cons of this unnecessary enslavement; we have been enslaved as a country. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Agreed. Can we proceed with the Committee of Supply? 

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 178,074816000 under Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 175,641,097,000 under Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 111 - Busitema University

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,677,520,000 under Vote 011 - Busitema University, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 4,872,476,000 under Vote 111 - Busitema University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10. I put the question for amendment.

             (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 132 - Education Service Commission

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,643,150,000 under Vote 132 - Education Service Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2009/10. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 53,060,000 under Vote 132 - Education Service Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 136 - Makerere University

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 44,792,820,000 under Vote 136 - Makerere University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 18,143,764,000 under Vote 136 - Makerere University, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 137 - Mbarara University 

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 7,402,070,000 under Vote 137 - Mbarara University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10. I put the question.

               (Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 4,785,770,000 under Vote 137 - Mbarara University, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,175,090,000 under Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 1.0 billion under Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School, yes, please.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have looked through the figures and they have some additional 770 on top 640,000. Why does Makerere University Business School have exactly Shs 1.0 billion? How did it come to Shs 1.0 billion? (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the chairperson stressed to us the Shs 1.0 billion. She did and nobody reacted. I think they may add something next time. (Laughter) I now put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 139 - Kyambogo University

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 18,536,345,000 under Vote 139 - Kyambogo University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 222,845,000 under Vote 139 - Kyambogo University, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 425,504,000 under Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, before we go to Gulu University, does it mean that Uganda Management Institute will not do any development in the year 2009/10? Not even buying a printer?

THE CHAIRMAN: Answer, please.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The Uganda Management Institute is a degree awarding tertiary institution using the facilities they have. Should it be clarified and proposed, this institution will get the development budget when the proposals of their development have been analysed. Right now, we are meeting their recurrent expenditures. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: The answer is no. They have no development expenditure.

Vote 149 - Gulu University

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I am the Vice-Chairperson of the Social Services Committee. In addition to what the minister has said, sometime back in this Parliament, we did consider a loan from the World Bank, the public service loan, which the government intended to use to construct a public service institute. We resolved with Parliament that the institute should be at the Uganda Management Institute. 

The Uganda Management Institute is getting money from that loan to upgrade their development needs. So, that is not reflected in the budget.

MR WADRI: I was more satisfied with the minister’s explanation but the Vice-Chairperson of the Sessional Committee on Social Services, which is responsible for this sector, has opened Pandora’s Box. All I know is that Uganda Management Institute, until recently, used to fall directly and administratively under Ministry of Public Service. That was its home but now that it is awarding degrees, it has sort of shifted to the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

The loan you are talking about is a loan that we approved in this House and that loan was spearheaded by the Ministry of Public Service. When you now say it is because of that loan and yet the docket we are talking about is of the Ministry of Education, you are actually confusing us more. At an appropriate time, I would wish to take on the chairperson and the vice-chairperson of this sector head on concerning this issue of UMI.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,946,372,000 under Vote 149 - Gulu University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We have passed the Vote of Gulu University and from the report, it is clearly written that the money budgeted for is for a constituency college for West Nile University. However, the people of West Nile say they want a public university. I seek clarification as to whether this money we have passed under Gulu University will be for the public university or not. Where is the money for West Nile University? Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I thought that the money is given to the university and the others are colleges under it. They will know how to handle the matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, constituent colleges used to belong to the university. They are not private so if you want your own university, you have to go to the Ministry of Education and get your own money. This money is for those universities affiliated to Gulu University.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,408,928,000 under Vote 149 - Gulu University, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 48,517,825,000 under Vote 014 - Ministry of Health, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 275,190,910,000 under Vote 014 - Ministry of Health, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10 –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in our book development expenditure for the Ministry of Health is Shs 262,627,000,000. Now here we are reading Shs 275.19 billion yet in the corrigenda I don’t see it amended. This is on page 360, the second last column. The figures are below there.

THE CHAIRMAN: I have a sheet here and it was baptised “the latest”. It reads Shs 275,190,910,000 and I think these are the figures I have read.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So do we amend the book? Can we throw away the book so that we don’t refer to it?

THE CHAIRMAN: The book was amended and that is why we adjourned last time. It is a fact. Can I put the question to it? I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 275,190,910,000 under Vote 014 - Ministry of Health, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We are now dealing with the Ministry of Health. There is a statutory Vote 107, for the Uganda AIDS Commission, which falls under Ministry of Health. We have time and again argued that Uganda AIDS Commission, which is currently administratively under President’s Office, is getting its appropriation through Ministry of Health and yet Ministry of Health has no control or supervisory role it plays on the Uganda AIDS Commission. In fact, even the Committee on Social Services does not consider the policy statements of Uganda AIDS Commission; it falls under the Presidential Affairs Committee.

For us we have kept arguing that that particular Vote 107 should go to the President’s Office so that we relieve the Health MTEF ceilings from that choke of the Uganda AIDS Commission. I really want us to be clear on this. We have talked about it year in year out. Which is the right home for Uganda AIDS Commission? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Who is to answer that? Well, this is an overall policy - maybe you may not be able -

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Chairman, we are going to handle that matter tomorrow when we shall be dealing with issues of the presidency. That is my suggestion and I shall abide by it.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, we have taken note of the commitment undertaken by the Leader of Government Business. He is talking of tomorrow and right in front of us here is the Minister of Health under whose ministry the Vote for Uganda AIDS Commission falls. Is he advising that we hold on until tomorrow when he comes and gives us his explanation and that only then shall we pronounce ourselves as to how to move forward? But I thought we needed that intervention now so that we know clearly what to do with this Vote.

THE CHAIRMAN: What we are going to do is that should there be changes, it will be a matter of changing a Vote from one ministry to another. For now, we agree that they need the money but then there will be a shift from one to the other. So, can I proceed?

Vote 114 – Uganda Cancer Institute

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 781,667,670, under Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,100,000,000 under Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 115 – Uganda Heart Institute

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 64,400,000 under Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,500,000,000 under Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 116 – National Medical Stores 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 63,269,418,430 under Vote 116 - National Medical Stores, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I thought we stayed this over. I do not know -

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Otherwise - 

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok.

Vote 134 – Health Service Commission 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,212,729,000 under Vote 134 - Health Service Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 346,799,000 under Vote 134 - Health Service Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Service 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,130,370,000 under Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Service, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 161 - Mulago Hospital

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 29,070,408,000, under Vote 161 - Mulago Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,120,000,000 under Vote 161 - Mulago Hospital, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 162 – Butabika Hospital

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 4,222, 244,000 under Vote 162 - Butabika Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 44,678,873,000 under Vote 162 - Butabika Hospital, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 163-175 – Regional Referral Hospitals 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 30,044,601,647 under Vote 163-175, Regional Referral Hospitals, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 17,000,000,000 under Vote 163-175, Regional Referral Hospitals, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much! Now there is one for medical - yes, please.

PROF. KAMUNTU: The taxes for National Medical Stores are what we term as non-resource tax. This means that previously, an institution like Medical Stores would have taxes waived by the Ministry of Finance. Instead of waiving taxes, taxes for institutions like this one are assessed by Uganda Revenue Authority and the amount determined. For example, the National Medical Stores will be buying trucks -(Interjections)- yes. So Uganda Revenue Authority will assess the tax and to settle the tax which would have been attracted, there will be a book entry without any monies being exchanged. That is why this amount of money is provided for. There is no resources that will be exchanged. It is very true that the National Medical Stores will be using what we call non-resource tax to settle these accounts as a book entry.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think that the honourable minister has all along been cooking as you directed him to -(Laughter)- and he has now come up with non-resource tax which those days used to be known as tax exemption application by the various institutions of government. They would write to the Ministry of Finance and without money exchanging hands, a book entry would be made to debit the revenue base of Ministry of Finance. In essence, it is a loss on the part of government and therefore you cannot come up and tell us that since this is a non-resource tax, therefore we can afford. We can’t! It is the same as if it was Uganda Revenue which is supposed to be the chief collector of taxes. If they imported a vehicle and did the same, we as taxpayers and citizens of this country would count it as a loss on our part -(Interjections)– I allowed you to cook your reason and you presented it. So, the onus is on you to also give me that business of -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This is a parastatal and that means that it has to prepare its own books to come up with a profit and loss account, or a surplus or deficit, whatever the case. For it to operate, one of the obligations is to pay taxes on the importation of all the vehicles. Unless you are telling us that all parastatals are exempted, then we will go by that, but if they are collecting their non-tax revenue, and they are buying vehicles, part of it should be applied towards the payment of taxes. For your information, for a book entry, we compute, for example, what we would call the 10 percent to the URA staff for having done very well. Even that book entry will be part of the collection and they will earn a living from it on the surplus to be paid. So, for purposes of moving forward, this figure here should be removed. Otherwise, if we put it here, then he should bring the items for which the people are paying taxes. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi –(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thank my colleague for giving way, and I want to thank the minister for the explanation. The minister has just simplified the work, because if it is a book entry, there is no need to appropriate for it. And the minister is actually setting a new precedent, because we have just appropriated taxes for Makerere University, which is also a parastatal, and we all know that the National Medical Stores has vehicles with private number plates where they pay taxes. So, the issue of changing goal posts is probably because the chairperson has told them to cook something; so, they are giving us unready food. There is no way we can - 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, the “cooking” meant to prepare -(Laughter)– not to forge. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, unless the ministry gives us another explanation, we cannot appropriate for a book entry. So the idea is that he should tell us whether they are going to pay the Shs 200 million provided for as government contribution to the National Medical Stores. But the argument of a book entry does not arise, and we cannot appropriate for a book entry. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to beg the indulgence of this House to reconsider what we have just talked about the National Medical Stores; that we are now giving them 70 percent of the PHC budget and 30 percent will go to the districts. That they have to deliver drugs on time is an added responsibility, and I believe they require this money to clear those vehicles to help them deliver these drugs on time. So, we are talking about the responsibility of service delivery that has been charged to the National Medical Stores. It is self-defeating for us to turn around and challenge the very argument we presented. That is the information I am giving you. Thank you. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I appreciate that the National Medical Stores needs to boost its fleet of vehicles to do the job. However, as shadow minister of health, when considering the policy statement, I do not quite remember the committee getting the procurement plan of the National Medical Stores, because the amounts for taxes could be computed depending on what procurement is to be undertaken. So, I think we are just giving this Shs 200 million radically since we are not exactly sure of what is to be taxed. 

MR ODUMAN: Mr Chairman, I think the amount of the money is not very important, but the issue is the principle. We have agreed in principle to give NMS enough money to procure drugs, and what is coming out is that they actually need to also procure equipment, and those are the trucks. Now, the question of principle here is that if they have money for taxes, where is the money for procuring drugs? The explanation we have been given is that they will use internally generated resources to pay for the trucks, but for the taxes, they are seeking for money from the Ministry of Finance. Now, the question in principle is that the source of the capital expenditure should be the source of the taxes; this is what members are raising and how do we deal with that? 

The issue of exemption of taxes has now become something of the past, and if you look at the Budget Speech of the current year, the minister talks about how they paid money to NGOs and institutions, for taxes which they agreed to meet. So, the source of the tax money is the issue. Where is the money for the capital expenditure? And the committee members are saying that they were not given the details of what they are going to actually procure in terms of drugs. How then do we, as a Parliament, say that we can appropriate taxes for capital equipment purchase which we are not aware of? I think it is a question of principle.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have received very useful information from four other people, save for the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, my friend and honourable sister from Bukedea.

I am going to rest my case. The issue is that, the idea of tax exemption is of the past as far as Civil Service is concerned. In the past what used to happen is that the line ministries used to write to the Ministry of Finance seeking for permission from the Secretary to the Treasury to allow parastatals and NGOs that were affiliated or working under their auspices to have taxes waived, but this was subject to abuse.

What government came up with was to charge the line ministries with the responsibility of making sure that there is a component for taxes budgeted for in their provisions, and that is the principle now.

So, if that is the principle, how then can we bring something of the past to come and destabilise what the principle is? My humble request to this House is that it is not the amount which matters, but it is the principle under which this money - even if it was one shilling - is being voted.

Let the Shs 200 million be struck off from this item and then we move forward so that it is a lesson for the technocrats and the ministries to get accustomed to the government principle of working. What will be the point for us to set a precedent now, and tomorrow we conveniently break away? What will we be doing? So, please, I pray that the Shs 200 million be struck from this budget that is being presented to us. Thank you.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, like the Minister of Finance has ably explained, we know very well that the National Medical Stores definitely requires trucks to be able to transport these drugs to where they are required. The information we have is that the National Medical Stores has internally arranged to purchase these trucks, but the difference they require is Shs 200 million for the taxes, and that is why they have requested for this amount of money to help them procure and be able to get the trucks.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, the honourable chairperson of the committee started very well when she convinced us of the need to have this change, that all monies be transferred to the National Medical Stores, and we agreed. Before that it was the responsibility of the districts and the referral hospitals to procure drugs from the National Medical Stores and the amount of money that we are giving them also embodied the transport component. 

If Arua District, for example, procured drugs from National Medical Stores, how would they reach them? There was the component of transport; and what has happened to that? So if you are bringing in the new idea that National Medical Stores be bought new vehicles, then they should have made it very clear and indicated to us how many trucks they are going to buy, of what amount, and what amount of tax it will require. Otherwise, without that, how can we proceed? We cannot proceed on imaginations. Things must be put down properly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The clarification I want to seek from the chairperson is that she has talked about internally generated resources. These internally generated resources are again the services we pay, by the way, if you have not known. If Mbale Hospital wants money, it will pay. So those are the internally generated resources. They have not come here for appropriation. If those internally generated resources have not come here for appropriation, it does not really carry sense for us to appropriate what we have not budgeted for.

In addition to that, what is the number plate? What colour will be the number plate? If it is blue, then it means they must pay for the taxes themselves. The taxes we pay, which we appropriate here, are for the red number plates not the blue number plates, and not the black number plates. If the cars are going to be with blue number plates, let them give us our money. Failure to do that - this one over our dead bodies - we shall not give it to you. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: I think the minister will explain the taxes but I just want to provide information. We did interact with National Medical Stores as a committee, and in the past, DANIDA used to help National Medical Stores to procure trucks, but I think this assistance has now stopped. When we visited National Medical Stores as a committee, we did note that the trucks which they have are actually old, and they have a problem delivering the drugs to the various destinations in the country.

In their plan they intend to procure four trailers and the Shs 200 million is just a tax component which they would want government to assist with, because they are struggling to raise the money to buy the four trucks and they want to be assisted. We indeed agree that National Medial Stores should be assisted to have its capacity built so that they can transport and deliver drugs to all health facilities in time; because of their responsibility to transport drugs to the district medical stores in all the 80 districts of Uganda.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the reaction of the House is that the National Medical Stores in their costing of the drugs should consider this capital development, including taxes, so that we are not surprised. If a tablet used to cost Shs 10, and because of building in the tax and capital development it comes to Shs 12, I think the house is ready to accept that; so that in costing, they take into account the cost of transport - because they have bought the trucks - and they cost and finish.

PROF. KAMUNTU: We thought it is in the overall efficiency of running the budget that this method has been adopted. Let me repeat what is happening. The medical stores will be purchasing from their own resources five trucks -(Interjections)- let me repeat, because this is very important. They will be purchasing five trucks and after they have purchased those trucks -(Interjections)- when they have purchased trucks, Uganda Revenue Authority will assess taxes on those trucks. And as put to this House, in the past they used to apply for tax exemption and they would get it; but because of their resources which are non-tax revenue in nature - and it is not reflected in the tax budget - we would need to help the National Medical Stores to put it this way, so that when their trucks come it is - and I am just repeating it - a book-entry. It will not jeopardise the capacity we are building; the efficiency you are talking about; and the need for the National Medical Stores to be involved. Mr Chairman, it is not big money but this would help this House. In fact it would be in the interest of this House that this amount of money is granted under this arrangement -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, this is the institution of Parliament. Among other duties, it has got the responsibility of ensuring that there is good governance and that processes and procedures which are established and set in government are adhered to. I am very happy that the Minister of Finance has clearly come out to admit that non-resource tax, which can also be called tax-exemption, is no longer the practise in government. I am happy that at least he has conceded –(Interjections)- yes, you have conceded. Due to the fact that you have conceded that this is no longer in practice, why should we go and re-invent the wheel, and begin taking government 15 years back? Please, Mr Chairman, I would like to advise the hon. Minister of Finance, not to lead us into temptation of failing as an institution of Parliament that is charged with the responsibility of ensuring that the government’s machinery of work is adhered to, and accountability and good governance are adhered to. I still, once again, re-echo my plea to this House that it is not the amount which matters, but it is the spirit in which we, as an institution, should be seen to work. Even if it was one shilling, it is still bad. I, therefore, strongly recommend that the Shs 200 million be struck off and we proceed with the rest of the things. I beg to move.

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Chairman, I am not an expert in financial matters but all I know is that the government has always assisted missionary hospitals when they import vehicles, by paying taxes. So in this particular respect if it is the National Medical Stores importing vehicles, why shouldn’t the same apply? 

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Mr Chairman, when we make financial provisions here, they are either resource-based or non-resource based. It is true that the practice of granting exemptions was abolished, but the government recognised the need to provide taxes. So what we do for ministries and parastatals that ought to pay tax is to grant a figure – and amount of money which is non-resource-based - for them to use that money to pay taxes. So in a way the hon. Minister of Finance is correct when he says it is a book-entry because it is a non-resource transaction, and a parastatal or a ministry is limited to the amount appropriated by this Parliament. But the actual transfer of tax from the institution to the tax body does not happen -(Interjections)- that is why we call it a non-resource transaction. So if the National Medical Stores is bound to pay taxes, it cannot pay them from the air. That amount must be appropriated; whether it is resource-based or non-resource-based. And that is exactly what they are seeking to do. 

MRS SENINDE: Mr Chairman, the Shs 200 million, according to the information we have got, is actually being explained right now. It is for taxes for purchasing the trucks. The trucks that are going to be purchased are four. If the National Medical Stores uses its budget to get the Shs 200 million to pay for taxes, it is going to deplete the budget for purchasing drugs. That is why it has requested the government to give it this Shs 200 million so that the budget for drugs is not affected. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I know. This is what I told you. The budget will be affected, and the cost of drugs will go up because of recovering this money. This is the best you can do. Hon. Minister, can you give us your explanation.

MR KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, in the interest of saving the time of the House, we have explained and I think, technically, we are trying to help the House because of their concern about the National Medical Stores’ need to do an efficient job. This is so that when their vehicles arrive, they do not reduce their budget to pay the taxes. We would in the interest of time concede that the Shs 200 million being debated be waived. Thank you very much. (Applause)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 
  
THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding­.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the budget proposals for the Ministry of Education - Vote 013 and the Ministry of Health - Vote 014.

I beg to report that the committee of supply has considered Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports; Vote 111 - Busitema University; Vote 132 - Education Service Commission; Vote 136 - Makerere University; Vote 137 - Mbarara University; Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School; Vote 139 - Kyambogo University; Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute; and Vote 149 - Gulu University.

The committee also considered the budget proposals for the Ministry of Health - Vote 014; Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute; Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute; Vote 116 - National Medical Stores; Vote 134 - Health Service Commission; Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Services; Vote 161 – Butabika National Mental referral Hospital; Vote 162 - Mulago Hospital; and Vote 163 to 175 - Regional Referral Hospitals; and supplied with amendments. I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of Supply of the two ministries of health and education, and other sectors falling under these ministries. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members for the work done today. I think it is a convenient time to adjourn. 

Tomorrow we will be handling the President’s Vote. We convene at 10.00 a.m. to be able to do some work, and if we finish, then we shall deal with gender. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 5.47 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 1 September 2009 at 10.00 a.m.)


