Thursday, 31 August 2006

Parliament met at 10.08 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. Today is 31st and according to the Budget Act, it is the day we should complete receiving reports of committees on the Budget. There are four reports, which we have not processed with and which we intend to process today. Because of this I just allocated one hour and 30 minutes for each report so that we can complete that and tackle another one.  

Yesterday there were questions, which were supposed to have been put to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Attorney-General, but unfortunately the owners of the questions were not here on both occasions, in the morning and the afternoon. I understand that the Minister is ready to answer hon. Ndeezi’s question, but I do not have the text of the question because today’s Order Paper is different from yesterday’s. The Minister can, however, answer so that we can proceed with other Business.  

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 05/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND 
CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS & ATTORNEY-GENERAL

10.14
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I apologise for my absence yesterday.  
“(1) When does the Minister intend to table the Bill operationalising the provisions of Article 32(3) and (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda i.e. establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission?  

(2) Whether the minister has advised the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide resources in the financial year 2006/2007 to kick-start the Equal Opportunities Commission that shall be established by September 2006 as the Constitution demands?” 

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

10.15
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS & ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members.  In response to the first question I have the following to say. 

The provisions of the Constitution relating to the Equal Opportunities Commission are as follows: Article 32; “(3) There shall be a commission called the Equal Opportunities Commission whose composition and functions shall be determined by an Act of Parliament. 

(4) The Equal Opportunities Commission shall be established within one year after the coming into force of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005.”  

Mr Speaker and honourable members you may wish to note that the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005 came into force on the 30th of September 2005. 

Article 32(5); “Parliament shall make laws for the purpose of giving full effect to this Article.” So the reasonability for introducing in Parliament a Bill establishing the Equal Opportunities Commission lies with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  

Accordingly, in order to give effect to Article 32(3), (4) and (5) of the Constitution, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development has taken the following steps: 

The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development submitted a memorandum to Cabinet seeking approval for the drafting of a Bill for the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission.

Subsequently, Cabinet approved the Equal Opportunities Policy, prepared and presented by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The Cabinet then authorised the drafting of the Equal Opportunities Commission Bill, 2006. The Minister of Gender, Labor and Social Development has now given drafting instructions to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for the drafting of the Bill.

Action by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs:

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has commenced the expeditious drafting of the Equal Opportunities Commission Bill for introduction in Parliament by the hon. Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  

It remains the responsibility of Parliament to pass the Bill, when introduced before the end of September 2006, in order to comply with the requirements of Article 32 of the Constitution.

In response to question (ii), which asks whether we have advised the Minister of Finance to make financial provisions to kick-start the Equal Opportunities Commission, I have the following to say:

The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development has sought from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development the indicative financial implications of establishing the Equal Opportunities Commission. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has affirmed that all interventions relating to the Equal Opportunities Commission under the proposed legislation are to be mainstreamed within the resource envelope allocated to the Social Development Sector on a year-by-year basis within the medium-term expenditure framework ceiling.

I would like to thank hon. Ndeezi for raising this question. As you see, Sir, the sector minister responsible for this is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I liaised with her actually - I showed her this answer in draft form in the presence of hon. Kinobe and she did not object to this rendition. Thank you, Sir.  

THE SPEAKER: Any supplementary questions?

10.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH AND CHILD AFFAIRS (Maj. (Rtd) James Kinobe): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I just want to go on record, Sir, to confirm that the submission made by the hon. Attorney-General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is correct. With the support of this House, definitely when the Bill gets here we shall be finishing that assignment as required by the Constitution. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What we can say, if the Bill is brought to us –(Interjection)– do you have a supplementary question?

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I thank both ministers for answering the question but I remain worried. According to the Constitution, this Parliament must approve this Bill by 31st September but both ministers have not actually answered when the Bill will come to Parliament. So it should be on record that in case this Parliament fails to pass the Bill by the 31st of September, it will be Cabinet to blame. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This is what I was going to explain in that since we are completing considering the reports on the Budget from the committees’ today, we shall have some time. If the Bill comes to us in a week or two, we shall be able to handle it because after considering these reports, we are going to form a Committee of Supply to approve the figures for purposes of preparing the Appropriations Bill, which is a legal instrument signifying our approval. 

Then the other business remaining is the Bills, which the Minister of Finance laid on the Table; those Bills, which support the Budget, namely the Finance Bill, the VAT Bill - I think they were about five. After we do this then you will have to consider those Bills. When we clear those Bills authorising a grant or loan then that will be cleared. Therefore, we will be able in September, which is starting tomorrow - if the Bill comes to us, we will process it so that it becomes law. So you should not worry about that.

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring up something relating to the peace talks, which are taking place Juba -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not on the Order Paper.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
I)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2005/2006
II)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2006/2007

PRESENTATION CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2006/7

10.24
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Peter Nyombi): Mr Speaker, I represent Nakasongola constituency and I am Independent but the people of Nakasongola constituency directed me to sit on the right hand side of the Speaker and that is where I sit. 

I have the honour to present the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the budget estimates for the Financial year 2006/7. I will try to summarise the report as much as possible.  

On page 1 there is the introduction that gives the basis for giving this report, and clause 11 is on the different departments that are covered in this report. Clause 12 is on the methodology that we applied in compiling this report. Nevertheless, Mr Speaker, there are some general comments that I need to make regarding our observations and they are on page 2.  

One, is that the MTEF ceiling for institutions is unrealistic and do not take into consideration the changes in the institutions that we considered. Two, there were wage shortages reported in a number of institutions that we looked at; and three, there is a high staff turnover due to poor terms and conditions of service in most of the departments that we looked at, and finally the problem of accommodation in all these institutions is quite big and has to be handled.

There are annexes to this report, and now I want to go the Ministry of Justice, specifically under clause 2.0, we cover the functions of the ministry generally. That is to provide legal advice and legal services as well as supporting the machinery that provides legal framework for good governance.  

On page 3 we outline the key, planned activities for the Financial year 2005/06. These were the activities that were planned by the Ministry of Justice and then we go on to the key achievements in general of those activities that were planned for the year 2005/6 and then we go on to the planned activities under the Justice Sector, that is, the last paragraph on page 3.  

We were able to make the following observations and recommendations:

On the issue of compensation we observed that there is need to have a known criterion for paying compensation and court awards. Although the Ministry of Justice said it has a data base, which holds information on all approved compensation and court awards cases, we were not satisfied as a committee that it followed the criteria outlined. It was observed that some cases that met the above criteria have been pending for the last 16 years without payment and continue to accrue interest. We give examples of two cases below:

Osotraco Ltd, which was awarded on 1st January 1990 and whose judgement amount was Shs 72,000,000, has accumulated to Shs 370,970,262 with interest of Shs 298,970,292 and still has an outstanding balance of Shs 148,698,877. 

Knight Aviation was awarded on 15th April 2005 a judgement amount of Shs 1,053,098,045 with no accruing interest, which has already been paid. 

We also observed that the budget for the Financial year 2006/7 makes no reference to the compensation arrears. The arrears are not provided for in the budget and, therefore, these are our recommendations:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
(a)	The Ministry of Justice should come out with a time table for settling court awards and compensation. 

(b)	The Ministry of Justice should strictly follow the first in first out principle to settle the awards and compensation.  

(c)	The committee that handles payments should be strengthened. 

(d)	A provision for compensation of arrears should be made.

On the issue of the reported high staff turnover especially of state attorneys, we give the reasons why there has been a high turnover and recommend as follows: 

The relevant ministries should constantly review salaries to make them competitive and to ensure staff retention. A comparison of the salary that is paid to a member of staff, a lawyer in the Ministry of Justice to a lawyer who is in private practice, shows that there is such a big variation and as a result the salaries in the Ministry of Justice are not attractive.

On the recurrent budget of the Ministry, we recommended that there should be an increase in the recurrent budget to cater for the increased activities of the Ministry.

Three, we observed that the Ministry had embarked on the process of revising and modifying the Bills that lapsed during the Seventh Parliament, and that the government is making preparations for further consultations on their status such as the Domestic Relations Bill.

The committee recommends that the lapsed Bills should be expeditiously re-introduced and the government should speed up and conclude consultations on the Domestic Relations Bill, to enable its re-introduction to Parliament.

We were informed that this Bill has been pending since the 1960s and it has never been resolved. Either Parliament passes the Bill, or it is gotten rid of.

The Directorate of Civil Litigation:

The directorate carries out the functions entrusted with the Attorney-General by Article 119 of the Constitution. It represents the government and certain institutions in courts of law and the achievements of this department are reflected in the second paragraph under clause 2(1). 

Observations and recommendations:

The committee observed that there has been an increased number of cases against the government and the reasons why there has been this increase are given. We also observed that cases that are lost out number those that are won. The reasons for that are also given below:

1.	Lack of instructions or inadequate instructions from Government departments or institutions for which Government is sued.
2.	Failure by Government witnesses to attend.
3.	Non-compliance with legal advice from the Attorney-General.
4.	Inadequate number of state attorneys; and lack of facilitation.

However, the committee observed that some ministries have set up desk offices to liaise with the Attorney-General’s Chambers and we hope if this is done in all the ministries, maybe the government may not suffer as many cases as it is doing. So the committee recommends as follows:

(1)	More state attorneys should be recruited to alleviate the shortage of lawyers who handle cases on behalf of Government.  

(2)	The terms and conditions of service of the current staff should be improved to ensure staff retention.
 
(3) 	Every ministry should have a trained desk officer and each of the officers should be charged with responsibility to ensure attendance of witnesses.

(4) 	Every year the Attorney-General should prepare a comprehensive list of witnesses who fail to comply and indicate action taken against the witnesses.

Then, we looked at the Directorate of the First Parliamentary Counsel, which is responsible for drafting all Bills before they are introduced in Parliament and we give the achievements for the year 2005.  

It is a statutory requirement under the Local Governments Act that all legislations passed by the district councils and municipalities must be vetted by the Attorney-General to certify that they are consistent with the Constitution and other laws enacted by Parliament.  

Some of the ordinances received are not well drafted, so the First Parliamentary Counsel has the duty to redraft them and there are delays by the local Government councils in returning signed ordinances for publication.  

The committee recommends as follows:

(1) 	The Government should facilitate the training of relevant staff in the local Government to enhance their capacity to handle drafting.  
(2) 	Basic legal training and training in legal drafting should be made mandatory for clerks to council.  
(3) 	Funds for publication of ordinances should be availed to the Ministry of Justice, which does the publication, to minimise the delay of publication caused by local governments.
(4) 	Establish feedback and follow up mechanisms to expedite the processing of ordinances.  

We looked at the Directorate of Legal Advisory Services and the achievements of the department are outlined there, and thereafter on page 8, the last paragraph, the observations and recommendations: 

The committee wanted to know whether the Attorney-General has had an opportunity to review agreements related to the oil industry and how favourable they are to the country.  

The committee asked for the copy of the contract, which the Attorney-General is yet to avail.  

The committee recommended that the Attorney-General avails a copy of the contract to them, which is mandated to carry out an oversight role.  

The committee observed that there are provisions of the law that are declared unconstitutional to the court rulings and this could be accordingly amended.  

The committee recommended that the Attorney-General should, unless there is a pending appeal, notify the affected ministries or department of the ruling of the constitutional court and ensure that the amendments to laws affected by the rulings of the court are made and promptly submitted to Parliament for enactment.  

The Uganda Registration Services Bureau:

The bureau is responsible for the official registration of births, deaths, marriages, documents, trademarks, copyrights, patents, utility models, industrial designs and official receiver matters. 

Observations and recommendations:  

The Ministry of Justice is opening up regional branches in phases. This is to decentralise its services to regions, to increase its services to the local people and ultimately increase the number of registrations. Currently the bureau does not have adequate human resource capacity to deploy in the regional offices.

The committee further observed that there is no system for collection of data and, therefore, there is no database on birth and death.

The committee made five recommendations:

1.	The Ministry of Public Service should expedite the restructuring process to enable effective discharge of the duties.

2.	The bureau should be facilitated to print standard certificates and register books. 

3.	More state attorneys should be recruited in the department. 

4.	The bureau should establish a database of births and deaths. 

5.	The bureau should expedite legal reforms to logical conclusion.

We looked at the Department of the Administrator General/Public Trustee. The function of the department is given there below and so are the achievements. The observations follow on until page 10, the last paragraph.  

The committee observed that there is a high turnover of professional staff because of poor terms and conditions of services, and the department is unable to cope with the volume of work. The committee recommended as follows:

(a)	The process of restructuring the department should be expedited to make it more efficient. 
(b)	The performance of the department should be reviewed with a view of improving terms and conditions of service.  

We looked also at the Law Council, which is established by the Advocates Act. The functions of the Law Council are given there and so are its achievements during the year 2005/2006. Our observations and recommendations follow in the last paragraphs on page 11.  

The committee observed that although the Law Council was established, it has not been operationalised. The council is currently manned by part-time staff and, therefore, the committee recommended that the Ministries of Public Service and that of Justice should expedite the restructuring process.  

We also went to the Centre for Arbitration and Dispute Resolution (CADER), which was established by an Act of Parliament. Whereas CADRE is in the Ministry of Justice, there has been a problem with it accessing funds and, therefore, the committee made the following observations and recommendations:

1.	The use of alternative dispute resolution in settlement of disputes has contributed immensely to the administration of justice. It is expeditious, less expensive and less strenuous to the parties with limited facilitation. 
 
2.	CADRE is currently housed by the Commercial Court Division (CCD). The committee therefore recommends as follows:

(a)	The Ministry of Justice and that of Finance should facilitate the centre to access a wage budget.  
(b)	The Ministry of Justice and the parent ministry should help CADRE procure an independent space for its operations.  
(c)	The Ministry of Justice should expeditiously introduce the relevant Bill for amendment of the Act to enable CADRE access funding.

The committee made the following recommendations on the Budget proposals:

Vote 007 – Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the recurrent wage is Shs 1,338,400,000 and the non-wage is Shs 7,284,303,000; while the development is Shs 22,480,000,000.

Vote 007 – Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, court awards Shs 2,050,000,000, court awards arrears are Shs 11,081,000,000, compensation is at Shs 0.  

The Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP):

The Directorate is created by Article 120 of the Constitution, which mandates it to conduct and control criminal prosecutions in the country. The key planned programmes and activities are outlined there on page 13, and so are the achievements.  

Observations and recommendations:

The recurrent budget of the DPP has been static and therefore not matched with the increased staff levels as per the approved structure. The effect of this is reflected in those five bullets. The committee expressed concern that private lawyers were paid exorbitant sums of money to handle a single case given that the amount is equal to a whole year’s wage budget for the Directorate.  

The committee observed that these funds could have been used to recruit more staff, to build the capacity of staff, to improve their terms of service and reduce on the backlog of cases; and therefore the committee recommended that in cases where the DPP may wish to procure services of private lawyers, the provisions of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act should be complied with, and the persistent case backlog affects the administration of justice.  

Therefore, the committee recommends that the relevant authorities should expedite the appointment of more judges to enhance the performance of the Judiciary and the amendment of the Magistrates Courts Act. 

The committee recommended that the budget of the DPP be approved as follows:

Vote 133 - Directorate of Public Prosecutions, recurrent wage is Shs 2,530,000,000; non-wage is Shs 1,801,000,000; and development is Shs 290,000,000. 

The Judiciary:

The mission of the Judiciary is to provide timely administration and delivery of justice to all people of Uganda. The key planned programmes and activities are outlined there and the achievements are also given. The observations and recommendations are at the bottom of page 16:

Court system - case backlog clearance proposal:

Despite implementation of the current phase of the case backlog programme, backlog of cases has continued to build up in courts. This is due to understaffing, inadequate facilitation for session funds, operational funds for the courts and logistical support.  

The committee recommends that a special programme be implemented over a specific period of time and thereafter courts would revert to the normal case hearing methodology. It was recommended that senior private lawyers could be recruited to act as judges for a given period of time so that the backlog of cases can be dealt with. This has ever been done in the 1970s.  

The funding gaps for implementation of the special programme for financial year 2006/2007 include the details given there. The committee recommends as follows: 

The Judiciary should be facilitated with financial support for the special programme to enable it reduce the case backlog as well as build capacity to effectively and efficiently deliver justice.  

Land Tribunals:

Land Tribunals are provided for under Article 243 of the 1995 Constitution and were established under S.74-79 of the Land (Amendment) Act, No.1 of 2004.  

The Land Tribunals have been transferred to the Judiciary. Currently the staffing is inadequate; there are only 16 chairpersons for 56 districts with each rotating in about three to five districts. The increase in districts has not yet been provided for. Land tribunals are manned by a chairman and two members. It was observed further that the contracts of the current chairpersons and members expire in December 2006 and gratuity for them amounts to Shs 243 million, which has not been provided for in the Budget. The budget requirement for the land tribunals is indicated on page 18.  

The committee, therefore, recommends as follows:

All members of the tribunals should be full-time.

Retainer fees of Shs 201,600,000 for members are provided this financial year.

The Government should mobilise for Shs 243,000,000 for the payment of gratuity to chairpersons and members whose contracts are due to expire.

The operations of land tribunals should be reviewed with a view of improving the delivery of justice on land matters.

The Commercial Court:

The Commercial Court has since its inception been receiving support from the sector. The committee’s recommendations are given here below:

The Justice Sector should revisit and review this provision for the Commercial Court.

The Government should provide essential funding to the Judiciary if the goal of establishing the Commercial Court to expedite commercial disputes, encouraging foreign investments and reducing poverty is to be achieved.

Inspection of Courts:

The Inspector of Courts has been receiving Shs 225,000,000 annually. The committee recommends as follows: 

(a) 	The Justice, Law and Order Sector should revisit and review its provisions to the Inspector of Courts to enable the inspectorate supervise the lower courts and ensure adherence to standards in the administration of justice.

(b) 	The Government should increase funding to the Judiciary to support inspection activities essential to the improved performance of the judicial officers.

Welfare of judicial officers:

There is need to review the welfare of judicial officers. The last salary increase was in 1994. This financial year, Shs 2,000,000,000 has been provided to increase the salary of judges and to cater for the recruitment of new ones. However, the other judicial officers have been left out. The committee recommends that the salaries of other judicial officers should also be revised.

Operational facilities for magistrates:

We recommend that the operational funds for the chief magistrates’ areas be revised, and the chief magistrates be facilitated with transport to enable them cover the areas within their jurisdiction. There are only 28 chief magistrates in the whole country and about 102 Grade I magistrates. Meanwhile, Grade II magistrates are being phased out. The committee recommends that the budgetary provision is made for the requisite manpower and the basic facilities.  

The committee therefore recommends that the budget of the Judiciary be approved as follows:

Vote 101 – Judiciary, recurrent wage is Shs 10,150,000,000; non-wage is Shs 10,038, 433,000; and development is Shs 16,259,176,000.

The Uganda Law Reform Commission:

The mandate of the Commission is derived from Article 248 of the Constitution of Uganda and its powers are stipulated under S.11 of the Uganda Law Reform Commission Act. The key, planned programmes and activities for the year 2005 and 2006 are also outlined there below. The achievements of this department are given on page 21, second paragraph. These are our observations and recommendations, Mr Speaker:

The committee observed that there is a shortage of Shs 116,000,000 in the wage bill for the approved structure. 

The committee recommends that the gap in the wage, the gratuity and the statutory allowances be provided for as these are mandatory payments.
  
The commission requires Shs 637,000,000 for printing of revised principle laws of 2001-2004. It was observed that this has stalled the process of printing the laws and is creating a backlog in the process of updating the law, and thus making it hard to access the law.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 637,000,000 be provided for; and that the Ministry of Finance does facilitate the Uganda Law Reform Commission to retain its non-tax revenue.

The committee observed that sometimes there is delay in processing Bills and, therefore, the committee recommended that the budget of the Uganda Law Reform Commission be passed as follows:

Vote 105 - Uganda Law Reform Commission (ULRC), recurrent wage is Shs 496,822,000, non-wage is Shs 2,772,925,000; and development is Shs 1,128,100,000.

The Judicial Service Commission is established under Article 146 of the Constitution. The mandate and the functions are given on page 25. The key achievements in the year 2005/2006 are also given. The observations and recommendations are given in the last three paragraphs on page 23.  

The committee recommends as follows:

(1) 	That where such circumstances arise, the appropriate organ should expedite the process to enable institutions to continue carrying out their mandate.

(2)	Implement the Judicial Service Commission Act to grant the commission a self-accounting status to enable it directly negotiate its budget and its financial year estimates to be treated in accordance with Article 155 of the Constitution.

(3)	The committee also recommends that the proposed law be expedited to facilitate the work of the commission.

(4)	The committee further recommended that the resolution of Parliament be implemented. There is a resolution that was passed during the Seventh Parliament requiring an addition of five judges each year, so the committee is recommending that that resolution be implemented. 

(5)	The Justice Sector should explore the possibility of having a special programme to handle the backlog of cases.

(6)	Associate judges could be sourced to handle a specific number of cases.

(7)	The commission should be provided with necessary funding to enable it discharge its duties.

(8)	The process of de-linking staff from the Public Service Commission to the Judicial Service Commission should be expedited to enable the Judicial Service Commission to have full control over its staff.

(9)	The committee also recommended that an increase in the development of funding be made to enable the commission procure basic facilities.  

Therefore, the committee recommends as follows regarding the budget of the Judicial Service Commission, Vote 148: the recurrent wage is Shs 500,000,000, the non-wage is Shs 950,001,000, and the development is Shs 65,000,000.

The Law Development Center is established under the Law Development Center Act, Cap 132. Under the law, the LDC is mandated to carryout the functions listed in the report. The key, planned activities for the Law Development Center are given in the last paragraph on page 25 and the key achievements are given in the second paragraph on page 26. Our observations are given in the last three paragraphs on page 26 and, therefore, the committee recommends:

1.	That the Ministry of Justice should prioritise payment of LDC arrears.

2.	The Government should make timely payment for the government-sponsored students to save LDC any further financial pressures.

3.	Under clause 3, the committee recommends that the wage bill should be topped up and fully paid by the government.

4.	Under clause 4, the committee recommends that the center should be provided with development funds to enable it cater for the increased intake of students and to put up a better structure.

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me. Give me just one minute to introduce, in the gallery we have development partners of Kyadondo East Rural Women Development Association led by Ms Bitten of Mother Courage, Norway. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. 

MR NYOMBI: On page 28 at the top, the committee recommends that Government honours its obligation to provide funding for the Legal Aid Clinic.  

5. 	Under clause 6, the committee recommends that the center be facilitated to procure better facilities for publication.

6. 	The committee under clause 4 recommends that since the LDC operates its own Vote, it should be able to get all budgetary related communications and to directly do negotiations with the Ministry of Finance.

Therefore, the committee recommends as follows with regards to the budget of the Law Development Center Vote 109, recurrent wage is Shs 857,000,000, non-wage is Shs 323,000,000, and the development is Shs 1,780,000,000. 

The Electoral Commission is established under Article 60 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The key, planned activities are outlined in paragraph 2 and the achievements of the Electoral Commission are outlined in paragraph 3, on page 29. Our observations and recommendations are reflected on page 30. The observations are that: 

The domestic arrears for which work was undertaken in the field of the Financial year 2001/2002 were verified by the Auditor-General and forwarded for settlement. Shs 467,000,000 was released, leaving a balance of Shs 3,700,000. The debt impacts negatively on the image of the commission. The committee, therefore, recommends that the arrears be paid as continued non-payment would be turned into a political matter.

Under clause 2, the committee recommends that the code of conduct be finalised by the Ministry of Justice and adopted by all political parties.

There should be continuous civil education to educate the population on the problem of bribery.

The committee recommends that the issue of the wage bill is a mandatory payment and should be addressed.

On page 31, the committee recommends that the government should assist the commission to obtain an appropriate piece of land to build its headquarters.

The committee further recommended that the Ministry of Finance should always discuss with stakeholders to enable rational budgeting where activities of the institution can be prioritised.

The Electoral Commission should be adequately facilitated because of its role, and for good governance.

Relevant authorities should ensure that laws are passed in a timely manner to enable the Electoral Commission adequate time to carry out requisite activities.

With respect to the budget of the commission the committee recommends as follows: Vote 102, the Electoral Commission, recurrent wage is Shs 5,509,337,000, non-wage is Shs 11,400,623,000, and development is Shs 330,000,000.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission was established under Article 51 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Its key activities are outlined in the second part of paragraph 9. The achievements during financial year 2005 are also outlined on page 32.

These are the observations:

Only 291 places of detention were visited out of 263,000. The commission’s activities were limited by inadequate human resource and transport facilities. Therefore, the committee recommends that the commission be facilitated with funds to enable it to execute its functions in this regard.

The commission has a national mandate but it has offices in only 7 out of the 70 districts or so. The committee recommends that the commission be facilitated to open up offices in Arua and Masaka. 

The committee recommends that the Uganda Human Rights Commission should be facilitated to carry out civic education on a continuous basis.

On page 34 under clause 6, the committee recommends that the wage bill - a mandatory payment should be fully funded.

Under clause 7, the committee recommends that the government should give the commission adequate funds to enable it carry out its mandate other than leaving it to the mercy of the donors. Therefore, with regards to the budget of the committee, the committee recommends as follows:

Recurrent wage is Shs 1,430,000,000, non-wage is Shs 1,448,000,000, and development expenditure is Shs 5,972,816,000.

The Inspectorate of Government’s office was established under chapter 13 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Its key, planned activities for the Financial year 2005/06 are outlined on page 35. Its achievements are also outlined on page 35 and its ongoing activities are also given on page 35.

There are observations regarding this office, on page 36, including that the IGG indicated that lack of its own office space leads to reduction of operational funds to meet the shortfall in accommodation. Construction of its own office premises would give the Inspectorate a level of independence.  

The committee was informed that consultations are going on with the Ministry of Finance whose idea is to build an accountability house that will accommodate all institutions under the accountability sector. The committee awaits the result of the consultations.

The IGG indicated that the institution had had difficulty in obtaining information from the members of the public. There has also been non-compliance with the IGG’s recommendation by various institutions and individuals. 

The Government should comply with the requirements of Article 231(4) of the Constitution to submit regular reports on action taken on the reports of the IGG.

The committee noted with concern that the offices of the IGG and that of the Attorney-General seem not to have a proper working relationship. The committee was able to look at the correspondences that have been going on between the two offices and it was able to make some assessment. However, it deemed it wise to study this matter further and make appropriate recommendations to the House in future.

The Constitutional Court’s rulings of 2004 annulled some sections of the Leadership Code Act. The committee recommends that steps should be taken to ensure that the Leadership Code Act is amended to take into consideration the Constitutional Court ruling. 

And, therefore, with respect to the budget of Inspectorate of Government, the committee recommends as follows: recurrent wage is Shs 2,180,000,000, non-wage is Shs 6,290,000,000, and development expenditure is Shs 5,905,640,000.

The Parliamentary Commission is established by the Administration of Parliament Act, 1998, and it is charged with the responsibility of providing overall policy guidance on the administration of Parliament.

These are the observations of the committee:

The Eighth Parliament has 322 Members. The number is to increase further with women representatives from the 11 new districts coming. The Eighth Parliament is a multi-party Parliament, which requires for a revised sitting arrangement in both the Chambers and in offices. 

Whereas previously it was possible for Members who had different political shades to share one office as a district, now it is deemed better to have different offices for different political shades. There is urgent need to construct new Chambers. The costs for constructing the new Chambers are included in the commissions’ budget submission for development expenditure for the Financial year 2006/2007.

The multi-party setting has also created new offices of the Opposition, the Leader of the Opposition and the attendant staff. There is, therefore, need to rent office space for Members and staff of Parliament. A sum of Shs 1,298,806,560 has been included in the recurrent budget for this purpose. 

Parliament also needs to furnish and equip offices of Members of Parliament. The new officials of the House and the additional staff of the Parliamentary Commission should be recruited. Provisions have been made under the development budget for this purpose. 

It is observed that the submission of the Parliamentary Commission does not include the funds for the women representatives for the 11 new districts and transport facilitation for Members of Parliament. The committee recommends that the budget of the commission be passed as indicated, however, supplementary funding will be sought to cater for the women representatives from the 11 new districts and the other activities that have necessitated a new political dispensation. 

The committee therefore recommends that the budget of Parliament be passed as follows: wage, Shs 8,174,695,000, non-wage is Shs 46,569,707,000, the development is Shs 13,852,057,893; and the total is Shs 68,596,423,893.

Mr Speaker, during our deliberations, the issue of the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly was brought up. There was a plea that the budget of the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly be amalgamated within the budget of the Parliamentary Commission. We were told that a resolution to that effect was passed in the Seventh Parliament. It is, therefore, our prayer that the budget of the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly be included in that of the Parliamentary Commission.

Page 39 gives a summary of recommended budget proposals for the year 2006/2007. The committee recommends that the budget for the financial year 2006/07 be approved as follows: Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice, wage is Shs 1,338,400,000, non-wage is Shs 7,284,303,000, the development is Shs 22,480,000,000, the court awards are at Shs 2,050,000,000, the court award arrears are at Shs 11,810,000,000; and the compensation is at Shs 0.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that this budget be approved.
  
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman and members of the committee. It is a big report with a number of sectors.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, going by our Rules of Procedure on attire or dress code, is the hon. Member for Maracha County, hon. Onzima decently dressed? Are other Members of Parliament able to come to Parliament dressed in the same attire tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you see the problem is that our rules – what do our rules say about dressing? Can I ask the senior Member of Parliament, hon. Ben Wacha – can you recollect for me the rules on attire? (Laughter)

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, you are trying to make me a judge in this matter, which you should appropriately handle -(Laughter)- but I know that the rule says that for male Members of Parliament, a suit and a tie, a jacket and a pair of trousers, a Kaunda suit or traditional attire, which is a kanzu et cetera. But the decision as to whether a Member is appropriately attired depends on what the Speaker says. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You mean it is a question of discretion of the Speaker? No, I think what you do is, there are national dresses, which may not be mentioned here maybe from DRC or from West Africa, but the problem with hon. Onzima is that he has mixed up, the top is not the same as the trousers and that complicates it. I think something should be done to change. If you want to have that dress, it should be complete from top to bottom. Either you have a complete suit as we know it, or you have that kind of dress. We shall find out to which country that dress belongs, but it should be complete so please, do the needful. 

11.12
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS & ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Erias Lukwago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the outset I would say the Opposition effectively participated in the proceedings of the committee and we do associate with the observations and recommendations made. So I intend to be very brief on areas upon which we wanted to put much emphasis. I will be very brief considering the time limits we have.  

The Opposition would wish to make observations on a few sectors:

The Judiciary: we do note that the problem of case backlog still, notwithstanding the well-stated mission of the sector, which is to provide timely administration and delivery of justice to all the people of Uganda. The statistics given in the policy statement of the sector indicate that the performance of the Judiciary in terms of dispensation of justice for the financial year 2005/06 is below average. Because if you look at the cases disposed of by the High Court alone, 2,026 cases out of 6,442 cases registered, the chief magistrates disposed of only 730 cases out of 12,663 cases registered, and the list goes on.

Mr Speaker, we do not need to mention that this dismal performance of the Judiciary leaves a score of Ugandans languishing in police cells – (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Is it really in order for the hon. Onzima to insist and go on to read a magazine after your ruling that he should go out because he is not properly dressed? Mr Speaker, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: He is not in order. Honourable member, please do the needful.

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, I don’t want to challenge your ruling but I want to appeal to you that I have been with you in this House for 11 years. Right from 1996 this is what I have been putting on and actually if you read further, I think there is a provision for this kind of attire. Further to that, I live 16 kilometers away from this Parliament House and yet I have a very important contribution to make in this House right now. May I, therefore, request that if that is your position, give me the opportunity to make a contribution and then we sort it out later? I just beg you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: I think you should have started with that but somebody had to draw my attention to the fact that you had not complied with the order. The question of having dressed in that way many times, to which the attention of the Speaker was never drawn to in the first place, is not an excuse. Please, just go and do the needful and then come back. I think it is better that way. We should not use other means to enforce the ruling. Thank you very much. (Mr Onzima thereupon exited the Chamber.)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I beg to proceed. Before that interruption, the submission I was making was that this dismal performance of the Judiciary in terms of dispensation of justice leaves a score of Ugandans languishing in police cells, remand prisons and other detention centers, gazetted or un-gazetted.

The prolonged litigation in terms of civil matters is inimical to economic development and growth and it constitutes a disincentive to genuine investors and the reasons advanced for this piling up of cases in the shelves of judicial registries inter alia include inadequate remuneration and facilitation of the staff, understaffing, et cetera.  

Mr Speaker, we do associate with the recommendations of the committee but we would specifically propose the following:

That this financial year Government should constitute the Supreme Court fully by appointing a Justice of the Supreme Court to fill the gap left by the late Justice Hagai Arthur Oder.  

The Government should also recruit four justices of appeal to bring the total number to 12.  
It should also recruit 17 judges of the High Court to bring the total number to 50.  
It should recruit 48 chief magistrates to bring the total number to 77.  
It should recruit 44 Grade I magistrates to bring the total number to 150.  
Recruit six High Court registrars and 18 deputy registrars and increase the High Courts from the current seven to cover all the sub-regions of the country.  

The Government should also improve on the remuneration of the judicial officers by at least 50 percent. In addition to the recommendation made by the committee about the welfare of the magistrates, we do propose that a minimum basic facility in terms of housing, transport and medical care would greatly improve the welfare of the judicial officers. 

The reason advanced there, Mr Speaker, as observed by the committee chairperson in the report, is that the only meaningful increment was last made in 1994 yet these judicial officers are barred from engaging in private business, which would probably augment their meager income. We do propose that their remuneration be considered as a matter of priority.
  
The Government should, in addition to all those measures, consider repealing the law of “idle and disorderly” which is archaic and repressive but contributes to a considerable percentage of the case backlog and of course congestion of our prisons. 
 
The Government should also consider the issue of operationalising the Khadhi Courts provided for under the courts of judicature, that is, under Article 129 of the Constitution, to handle matters of marriage, divorce, inheritance of property and guardians for those who profess the Moslem faith. Indeed this is long overdue because the Sheikhs and experts in Sharia law are anxiously waiting to handle disputes relating to that.  

We do also propose that the government should address the genuine concerns raised by the Uganda Judicial Officers Association in their memorandum presented to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. The current trend of rewarding politicians with judicial appointments at the expense of career judicial officers is eroding their commitment to the job and thereby causing a significant number to quit for greener pastures. This concern should be addressed in addition to other recommendations made.  

The Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP):

The Opposition has noted with profound concern the DPP’s claim that the operations of the directorate were during the Financial year 2005/2006 constrained by inter alia a static wage and non-wage recurrent budget, insufficient funds to train staff and lack of transport for field officers. Yet in the same financial year we sourced out private lawyers of Kampala Associated Advocates to prosecute one case against Col (Rtd) Dr Kiiza Besigye at a whopping cost of Shs 2,500,000,000, which was equal to the entire wage bill of the whole directorate as observed by the committee.  

We also note that this expenditure was not provided for in the directorate’s approved Vote for the financial year in question. The DPP claims that he has already disbursed Shs 1,000,000,000 to the said lawyers out of the non-wage supplementary budget, but records show that no supplementary budget has ever been approved for that particular purpose by this august House, nor by the Seventh Parliament as required under Article 154 of the Constitution and other relevant laws notably the Public Finance and Accountability Act as well as other regulations.  

Mr Speaker, the DPP further contends that he did not follow the procedure laid down under Section 8 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act and the regulations there under simply because those provisions are at variance with the provisions of Section 74 of the Advocates’ Act. The Advocates’ Act makes it an offence for an advocate to advertise his professional service. It is our considered opinion that this argument is untenable both in law and good conscience. The PPDA as well as regulations there under provide for several options that a procuring and disposing entity, in this case the DPP, would apply depending on the circumstances. These include open domestic bidding, restricted domestic bidding, quotation and proposal. The DPP portentously failed to choose any of the aforesaid appropriate methods. Besides, there is no conflict of laws as you will observe that the law cited –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is it realistic for me to choose a lawyer to do it by that method - procuring a lawyer’s service, that people bid and that I am going to pay you less so that I can – is it how you can choose a lawyer?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, there are procedures laid down under the PPDA regulations, so those ones are applicable to the procuring and disposing entity.

THE SPEAKER: Suppose it is a medical service and you want a specialist to work on you, do you say, “People should bid”, and therefore you choose a person who claims a low fee then you leave others? I do not know, I am not saying it was proper but there is a problem in choosing legal service or some professional service.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate your observation and I would not wish to dwell much on that point but the issue is that the law is mandatory. It makes no exceptions of the PPDA Act and the regulations there under. 

In addition to that I was saying that the Advocates Act was amended by the Seventh Parliament to allow advertising in accordance with regulations made by the Law Council. On top of that, Mr Speaker, under the PPDA Act, Section 82, you can make a proposal, we are not talking of advertising only as the means of procuring public service - I mean getting services but you can as well use the proposal method and this is why I am saying all these options were not explored by the DPP.  

These are the recommendations we would make in regard to that particular matter:

That the government should not pay the balance of Shs 1,500,000,000 and in any case it is not even provided for in the budgetary proposal made by the DPP. In addition to that, this is a matter of great public concern and we would wish it to have the matter investigated probably by a select committee. We want to see how this money was disbursed, its source, the rationale for such inordinate expenditure and the possibility of having it recovered. And probably bring those people who are involved in this matter to book because this is a matter of great public concern.

The Human Rights Commission:

The Opposition observes from the policy statement that among the chronic budgetary hindrances the Human Rights Commission is encountering are insufficient budgetary allocations, inadequate logistical support, insufficient manpower and persistent torture and delay in compensation by the Attorney-General for the victims, among others.  

Our interests have already been addressed by the committee but we would wish to specifically address the august House on the issue of persistent torture, which is causing budgetary implications to the commission. When you look at the compensation portfolio for the victims of human rights abuses, it has skyrocketed to Shs 797,000,000 yet it is only Shs 313,000,000 which has so far been settled, less than 50 percent of the arrears.  

In addition to the recommendations of the committee, we propose that all the remaining unsettled arrears be cleared this fiscal year. This is because these are victims of gross human rights violations and they would be subjected to double jeopardy if after getting a remedy from the Human Rights Commission they don’t get the compensation as directed by the commission.

We also propose that Government takes legal action against the individual Government functionaries implicated in the findings of the Human Rights Commission as perpetrators of human rights violations or torture.  

The Government should disband all the notorious extra legal paramilitary organisations such as Kalangala Action Plan and VCCU that are reputed for subjecting innocent people to inhuman and degrading treatment. We also propose that all safe houses and torture chambers be closed forthwith because they are unconstitutional.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, you would see that a considerable portion of the Vote for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs goes to the settlement of court arrears. You realise from the policy statement of last financial year, the Attorney-General paid Shs 25 billion and there are arrears amounting to Shs 55 billion. This is a manifestation of non-compliance with the law by various Government departments. So, we do implore Government departments to observe the rule of law so that we avoid that kind of litigation, which is impacting heavily on the Consolidated Fund.

Clash between the IGG and the Attorney-General:

We do associate ourselves with the recommendations of the committee that this matter calls for the concern of this House and should be studied further. But in the meantime there should be a “ceasefire.” There should be a cessation of hostilities between the two institutions, Mr Speaker. They should cease hurling insults at each other. 

We recommend that the people implicated in the reports of the IGG should not rush to the Attorney-General to reverse those reports or orders of the IGG. To seek redress in that way, the Attorney-General would be turning himself into an appeal tribunal, reviewing the orders of the IGG.  

Likewise, these observations made by the IGG that there is too much collusion in the department of the Attorney-General also call for further substantiation and better particulars but in the meantime we propose that there should be a cessation of hostilities. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you know, we agreed to allocate 1 hour and 30 minutes to each report and it is almost an hour since we started, so be brief. Whoever wants to make a contribution is to be given not more than five minutes.

And one more thing, I do not know who is going to explain it because it is in the report and I am the Chairman of the Parliamentary Commission, but you need not labour about this issue of vehicles, which were not provided for. The Commission is trying to negotiate and find a solution so please, do not bring it up. It is better we handle it the way we are handling it.

11.32
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman for the report. I just want to make one or two observations. 

One, the Shadow Minister for Justice is recommending the setup of a select committee to find out about the money that was paid to the private lawyers. But as a member of that committee, when the Minister appeared before them didn’t he have an opportunity to ask him and if he did, what did the Minister say?

Secondly, there is this issue of using the number of cases cleared by the Judiciary as a measure of success of the Judiciary. My observation is that the clearing of cases by the judges or the chief magistrates is a factor of many factors. If the investigations have not been done properly due to lack of either proper facilitation or training, then it will affect how long it takes for the case to be cleared. I had an opportunity to attend one of the court proceedings where the judge was in such a hurry to complete that case that he ordered the defence lawyer to stop cross examining because he was wasting his time. We should look at this at that level because if we are to push too much on clearing cases, we shall end up having too many appeals against judgment.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of high turnover of state attorneys, retention of staff in organisations is also a factor of the many factors. Is it only the salary or the remuneration that affects the working environment of the state attorneys? Two, if the state attorneys demand for a different payment, what about the doctors, soldiers, teachers and the MPs? We need to have a situation where Ugandans become patriotic.

The attorneys in private practice can’t be compared to the ones in Government. Is it possible to establish how much a private lawyer is paid monthly? Private lawyers have many advantages. They can go to politics but those in Government have the advantage of a regular salary. So you need to look at both advantages and disadvantages before pushing for that. In our committee we looked at the possibility of having a unified pay policy so that we could have a uniform pay system in order to stifle this idea of individual agitation, which tends to show off some people as more hard working and others more needy because if you pay the state attorney more and you are paying the Police CID Shs 180,000, are you going to get the results?

Four state attorneys leaving per year are not many because how many come out of the university in a year? Those are my observations, Mr Speaker, and I want us to put them together so that we do not just – let us push together but knowing that so many factors affect the implementation of programmes. Thank you.

11.36
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the work, and the Shadow Cabinet Attorney-General. I have one observation and this is in regard to the Vote of the East African Legislative Assembly. The Members of the East African Legislative Assembly are playing a legislative role, and the doctrine of separation of powers would be to the effect that the three arms of Government: the Legislature, Executive and Judiciary each does its work. However, currently the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly are placed in the budget line of the Executive - in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

This contradicts the treaty because countries like Kenya and Tanzania have had the operations of the East African Legislative Assembly within the Parliamentary budget since 2001. This matter was cleared in the Seventh Parliament but I do not know why it has not appeared here. The Budget Committee made a recommendation to the effect that the Vote be transferred from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Parliamentary Commission, and it does not involve resources. I mean it does not involve more expenditure but just an administrative transfer of the Vote from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Parliamentary Commission.

Actually in the plenary here the Minister of State for Planning then, hon. Isaac Musumba - I just want to quote what he said: “We are talking about Members of the East African Legislative Assembly getting their cheques timely, that is the bottom line. We are going to put in place a mechanism immediately we leave this place, to ensure that this happens through the Parliamentary Commission.”  And the then Minister of Regional Affairs, hon. Nshimye said, “Let the Ministry of Finance and the Parliamentary Commission administratively work out how much is due to the East African Legislative Assembly Members and then remit it to the Commission.”  

Mr Speaker, I just want to once again appeal to the House to consider this very seriously. Whenever the Members of the assembly go out for mobilisation they use donor funds. To me that depicts Uganda negatively because the government must come out willingly to support and in the best way through the Parliamentary Commission –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the honourable colleague. This House made a decision to transfer the funds of the East African Legislative Assembly from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Parliamentary Commission, and she is appealing to the House to once again support a decision that we have already made. I would like to know what happens when Government does not implement the decision of the House; is it brought back to the House to make the same decision, or something else is done?

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, this is the clarification I would also seek from the Minister because I would imagine this is something that we agreed upon in the last Parliament but it has not been effected to date. We have elected Members of the East African Legislative Assembly; I really do not know who is supposed to handle this, but we should expeditiously ensure that the budget for Members of the East African Legislative Assembly is within the Parliamentary Commission to ensure consistency, and coordination. I thank you.

11.41
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Mr Speaker, when this matter came before this House on 9th September 2005, the final decision was that a supplementary would be raised later on and monies, which were remaining under the Vote for Members of the East African Legislative Assembly, would be then technically transferred to the Vote of the Parliamentary Commission. 

It is unfortunate that the Minister concerned, the Minister of Finance, is not here but since my chairman has already indicated that we are going to raise a supplementary for purposes of catering for the newly elected Women Members of Parliament, we should include in our recommendation - if my chairman does not mind - that the same supplementary should also cater for Members of the East African Legislative Assembly under the Vote of the Parliamentary Commission.

THE SPEAKER: No, that cannot be the case because when you ask for a supplementary, you ask for a supplementary for a vote, which exists. But in this particular case that Vote is not with us, it is somewhere else. So, we must first of all bring that vote to here and when it is not enough then we can ask for a supplementary for it. What is being done currently is that we are following it up as a Commission. We are in communication with the Ministry of Finance to ensure that this particular vote is changed to Parliament. Once it comes to Parliament then we will be in position to see if the funds are not enough and, therefore, raise the supplementary. This is what is currently going on.

MR WACHA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was raising the issue of supplementary thinking that by now some money has already been expended. But if it has not yet been expended, then it is unfortunate that Government is not following a decision, which has been made by this House already.

11.43
LT (RTD) SALEH KAMBA (NRM, Kibuku County, Pallisa): Mr Speaker, I also rise to add my voice to those of Members who have contributed to the issue of the East African Legislative Assembly. There is need for the Ugandan Parliament to give their views and input on the status of the East African Federation. As we stand now, there has been no full debate by this Parliament on the issue of the East African Legislative Assembly. 

Also the East African Members of Parliament are representing us at the East African level, meaning that we the Ugandan Parliament are the constituents. Therefore, they are supposed to take our views to the East African Parliament and they are supposed to come back and brief us. However, this is not possible, for unknown reasons. But because these Members are not fully incorporated into our system, I believe it would have been appropriate to make these East African Members of Parliament ex-officios of our Parliament the way we are to our districts.   

THE SPEAKER: For your information, we have a mechanism where the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly can brief us through the committee. But may be what you are suggesting is that we may change our rules to allow one day or so to invite other distinguished visitors to come on the Floor and address us. Otherwise, they will be strangers; Members of the East African Legislative Assembly cannot come here. They cannot be ex-officio, but they can at one occasion or so at intervals be invited to come and brief us.

MR SALEH KAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgency. Actually that is what I was coming to; that where need, maybe we can amend our Rules of Procedure to allow these Members to have at least one or two intervals when they can come and brief us.

Actually the East African Members have so many concerns, which I would call upon this Parliament to take note of and see how best we can help to rectify them. These East African Members are not staff Members of the East African community; at the same time they are not Members of the Ugandan Parliament, so they are in between there. Their mandate, terms of reference, terms and conditions of service are unclear - they are not defined.  

Therefore, I am told they are still under negotiation. Really, the Ugandan Parliament should come up with a concrete position on how we can work in co-ordination with the East African Assembly. Among the many concerns of the East African Legislative Members is that the current reporting system is so inadequate that it does not lead to a full debate in plenary of this Parliament.  

Also, there is a need to institutionalise the working relationship between the Parliamentary committees of Uganda and the corresponding committees of the East African Legislative Assembly, for harmonized working.  

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the welfare of these Members, surely the remuneration of the Members is too low to enable them perform their mandatory duties effectively. Therefore, we need to revise this, especially on our side. Because of the poor facilitation, these other state members like Kenya and Tanzania are subsidizing whereas Uganda is not doing so; making the work of these members very difficult.

Also, there is a need for us to come up with a clear position and we associate ourselves fully with the East African Federation by –(Interruptions)

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My colleague, I would like to inform you that the Committee on Foreign Affairs handled the issues regarding the East African Assembly and its operations. So I thought that that was the time when we would have received some of those contributions. Thank you.

MR KAMBA: Honourable Colleague, thank you for your information. In conclusion –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: When we were dealing with the report on Foreign Affairs, I think it was brought out here that it may be necessary for us to constitute a separate committee to deal with matters of the East African Legislative Assembly. Now we have a Minister for the East African Legislative Assembly. Once we do this, the problem, which we are raising, may be taken care of.  But the other problem of the budget is being worked on. Once we get that committee, I think it will start addressing those issues.  

MR KAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the thorough guidance. As I conclude, it is important that these Members be given all the necessary logistical support and facilitation. So, since you are saying it will be handled in a special committee to be established soon, I think we shall be able to contribute there.

Finally, I would like to react to one issue raised by the Shadow Cabinet Attorney-General. He has raised a serious concern about Kalangala Action Plan. I would like to bring to his attention that as we talk now, Kalangala Action Plan does not exist. If it does, what is its membership and who are the members?

11.48
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to make due observation that there is an increase in the number of cases over which Government is being taken to court. My understanding of the situation is that most of the cases when Government is taken to court are based on human rights abuses. So in total it means there is an increase in the abuse of people’s rights in the country and I think Government should check on that. Otherwise, we have sung about promoting human rights and yet it is indicated here that human rights abuse is on the rise. 

Secondly, it is unfortunate that Government has equally lost most of those cases and the reasoning is that witnesses do not attend. There are certain cases you cannot win however much you testify. So it is basically the nature of the cases that are taken to court that also make Government lose. If a case is fabricated, how do you testify on that case? Of late others have tried to testify and they develop ailments in courts and cases have ended up just like that. So I think we should be conscious of what cases we take to court.

The other thing is non-compliance of Government to the advice of –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: But normally it is not the government, which takes cases to court; Government is sued. Some other person sues Government.

MR OMOLO: Like of recent, Colonel was taken to court for some cases. 

There is the non-compliance to the advice of the Attorney-General; I really sympathize with the Attorney-General. He works with people who do not listen so I feel they should really respect the institution of the Attorney-General and they should respect his advice. Where he advises, people should take it rightly.

The other thing is I thought it would be fair to have a fund in the Human Rights Commission where people who are awarded compensation are paid other than taking the long process of going through the Ministry of Justice. Some people try and get defeated on the way, and they just give it up. So I think they should be taken into account.  

The other point is with regard to the Electoral Commission. I fear that civic education is deliberately not done so that people may vote on an ignorant basis and they are forced to vote the way they are instructed because I see no reason why the Electoral Commission does not do civic education and instead does it on radios and plays music in towns, and that is all about civic education. In the past elections, we saw that happening, music was played in Soroti town –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: I want to seek clarification from my senior, hon. Omolo, when did you vote ignorantly?

MR OMOLO: I assure you I had to take up the responsibility of civic education upon myself, which should have been the responsibility of the Electoral Commission. I think the Electoral Commission should take up its responsibility and make sure that civic education is an on-going process from day one to the election day. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

11.54
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I concur with the Members who have raised this issue of the transfer of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) budget from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Parliamentary Service Commission because the government needs to facilitate these people.  

There is need for vigorous sensitisation of the masses. People need to know more about the East African Community (EAC), how it operates and how they will benefit. They need to know the concept of the customs union and how they will benefit from it. So, Government needs to make an arrangement and fully facilitate these Members of Parliament.  Thank you very much.

11.56
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have just two remarks about the land tribunals. I do not know for how long Government has to wait to see people suffering before it solves a problem! The issue of land tribunals has been raised several times but it appears nobody is taking it up, and it will require a constitutional amendment. Many people are suffering with these land tribunals; they have just failed.  

The Act as conceived then even assumed lower tribunals but they cannot function; even the ones at the district cannot function. You cannot have one chairman rotating between three districts, sitting once a week and sometimes just to adjourn cases. People travel long distances to come and have their matters settled but they are not settled. So I think this matter should now be handled with the urgency it deserves.

The second one is the Administrator-General’s department. This is an important department in our economy. It handles property of our deceased ones, which should be passed to the bereaved, but it is so thinly spread on the ground; it is not facilitated to the extent that it simply does not function. 

Consequently, the people out there are left to sort out the matters themselves. The children and the widows suffer and nobody appears to be addressing this matter. I want to urge Government and everybody concerned to look at these two issues and find a solution for the good of our people. I thank you.

11.57
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the shadow minister for the good work done. I have three issues of concern.  

In the report, a lot of lamentation has been made of the high caseload backlog, and when you look at the fractions you will realize that the highest backlog of cases consists of cases of defilement. Defilement is a reality, it is here with us and it may be here with us to stay for some time. At no one time in the history of this country have we known of any person who has been sent to the gallows because of defilement, and yet defilement is considered a capital offence. We are complaining of few members serving at the benches, the judges are few; the High Court circuits are limited, hence leading to a lot of cases, especially those of defilement nature, being left pending. 

I would like to urge Government to be realistic and come out with a law, which can give jurisdiction to the chief magistrates so that some of these backlog cases can be offloaded. But if we are going to continue saying that a 17-year old girl has slept with a 19-year old boy, and the 19-year old young man is taken in and yet you are considering it an issue of defilement – yes, technically it may be defilement – but I think it is very unfair. Let justice be delivered expeditiously, in which case if jurisdiction was given to the chief magistrates, I believe disposal of these cases will be a little faster.

Secondly, I have another concern regarding the Electoral Commission. We are now in a multi-party dispensation, which requires that in constituting membership to the Electoral Commission, all the various stakeholders - the various political parties - should have an input. The present Electoral Commission is a one-man’s show. It is paying allegiance directly and only to the government of the day because there is an English adage, which says, “He who pays the piper calls the tune.” So how sure are we that the Electoral Commission is impartial? We need checks and balances, and these checks and balances can only be attained if all the stakeholders have their interests represented in this Electoral Commission.

The third issue, which I would want to bring to our attention, is related to the Parliamentary Chambers. When we were having general debates, the Leader of Government Business did stand up here on the Floor of the House, and it is in the Hansard where he reported that we had received Shs 14 billion from the People’s Republic of China, and that part of this money was going to be used to construct a new chamber, which can be able to accommodate the ever-increasing number of Members of Parliament.  

Yesterday we received a report from the Ministry of Works, which is supposed to be the technical department, and no mention was made of this offer and neither is it even reflected in the present report that we are debating.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think about the Chambers, we either liberate ourselves and become independent or we remain the way we are. The Chinese Government is likely to bring money for only the Prime Minister’s Office and the conference, not the Chambers of this House.  So you either decide to vote money for the Chambers here today or never. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for that information. 

Many African languages have one thing in common that when you are the one dividing meat at the dinning table and at the end of the day you end up complaining that you missed, then you have nobody to blame but yourself. We as an institution take the responsibility –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, we are in touch over this issue and there are letters being circulated to us over this particular issue that there is money for this Chamber and I think some people are still working on the necessary papers. We have communication; it might not have been included in the budget just because it was a donation or something like that, but we got communication to the effect that there is money. Maybe, the Minister of Finance wants to clarify?

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and honourable members. It is true that Government did not come here and talk about the money that is coming from the Republic of China and that money is going to be utilised to put up Government offices. We have submitted to this Parliament the first corrigendum and we are submitting a second corrigendum that will give Shs 5 billion towards the expansion of the Chamber. 

With your permission, Sir, the issue that was raised by hon. Rose Namayanja and hon. Susan Lukyamuzi regarding the East African Legislative Assembly Member of Parliament, their payments will also come through the second corrigendum and it will be transferred to the Parliamentary Commission.

Lastly, the issue that was raised by hon. Ben Wacha about the 11 new Members of Parliament who are coming, the Women Members of Parliament, this will be taken care of in this Budget. Thank you.

MR WADRI:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that information. It is very unfortunate that we as an institution of Parliament have not been provided that information. We are well pleased to have received it now anyway. Now that you have told us, we will take your word as it is. But at the same time I also wish to say that the Shadow Ministers are a creation of the Administration of Parliament’s Act as amended this year. 

It is my hope and prayer that the Commission through its entire administration of Parliament also does take into account the fact that these people who are here next to be on the other side come 2011 are doing a commendable job and that they be facilitated. We are an alternative Government - take us seriously, in 2011 we will be sitting on the other side and the professor will be here. (Laughter) Thank you.

12.06
MR NORMAN MUWULIZE (Independent, Buikwe County West, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I rise on only two issues. 

Basically, one is the issue of land. The issue of land is actually a big problem here. For example, in my District Mukono we are finding a big problem. Our district is in problems with the government of Buganda so you find that the issue of land does not really get the concern it deserves and consequently, we are going to land these local governments in real trouble. So I urge this House to come out very clearly on the issue of land particularly with regard to those areas, which are now being occupied by the local governments and the landing sites where several areas are having interest.  

The other issue is with regard to the Domestic Relations Bill. It was indicated that there are consultations being made especially with religious bodies. But the responses from these religious bodies kind of show that they are not willing to see this Bill passed. So, I feel it should either be referred back for redrafting or reconsideration, and this done such that it is presented to these people in a manner where they can actually relate to it in a friendly way. Otherwise, the way it is, everybody like the religious bodies find it unfriendly. If it is in a manner that is understood and clearly gets to be acceptable to the members, I think that is when it will qualify to be called a Domestic Relations Bill and you can actually pass it when our locals have accepted it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember that we agreed to debate this for one and a-half hours. Therefore, I call upon the Minister to make a brief comment.  

12.08
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS & ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I thank you for your indulgence. When you look towards the end of the report of the committee, there is a list of the members of the committee, and the first one is hon. Kajara Aston the chairperson, and he signed this report. But as you are aware, he has subsequently been appointed Minister of State in charge of Karamoja. I would like to congratulate the former chairman of the committee upon this.

I would like to appreciate the work done by the committee on this rather important but complicated sector. I thank them for having come to grips with the issues. I also thank hon. Erias Lukwago for his contribution to this debate, but I think we need some guidance in the future. 

Hon. Lukwago is a member of this committee; we obediently appeared before this committee and he even participated in the proceedings of this committee. But we do not have a minority report from this committee and the committee has made recommendations; then this honourable colleague and future Attorney-General and Minister of Justice, plus other titles, comes on the Floor and raises impromptu statements that in many respects disagree with the report of his committee! I need some guidance on how to deal with this disagreement and I think it will help us in future.

THE SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, we have dealt with this issue before and some two days or so ago this was the first experience we received during this budget process and we agreed that in future, if the Opposition wants to have a sort of statement on the policy, it should submit it to the committee so that the committee compares it with the statement by the ministry concerned, debate on it and report on it. That will be in future, but for today, they did not.

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your guidance. These honourable members who had an opportunity to contribute; I think they are 11, they have understood the report. First of all, the committee has made recommendations, which I appreciate. I do not disagree with the recommendations of the committee. 

Similarly, my colleagues who have contributed here, I essentially agree with their contributions. I have no problem with it. I regard these contributions as recommendations, which Government will study and if it is possible, we will implement them, if it is not possible; we will come back to this Parliament and say so.

If I stopped here, my colleagues would think that I am being arrogant and disrespectful. Therefore, one-by-one –(Laughter)- you know, for me I thought when it comes to the matter of the case backlog and what seems to be like limited output from the courts in terms of cases finally disposed of, I think the first thing for me to say is to commend the judges and other judicial officers. But if you have followed the policy statement, if you have followed the report of the committee, they work in difficult circumstances, but they have been able to deliver and I think I should begin by commending the Judiciary for delivering in difficult circumstances. 

You see, if I am to take hon. Kassiano Wadri seriously that you are an alternate Government, then you must be able to appreciate the problems of running a Government in a poor country. I do not agree with the hon. Member for Kole who came here yesterday and declared that we are rich. We are not rich –(Laughter) No, we are struggling to be rich, but we are a poor country. So, as an alternate Government, you should also think about the problems of running Government with limited resources. What are you going to do, increase the taxes? Even to collect Shs 3,000, we had to send out the LDUs until we abandoned even the Shs 3,000, moreover per year, but we had to abandon it. So, the resources are quite limited.

And I do not agree with hon. Erias Lukwago that the Judiciary has a dismal performance. No, and I hope that since we are all advocates of the High Court of Uganda, I hope that in your professional conduct, you have never asked the court for an adjournment for whatever reason. Because when you ask for an adjournment, you are part of the poor performance - you are part of the limited performance. I hope that in your professional practice you have never asked for a single adjournment –(Laughter)

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I take the accusation in good faith, but when I was assessing the performance of the Judiciary, I did not look at it qualitatively; I looked at it quantitatively. That is the test I used. There are two tests, the qualitative and quantitative test. As far as the qualitative test is concerned, the Judiciary has been excellent. Their performance is excellent because they are operating under difficult circumstances as the hon. Attorney-General has observed, given the bottlenecks they are facing, the budgetary allocations, which are minimal and so on; and the inadequacies we have talked about in terms of human resources and the funds from the Consolidated Fund. But quantitatively, the case backlog is still a very big problem and that is why we advanced those proposals. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I think sometimes that backlog is not caused by members of the Judiciary but the advocates who seek adjournment. Yes, the responsibility for causing the backlog should be shared.

DR MAKUBUYA: Well, Mr Speaker, I thank you for clarifying that. I was saying that if even in quantitative terms hon. Elias Lukwago is not satisfied, the responsibility for low quantity cannot be the responsibility of the courts alone, not even the council, the witnesses and what have you; they are all part of this low quantitative performance.

Mr Speaker, we in Government cannot assess this institution in quantitative terms alone. We also must assess them on the basis of the quality of their production. And I am glad that hon. Erias Lukwago agrees that in terms of quality, they get full marks. 

As I said, these things are for study. For example, what is the consequence of repealing the law on idling and disorderliness? What are the consequences? So, this is a good recommendation, but I have to refer it to the Uganda Law Reform Commission to study the likely consequences of repealing this law, because you do not know how much idleness and disorderliness it is containing by being on the statute book. Only the Uganda Law Reform Commission can tell me after a study. Yes, you could lift it and have a tremendous upsurge of all these evils and so on, but it cannot be a shouting match where I say yes, you say no. That is why we go to the Uganda Law Reform Commission, they go out and study and advise us. After they have done so, we will figure out whether to repeal the law or to retain it.

Again, whether there is a conflict between the Advocates Act and the PPDA, these are matters, which require some study and it would be irresponsible for us to just say, “Apply the PPDA and ignore the Advocates Act”, no. I think Parliament would not be fair to itself if it were to proceed on that basis.  

You know, when you talk about the Human Rights Commission and you say that in most of the cases it is dealing with compensation for torture and all these and therefore it is terrible - first and foremost, where did the Human Rights Commission come from? It is not a gift from God. The Human Rights Commission is a programme of the NRM Government. There was no Human Rights Commission here. There were many governments here before but with no such Commission. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, is the Attorney-General in order to impute that the Human Rights Commission was set up by the NRM political party, knowing that the Human Rights Commission was created under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda of 1995 and that that Constitution has been operating under the Movement System to which all of us belonged? 

THE SPEAKER: No, I mean this is a personal assessment as far as he is concerned. The NRM Government is still continuing. Yeah, it was during NRM time that that Constitution was promulgated and it is that Constitution, which created the Human Rights Commission. So, what is the problem?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I have been a Member of the NRM and he has been a Member of NRM as well. Hon. Lukwago has been a Member of the Movement and when we raise this matter, it should not be the NRM political party to take the credit. It was a contribution of all of us, even FDC contributed because by then there were no political parties. (Laughter) 

We all belonged to the Movement under this Constitution and we created several institutions and, therefore, the NRM political party, which was created recently, cannot claim credit for having created that institution. I think that is unconstitutional and that is being dishonest for the NRM political party to claim credit for having created the Uganda Human Rights Commission.

THE SPEAKER: This is a question of assessment of a situation, therefore, I cannot rule somebody out of order just because his opinion is this and the other is that. But the Constitution was made under the NRM/Movement System.

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, I am making a simple point. I have been here, I was born here, I grew up here, I have lived here and I hope to die here and be buried here.  

In 1962 we had a Government led by the Uganda Peoples Congress (UPC) and it remained in power – okay, UPC and KY 1962 to 1966, there was no Human Rights Commission set up. The UPC remained in power until 1971. It was very necessary, because people were then being killed –(Interruption)- you people, what are you talking about? Where have you been?

THE SPEAKER: But why can we not go on to other issues?

DR MAKUBUYA: No, Sir, you know this is important, because people are talking about the Human Rights Commission as if it came from thin air. No, somebody thought of it, having studied the history of our country and having seen the problems that we went through. Therefore, if an opportunity has been created for people to complain about torture and violations of human rights, I should acknowledge where it comes from. I should not be as historical as hon. Ekanya, even if he comes into power in 2011.

MR APILIGA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to accuse the previous governments - the UPC Government, which was in power prior to 1986? At that time when UPC was in Government, there were no crimes, no killings to the extent that preceded the coming of the NRM Government into power. Is he, therefore, in order to accuse a Government for not setting up a human rights commission when there was no abuse of human rights at that time?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Apiliga, there was a commission of inquiry where I was a lead counsel, hon. John Kawanga was a member and Prof. Makubuya was a member; there are volumes and volumes of records about what happened between 1962 and the period when our commission was set up. And if you want, the volumes are available.

DR MAKUBUYA: Therefore, Sir, I would like to comment on only one other thing raised by hon. Lukwago about the Office of the IGG and the Office of the Attorney-General. 

If you study the 1995 Constitution, both these offices are constitutional and they have different mandates. If anybody thinks that there is fire from the Attorney-General’s Office directed to the IGG, then you may need to redefine fire; yes, there is fire from one side, but if there was to be counter fire, life would be difficult. So, I think what the committee recommends is very important. They have studied the matter at page 36 and they say the committee noted with concern that the Office of the IGG and that of Attorney-General seem not to have a proper working relationship. 

The committee resolves to study the matter further and make appropriate recommendations to this House in due course. This matter needs further study; you cannot dispose of it. There is one thing that I cannot understand when the honourable says that the Attorney-General colludes with the people who are mentioned in the IGG’s report; I think this should be expunged. Well, if he did not say so, very good, but –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: I would wish to put the record straight that the Attorney-General would not be in order to insinuate that I made those allegations. Actually that assertion that I alleged that there is collusion between the people who are mentioned in the IGG’s report and the Attorney-General’s chambers, is wrong. I did not say so. What I said, and the record will bear me out on this matter, I was on the side of the Attorney-General calling for further and better participation, calling for substantiation of those allegations from the IGG. 

As far as the Attorney-General’s chambers are concerned, what I did say and it is on record, is that there are people who are mentioned in the IGG’s report and instead of complying with the directives and orders of the IGG, they rush to the chambers of the Attorney-General for review of the decisions and verdicts of the IGG; they seek remedies from the Attorney-General. I can give a case in point, of the public officers who are involved in the –(interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not leave it? I think you are trying to correct the record.

MR LUKWAGO: I wanted to give an example because we wanted this - the public officers in the Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA), the IGG recommended that they should be sacked including the Executive Director, but they rushed to the Attorney-General for interpretation and the record now is to the effect that the Attorney-General has advised that those people should stay notwithstanding the recommendation of the IGG that they should be sacked. This is what I am talking about, Mr Speaker. I thank you very much.

DR MAKUBUYA: Therefore, Sir, there is no point of order; it was a contribution. Let the contribution remain on record. 

Hon. Peter Omoro on the increase in abuses of human rights - on the contrary, I do not agree that there is an increase. For me what I see is that the last 20 years I have helped Ugandans to know about their rights, and opened up opportunities for people to assert their rights and to demand remedies and fortunately the system has provided these structures where you can go and accuse Government of anything and get away with it. In the past, you would disappear if you dared. 

On the matter of the Electoral Commission; yes, I think we need to study and see how it may be structured in a multi-party dispensation. 

Mr Speaker, I respect hon. John Kawanga very much and I take his views quite seriously. When I was coming here I tried to inquire and I have been inquiring actually for some days about these land tribunals and so on, but I think this is a matter I will take up very urgently because otherwise you promote civil disorder if you do not deal with land matters as a matter of urgency. And the Administrator-General, you recommend that we facilitate and strengthen his office. I cannot oppose this advice; we will try our best.

Then Hon. Muwulize commented about land in Mukono and then the DRB. I was in the Seventh Parliament and we dealt with the DRB and suspended proceedings and said that substantively we must return and consult to avoid civil commotion and discomfort in all the communities in our country and I think it is important that we take time to convince ourselves as citizens of the same country. We should ascertain what is the proper way forward on this matter and I would urge all honourable members not to hurry this matter but to allow for more time for proper consultations so that we advise ourselves as a country rather than to irritate this and provoke that.  

Also let me comment briefly on what hon. Kassiano Wadri was saying on the question of defilement. If you look at page 5 of the report, we propose the amendment of the Penal Code, the Magistrates Court Act, and Trial on Indictment Decree. 

The purpose of these is to deal exactly with the question of defilement and who will have the proper jurisdiction and what the penalties should be and so on to bring it to some realistic level. We had endeavoured to do this in the Seventh Parliament but we were caught up with time. 

Fortunately, Mr Speaker, many of us were there and we saw that the pressure then was in a different direction. Yes, this is the truth, now that the pressure has eased, we will now address these matters as we propose on page 5 of this report. 

I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. I would like to thank my honourable colleagues for their contribution and to urge them to support this report. I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the prayer was that we adopt the report. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT FOR THE BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2006-2007

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson was not here but when we were starting, we agreed that we are going to spend one and a-half hours on each report, that is the time allocated for this report. Therefore, I would request that if you can, please summarize it, we could have sometime for debate.

12.39
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Teopista Ssentongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have the pleasure to present the report of the committee and this is in accordance with the provisions of Articles 90 and 155(4) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda and Section 9 of the Budget Act, 2001.  

The Sessional Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development received and examined and discussed the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the financial year 2006/2007 under Vote 018.

I now beg to present to you the committee’s findings and observations together with the recommendations to this august House for its consideration and approval. The mode of operation or methodology that we used was that we received and examined the policy statement of the ministry, and examined the draft estimates of revenue and the expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007. Then, we reviewed the progress of its recommendations to the Budget Committee on the micro-economic plan and indicative budget framework for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the Financial year 2006/2007; we also received the observations and recommendations made on the ministry’s budget estimates for the last Financial year 2005/2006. 

We held discussions with the ministers and their technical staff, and we received and examined the views of the following stakeholders: National Council for Persons with Disabilities, National Women’s Council, National Youth council, National Library of Uganda, Uganda Debt Education Network and Functional Adult Literacy Consultants. 

Others included the Federation of Uganda Employers, former East African Community employees, Central Organization of Free Trade Unions and Uganda Government Pensioners, among others.  

We appreciate and thank the ministers, officials of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the different stakeholders for their input, which was valuable in the compilation of this report.  

The mandate of the ministry is to be the lead agency in the social development Sector and to this end it promotes the protection and empowerment of communities so that the poor and the vulnerable that constitute the majority of the population are enabled to meaningfully participate in the development process. Because of time I would prefer to skip the recurrent activities –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think you can just indicate the pages at which they are because the Members read through already.

MRS SSENTONGO: I will go direct to the projects and other special programs. The activities and programmes for the Financial year, 2005/2006 are the following: 

The Ministry continued to pursue the following projects among others, the Norwegian Association for the Disabled - this is on page 10. I have skipped the recurrent activities for the financial year 2005/2006 and that starts from page 2 to page 4, and the development activities for the financial year 2005/2006 are from page 5 to page 10. 

On the same page, let me talk about the projects and other special activities and programmes for the Financial year 2005/2006. 

The ministry continued to pursue the followings projects among others: there is the Norwegian Association for the Disabled, Functional Adult Literacy Programme, Promotion of Children and Youth, programs for enhancement of adolescent reproductive life, rehabilitation and development of public libraries, strengthening the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, reproductive health, communication support services, and elimination of child labour.  

The amount of funds appropriated to the Ministry for the financial year 2005/2006: recurrent expenditure was Shs 6,225,405,000, the development expenditure was Shs 4,533,847,432,000, and development donor expenditure was Shs 7,320,000,000. 

The supplementary appropriations, the recurrent expenditure was Shs 554 million, development expenditure was nil, and other programmes also had nil.  

The amounts of funds released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development: the recurrent expenditure was Shs 6,887,852,619, development expenditure was Shs 4,395,826,491 and the other projects and programmes had nil.

Project performance for the financial year 2005/2006: the ministry continued to harmonise and consolidate its efforts to spearhead the advocacy for rights, mobilisation and empowerment of communities especially the poor and the vulnerable. 

The actual release to the Ministry was Shs 11.313 billion, against the approved budget of Shs 107.509 billion representing a budget outstand of 105.12 percent, that is in excess and the excess of Shs 554 million partially arose from a special release for compensation of Ebola victims. Actual release for development was Shs 4.395 billion reflecting 95.96 percent performance.  

The social development sector conditional grants limited to the districts, women, youth, disability councils declined to Shs 1.36 billion from Shs 1.39 billion in the previous financial year 2004/2005 and Shs 2.5 billion in financial year 2003/2004.  

Budgetary allocation for the financial year 2006/2007: a total of Shs 13.54 billion has been budgeted of which Shs 12.64 billion is from the government of Uganda and Shs 0.90 billion is expected from development partners. This translates into a funding decline of 23.85 percent or Shs 4.24 in nominal terms over the financial year 2005/2006.  

This, therefore, shows the medium term expenditure framework ceiling for the social development sector has not improved instead it has experienced decline as shown in the table below. 

However, there is a change with the recurrent development, the wage for financial year 2003/2004; it was Shs 1.29 billion, under non-wage it was Shs 3.37 billion, under development and domestic it was Shs 5.11 billion. Under donors it is Shs 6.67 billion. The total was Shs 16.74 billion for the financial year 2004/5. Under the wage it is Shs 1.30 billion, and under non-wage it is Shs 2.44 billion. 

Under domestic expenditure, it is Shs 7.74 billion, under donors it is Shs 6.11 billion and the total is Shs 14.59 billion. For the financial year 2005/6, under wage it is Shs 1.39, under non-wage it is Shs 3.85 billion, under domestic expenditure, it is Shs 2.02 billion, under donors it is Shs 7.26 billion and the total is Shs 16.62. 

For the financial year 2006/7 it is Shs 1.61 billion under wage, and under non-wage it is Shs 6.35 billion. Under domestic expenditure, it is Shs 4.65 billion. Under donors it is Shs 0.90 billion and that gives us a total of Shs 13.51 billion.

This decline is as a result of reduced Government funding, and also declining donor support to the social development sector. This affects the ministry’s operations and effectiveness of service delivery. For example, only Shs 156 million is shared amongst the nine departments under that ministry. The ministry requires Shs 21.79 billion of non-wage funding and, therefore, has a funding gap of Shs 15.44 billion; that is 71 percent.  

So, if we look at the achievements of the sector during the financial year 2005/6, they include the following: 

•	Only Shs 750 million was paid on the long-standing arrears of the Ebola victims.

•	Shs 5.5 billion was granted to the civil society organizations to implement activities geared towards protection and care for orphans and other vulnerable children and youth using United States support. 

Parliament enacted the following laws: Employment Act 2006, Labour Unions Act 2006, Occupational Safety and Health Act 2006, Labour Disputes Arbitration and Settlement Act 2006 and Persons with Disabilities Act, 2006.

The ministry finalized and submitted the national equal opportunities policy, the community mobilisation and empowerment strategy, as well as the national policy on HIV/AIDS and the order of work to Cabinet. 

We trained 872 students at the National Institute for Social Development in Nsamizi in the field of social mobilization, counselling and adult guidance, social work, entrepreneurship, development, and development studies.
 
It expanded the functional adult literacy programme to all districts of Uganda, covering 830 out of 969 sub-counties including divisions. The adult literacy rate for the population aged 18 years and above has increased to 69 percent. 

A total of Shs 1.60 billion was disbursed to the district, excluding town councils and municipalities, for functional adult literacy activities. It also carried out 550 work place inspections and 1000 full labour inspections to ensure compliance with labour laws and regulations.

They just added 15,563 and placed 2847 of these job seekers into gainful employment within the country. The ministry developed the draft national plan of action for persons with disability and Cabinet approved the national policy on disability, and developed a policy framework for externalisation of labour to ensure safety and dignity of Ugandans working abroad by the end of May 2006. 

Furthermore, 429 Ugandans had been officially placed outside Uganda. The Industrial Court held and arbitrated two trade disputes. Also the ministry provided vocational skills training to 260 people with disability -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, can we not say that in details, achievements between this page and this page and on page 15? Otherwise, it is evident that there were achievements.

MRS SSENTONGO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Having gone through all that, the committee made observations and recommendations. We looked at the under funding of the sector. 

The committee observed that the medium term expenditure framework ceilings for the social development sector have not improved at all instead the sector has experienced declines in its ceilings.

In the financial year 2005/06, the recurrent wage was Shs 1.61 billion, non-wage was Shs 4.67 billion, and domestic development was Shs 4.18 billion and the donor project was Shs 7.32 billion giving a total of Shs 17.78 billion. 

In the financial year 2006/07, the total ceiling was only Shs 13.54 billion translating into a funding decline of Shs 4.24 billion.  

The committee notes that it will be difficult for the ministry to operate the nine departments with only Shs 156 million, and the unfunded activities as reflected on pages 17 and 18 of the policy statement are likely to close.

We, therefore, recommended that the budgetary ceiling for the ministry be increased such that the ministry can be able to carry out its activities at least to last year’s financial year level.  

The burden of rent:

The committee observed that the ministry is spending Shs 1.433 billion on rent alone thereby depriving the ministry the much needed resources, which could be used to support the technical departments to deliver services within their mandates and, therefore, recommended that since the ministry is willing to buy and a seller is willing to sell the building where the ministry is currently accommodated, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should liase with the Ministry of Public Service such that the process of buying the building is expedited.

Contribution to traditional cultural leaders:

The committee learned that His Excellency, the President directed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should undertake the funding of the traditional leaders. However, Finance simply passed over the responsibility to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development without adjusting the sector ceiling to accommodate this new spending area. Consequently, the ministry had to spend Shs 6.0 billion from its meagre resources to cater for the traditional leaders.

The recommendation by the committee is that, payment of traditional cultural leaders should be taken over by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development immediately as per the directive of the President so as to avail the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development the much needed meagre resources.

Labour sources:

The committee observed that there are no specific resources allocated for the implementation of labour laws as earlier noted in this report. The implementation of the new labour laws requires the tripartite arrangement with each of the partners; that is, the government, employers and workers playing their respective roles. 

In the case of Government, start up activities for the operationalisation of the laws to basically create awareness and sensitisation followed by the publication of the laws into popular versions and possibly in key local languages. Once this has been done, the enforcement with labour inspection as a key aspect becomes a routine undertaken by the ministry.

Awareness creation and sensitisation is to be undertaken as a normal function of the ministry with the support from the International Labour Organization (ILO). It is hoped that adequate funding for the operationalisation of the labour laws would be stepped up on a year-by-year basis starting with the financial year 2007/08. Also there has been non-payment of the annual contribution to the International Labour Organization and if payments are not done, Uganda might lose affiliation to such organizations like ILO.

The recommendation from the committee is that, resources should be availed. Payments to affiliate bodies such as International Labour Organization and others should be done immediately.

It was observed that labour officials at the districts are inadequately facilitated due to inadequate budget ceiling in the ministry, hence very poor performance in their services. Therefore, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should increase the labour budget to enable its strengthening, its support for the labour officers through focused monitoring, training and retraining of such officers to enable them perform more effectively.

Employment policy:

It was observed that currently there is no employment policy in the country, but there is a draft, which still needs further intensive consultations in order to have a national consensus to be able to take into account all the critical issues that have been identified.  

Also there is a great need to establish a labour productivity centre that would be responsible for all issues related to labour and investment interior.

The committee recommends that consultations should be finalized quickly and the employment policy be brought to Parliament, and also establishment of the labour productivity centre should be put in place immediately.

Revitalization of labour and advisory board: The committee observed that the labour advisory board is no longer functional due to lack of operational funds and yet it has a legal backing. 

The new law, the Employment Act No.62000, Section 22 requires the minister to appoint a labour advisory board. Its functions are properly defined in Section 23.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should avail funds to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to revitalize this important board.

Public Service negotiating machinery:

The committee observed that the development, processing and implementation of the public service negotiating machinery fall under the mandate of the Ministry of Public Service. But the committee also is aware that the Cabinet passed the public service negotiating machinery principles for appeal in March 2006. Therefore, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Justice should expedite the drafting of this Bill to enable the Ministry of Public Service to bring the Bill to Parliament for approval.  

Industrial Court:

It was observed that the Industrial Court was elevated to the status of a high court, but it is still under-funded although Parliament recommended that it should draw its resources directly from the Consolidated Fund.  

For the effective operation of the Industrial Court, it requires about Shs 200 million per year, but only Shs 66 million has been provided for the financial year 2006/07. It was further noted that the court is heavily under-staffed with only two staff namely; the president of the Industrial Court and the registrar.

Recommendation from the committee is that, a separate budget line should be created without any further delay in the next financial year and its resources be drawn from the Consolidated Fund as earlier on recommended by Parliament, and thereafter the court should be adequately staffed to enable it operate effectively.

National Social Security Fund:

It was critically observed that the main stakeholders of National Social Security Fund are workers and employers, and their line ministry is Gender, Labour and Social Development. The structures of National Social Security Fund are under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. But despite all that, NSSF continues to be under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The committee, therefore, observed that the NSSF board, which the Minister of Finance appointed has no core stakeholders represented on the board and therefore it recommends that NSSF should be reverted to the Ministry Gender, Labour and Social Development and the reasons, which led to its transfer to the Ministry of Finance, should be addressed immediately.

They further recommend that the minister should also appoint the workers and employers representatives on the NSSF board with immediate effect, and stakeholders group report be implemented without further delay.

Minimum wage policy:

It was critically observed that Uganda is a member state of the East African Community. The other two member states of the community, that is Kenya and Tanzania, have a minimum wage policy in place but Uganda does not have any. The absence of the minimum wage is a violation of the Minimum Wage Advisory and Wages Council Act, 2000 Chapter 221.  The example here we can give is Kenya. Kenya as a nation has already set up a minimum wage in its last financial year, and they had put their minimum wage at Kshs 4,600, which is approximately Ugshs 105,000 per month per worker. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, it was agreed yesterday that today we have a very tight programme in which we have to dispose of four ministries, and I thought that this morning, hon. Peter Nyombi, who presented the report on the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs was exemplary enough, in the sense that we already have copies of these reports and we could be ready to read them at own time to internalise them. 

I, therefore, appeal, Mr Speaker, that the chairperson gets the highlights so that at the end of this mid-morning session, we can go for lunch and then come back to complete the other two ministries. Otherwise, at this rate we may not be able to beat the deadline as per the Budget Act, which means that we should be able to complete all our work today. Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is okay, so what you can do is, briefly comment on the key points and then we go.

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleague. There is a problem of non-recognition of trade unions in this country and it is too rampant that the international community is getting concerned about this. I would like to call upon the government to make sure that they enforce the laws that we passed in the Seventh Parliament that employers who seem to be stubborn come up and adhere to the law. I wanted to give an example, but because of time I have to stop there.  

There is this workers capacity building. It was observed that in the past, workers had their labour college and when the labour college was taken, the NRM Government one time financially sponsored the workers education programmes and we therefore recommend that the government should provide funds to the workers national centres for their capacity building, like it is in the sister countries under the East African Community. 

We observed that the national library is a semi-autonomous body and it has 33 districts library, but it is badly under-funded and it is also understaffed just because of the under funding. Unfortunately, it is still renting, and as we talk now, it is in arrears of Shs 37 million, which is not yet paid. So, they are now almost threatened with eviction.

We also observed that UNESCO had given funds to develop an architectural plan, which plan just requires land, and we were reliably told that the Ministry of Labour has land, which is lying somewhere in Naguru. But again there is a land title, which is in the hands of the Land Commission on behalf of the government. 

So, we recommend that the Ministry of Lands should hand over the land title to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to be able to put the structures of the national library to its land, which is lying idle right now.

Other policy observations:

We looked at the Equal Opportunities Bill. It was observed that Article 32, Section 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: To help on this, we have dealt with it this morning. The Attorney General and the minister of this sector have given an explanation, something is being done. You can go on another point.

MRS SSENTONGO: We are all aware that there is the Eighth Commonwealth Ministers for Women Affairs meeting, which is going to take place in Uganda in June 2007, and this is in recognition of our country for the tremendous strides that it has made in affirmative action and promotion of women and vulnerable groups. So, we are happy to note that at least the Minister of Finance has already released Ugshs 900 million to the effect of preparing this meeting and, therefore, we recommend that Parliament and other stakeholders should be involved in the preparation of the Eighth Commonwealth Ministers for Women Affairs meeting.

Functional adult literacy:

The committee appreciates the efforts of the ministry and all those involved in the instructions of the functional adult literacy programmes, but strongly recommends that the Ministry of Finance should adequately fund the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to be able to spread literacy.  

Secondly, all facilitators should be well motivated in order for them to do a good job in this programme.

People with disabilities:

The committee recommended that the ministry should source funds to increase on the resources allocated to the people with disabilities council. The International Day for People with Disabilities should be gazetted by the government and the rehabilitation centres be transferred to the Ministry of Education and Sports to be converted into vocational institutes for people with disabilities, and a wider section of the population because right now we have universal primary education. Those who may not be able to make it for secondary education could easily get the services of these idle centres.

Externalisation of labour:

The committee recommends that serious precautions should be taken in recommending Ugandans to high-risk countries. Secondly, the government should establish inter-governmental linkages to these countries where Ugandans have to be recommended for guaranteeing their safety, avoidance of slavery and for taxation purposes as is being done in other countries.  

Externalisation of labour should also be directed to countries with strict international practices and standards. Government should put in place a strict mechanism for streamlining, monitoring and evaluating the companies engaged in the externalisation of labour.  

Women councils:

We recommended that women councils are still very relevant, especially at this time when we need to use such established structures to reach the grassroots in implementation of different programmes as we internalise the operation of the multi-party system. The committee further recommends that research should be undertaken on how women councils work in countries that are under multi-party democracy like Ghana, Malawi, South Africa, Rwanda, Egypt, Nigeria, Swaziland among others. Women councils budget ceiling should be improved in the next financial year.

Children’s affairs:

We have recommended that child abuse and sacrifice should be given top priority by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development through sensitisation on radios, schools and other mass media fora.  

Money should also be availed immediately such that the street children and other disadvantaged groups are removed from the streets of Kampala and other towns immediately. The committee further recommends that a law should be brought to Parliament immediately to curb this growing inhuman act against children, which is taking root in recent times such that a strong penalty is given to those found guilty.

National Theatre:

The committee recommends that comprehensive audit be carried out on the books of accounts of the national theatre and report to Parliament two months after this report is read to Parliament.

Youth councils:

The committee recommends that the youth councils remain, but their funding should be stepped up to enable them carry out their activities. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg that this House do approve a total of Ugshs 13,512,861,007 of which Ugshs 7,961,273,000 is the recurrent and Ugshs 5,551,589,000 is for development as the total budget required for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the financial year 2006/07. I beg you to approve this budget. I thank you for your attention.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson.

MRS SSENTONGO: Sorry, I have not laid the minutes on the Table. I beg you allow me to lay the minutes of the committee meetings on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, you and the members of the committee, for the work done.

1.16
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF GENDER (Ms Susan Nampijja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, honourable members, I am honoured and privileged to present to this august House the Opposition’s response to the ministerial policy statement. We thank the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the well structured and thought-out policy statement.  

Mr Speaker, in many respects the functioning of the House is based on a clear-cut division of rules between Government and the opposition. In modern democracies, the Opposition keeps the government in constant check by criticizing the Executive failures and excesses, offer alternative policies and programmes and they must support good Government programmes. 

Mr Speaker, in the same vein, the ruling party has a duty not to just hear but also listen and acknowledge the alternative voice from the Opposition to enhance this exercise that we are now engaged in.  

Highlights of the ministerial policy statement

Mission, mandate, objectives of the Ministry

The mission of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is to create an enabling environment for social protection and social transformation of communities. The social development sector promotes issues of gender equality, equity, human rights, culture, decent working conditions, employment and empowerment of different groups such as women, children, youth, IDPs, the elderly and PWDs. 

The mandate of this ministry is to empower communities to harness their potentials through skills development, labour productivity and cultural growth for sustainable and gender responsive development.  

Mr Speaker, against the mission and the mandate, the ministry has set some objectives. I will not read them.

The Opposition observed that the ministry has an extensive mandate to serve the most disadvantaged and most vulnerable groups. The continued marginalization makes the ministry redundant and ineffective to the people it intends to serve. The Government in power needs these people. The Government needs the youth, the elderly, the women and the PWDs, but the structures put in place to cater for these people are marginalized. I do not think, and I do not know, whether other ministries are treated like these vulnerable destitutes. Something should be done.  

Whereas all objectives require inter-sectoral cooperation and coordination, there is limited coordination between the orphans and vulnerable children, programmes for the children and youth, the secretariat and the child labour unit. This is largely because the ministry has been highly marginalized in terms of budgetary support. No wonder it now considers only its own capacity building as a major objective, when this is but a necessary condition for effective execution of its mandate.

Overview of the ministerial policy statement:

Mr Speaker, according to the 2006/07 budget, the ministry is one of the most poorly funded ministries. Everything is declining and static.  The ministry is being marginalized in terms –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it seems from the report you are saying there is under funding, can you tell us the recommendation.

MS NAMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, honourable members, given the nature of the targeted beneficiaries, their social vulnerability and the need for adequate support, the Opposition proposes that the budget ceiling of the ministry be increased. In the alternative, the department of labour should be moved to a new ministry of human resource development, labour and employment. This will allow effective focus on both our vulnerable people and on human resource development and employment. 

Labour and employment issues:

Mr Speaker, the Ugandan labour market is a sad story of continued abuse of workers’ rights by investors. Employers have routinely abused their employees by paying meagre salaries and physically abusing their desperate workers. There have been numerous reported cases of sexual harassment, poor conditions at work places etc. In the area of salary, our Constitution provides for the right to equal pay for equal work yet many employees remain inadequately paid. Uganda has not adopted a minimum wage policy much as there is a minimum wage advisory board and council. In fact, in the East African Community only Uganda has not set a minimum wage policy. 

Failure to set up the minimum wage policy has sent out wrong signals to the business community. Investors from Asia are known for paying our workers peanuts and on top of that subjecting them to inhuman treatment. The last minimum wage was set in 1984, to an equivalent of Shs 6,000. This is too meagre! It would rather apply to a manual labourer who does not have employment contracts. Although the labour laws that ought to guarantee safe and healthy conditions of our workers have been enacted, these abuses continue. We note that the government has not enacted a national policy on optimum or occupational conditions for the citizens.  

In the area of employment, the ministry has not given any convincing reason as to why up to now Uganda has no employment policy. The Employment Act of 2006 is meaningless in the absence of an employment policy. The Ministry of Labour in all its past reports has been saying that the employment policy proposal is at Cabinet level.  This has turned out to be an endless exercise that should expeditiously be done away with so as to operationalise the labour laws. In the absence of constitutional provisions like Article 24 and 25 on the recognition of the dignity of children and their defence from forced labour and exploitation, how can Government fail to adopt an employment policy?  

Mr Speaker, in the social development sector report of the ministry, the unemployment statistics given in tables 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 hardly reveal youth age groups, which are most hit by unemployment. We have sensed a lot of speculations. The ministry should analyse these figures. Government has, however, not assisted the local employers. Favours like tax holidays are extended to only foreign investors.  That practice should be reversed. We are building a neo-colonial economic empire to promote only foreign investors –(Interruption)

MR FRED RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I did not intend to interrupt the honourable colleague on the Floor of the House, but Uganda no longer gives tax holidays to investors. Tax holidays were abolished in the Income Tax Act of 1997. All the tax benefits are consolidated under the harmonized tax code and are always updated in a harmonized way in every finance budget that we pass here. Therefore, there are no tax holidays given to investors under any law.

MS NAMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I know what I am talking about. I carried out some research to backup what I am talking about.  

Mr Speaker, on VAT, all this is unconstitutional and has negatively impacted on the citizen’s employment opportunity. Unfortunately the whole mess is spearheaded by His Excellency, the President. 

In accordance with Article 107(1)(b)(ii), the President may be removed from office if he or she has dishonestly done any act or omission, which is prejudicial or inimical to the economy of the country. The ongoing unexplainable land allocation around the city is inimical enough to persuade me and the opposition to move a vote of no confidence in the presidency anytime from now. The President is allocating land as if he is allocating pancakes.

Recommendation:

Mr Speaker, the government should put labour rights high on its agenda, particularly the welfare of the labour force. This will only be possible through formulation and effective implementation of national manpower development, employment and occupational conditions and policies. We, in the opposition, recognise the need for all Ugandans to engage in gainful employment and the role local investors play in creating employment. We urge that with foreign investors, Government urgently institutes measures to support local investors.

Mr Speaker, there is need for the government to develop a special funding programme to support our people build capacity and acquire specialized skills and equipment, to enable them compete regionally and globally and to create quality and well paying jobs.

Women and youth councils:

Mr Speaker, of recent, the youth and women councils have faced eminent threats of being dissolved. The Opposition recognises the role these councils have played as grooming grounds for leaders among the youth and women. Having served us all, we urge –(Interruption)  

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have agreed that we summarise the reports that are being presented, and I think now it is becoming a practice. My colleague, however, is just reading word by word, to the extent of including some ideas that belong to different committees like land issues. Would it not be wise or procedurally correct for the Member to summarise her report so that we catch up on time?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you come to children, for instance, you just hint what you think should be done. The details you can leave out. When you come to IDPs, just say what should be done and then we dispose of the report. Please.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am finalizing now. The Opposition recognised the role these councils have played as a grooming ground for leaders among the youth and women. The Opposition also recognises Ugandans as responsible people who by tradition exercise equity in development and welfare and share out benefits –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think what should be done there -because we know what you want – is for you to say, “We want this to be done” and then you dispose of the subject.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I would have no objection in her giving the points if we had copies, but –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You will get copies. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the shadow ministers have been presenting their reports without copies, so if they summarise –(Interjection)- we cannot while the government side have copies. Is this inequality or what?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think let us not debate this. We have agreed that she is going to summarise, then we shall work out ways of getting you copies. Please summarise. I know she is competent to do that.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Specifically, we urge Government to operationalise the Equal Opportunities Commission provided for in the Constitution. You already told us that this has been discussed. We shall vigorously fight to ensure that we promote gender sensitive governance and development, enforcement of laws against sexual discrimination and fair representation of women in all party and elective leadership positions. The Opposition is seriously disappointed that no such concrete commitment has been made in the ministerial policy statement. We shall, therefore, vigorously advocate for a national youth development programme that focuses concretely on national integration, horizon and character building, ethics and integrity skills and entrepreneurship development.

Children affairs:

Mr Speaker, the Opposition is deeply concerned about the increasing number of street children, especially in Kampala and other urban centres. According to the New Times Kigali, August 2006, the International Labour Organisation (ILO) accused Uganda of practicing child labour and forced labour. This paper says that such abuse contravenes the ILO labour standards. The Government has done little to extricate itself from accusations of this world body thus exposing the country to potential black listing of its produce.

Mr Speaker, given the importance attached to balanced development of our children, we urge the government to: 

•	Institute measures to collect good quality information about violence, exploitation and use of children. 

•	Establish a national system for systematic monitoring of child protection issues in the country; and 

•	Concretely support all policies and programmes for the well-being and effective development of our children.  

In the special case of street children, we urge the ministry to develop and implement, with the active involvement of the street children themselves, a comprehensive policy that should address the root causes and prevent this phenomenon. It should also provide street children with the necessary protection, adequate health service care, education and other social services. To support these policies and programmes, associated children institutions like Naguru Reception Centre and Naguru Remand Home, need to be urgently funded. Presently, conditions in these remand homes and rehabilitation centres are poor. The staff are poorly trained, poorly facilitated and unmotivated. The staff also reportedly use harsh punishments despite the provision of the Children’s Act. This Government must stop paying lip service to the cause of the children.

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I will comment on IDPS. Nearly two million people in Northern Uganda live in IDP camps. Much as the peace talks are going on in Juba, the government has not provided any guarantee to protect the most vulnerable groups like children and women from abuse of various kinds. We, in the opposition, live to see peace prevailing in Northern Uganda after the Juba talks succeed and a peace deal is signed between the LRA and the government, so that our vulnerable children and women can gain a fresh opportunity too for protection. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the Opposition asserts that the issue of gender, labour and social development is critical to creating the right balance in our national development process. We, in the opposition, therefore, condemn the lack of proper policies and programmes and the low level of budgetary allocations for this sector by Government.  We, therefore, urge the government and the NRM to take the concerns of the Opposition most seriously. I thank you for your kind attention and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.  

1.37
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the well-presented report. I want to ask the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development one thing, after hearing that the government intends to repeal the women councils and the youth councils. Knowing that most of us are here as a product of youth councils and women councils, I want to know the status of the women councils and the youth councils as we speak now. I strongly support the committee’s recommendation that we still need these women and the youth councils. The only thing that needs to be done is to scrutinize how these councils will operate in a multi-party setting.  

Mr Speaker, the youth and women councils have been proud of the grants that the government started allocating to them. These grants have been seen to be functional. I have not seen anywhere in the report whether these councils are going to continue benefiting from the grants. I want to know from the honourable minister if these youth councils, women councils and the PWDs councils are going to continue benefiting from these conditional grants. If not, I would like to strongly recommend that we still need these conditional grants for these councils.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, I would like to commend the committee’s observation on the children’s affairs. It is really appalling that today in Uganda we have child sacrifice! There is a hidden side to it though; some children are disappearing and in other countries they are going ahead to enact laws on child trafficking. These children who are not found or whose bodies are not found, we do not know where they end up. I want to ask the minister – it is good the Deputy Attorney General is here - when do you plan to come up with the child trafficking law on the Floor of the House?  

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I belong to Bunyoro Kingdom. I am glad the committee has recommended that the cultural leaders fund be reversed to the Ministry of Finance. Our cultural leaders have been suffering. The Ministry of Gender’s budget is so meagre that when they go there, at times they continue bouncing and do not get even the little that has been allocated to them. I would like to ask the government to take this recommendation as a strong one. The Ministry of Finance should really respect the cultural institutions, which were put in place by this Government. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

1.40
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): I have noted that the ministry carries out training; on Page 12, it says that they trained over 800 students at Nsamizi. Considering that they have a very small budget, I am wondering why this training cannot be passed over to the Ministry of Education so that we can save on the little money that the ministry has. 

I want to commend this Ministry on the point of functional adult literacy. (Applause) It says here that they have actually covered most of the country and they are now covering 69 percent of the whole country. I am talking about this because I know the majority of Ugandans in the countryside do not know how to read and write. Even many young ones do not know how to read and write. So, I commend them on this and I urge this House, as we pass this budget, to bear this ministry in mind should they come with a supplementary budget, we should support that budget too, considering that they handle issues of women, children and the youth who are a big percentage of the population.  

I have been wondering, under the Ministry of Finance they have established a body called a business culture centre, which intends to go training in the countryside. I wish this business culture centre had fallen under Ministry of Gender. It would have made much sense because the people to be trained in the countryside are the women and youth.  

Mr Speaker, you will bear with me, if we do not handle the issue of youth with caution we will have a problem. If we can actually start with them on this business culture thing, it would help us. It would make much sense and shape them to do what they are supposed to do. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.43
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to emphasize the point that the mandate of this ministry is so wide and yet the budget is so meagre. So, most of the work actually allocated to this ministry remains undone.  

Mr Speaker, I have the following suggestions. On top of the committee recommendation to increase the budget of this ministry, when you look at the work in this ministry, you note that some of the issues are actually crosscutting. Some issues can actually be dealt with by different ministries. When you look at page 22, for example, it talks about persons with disabilities and one of the recommendations is that the rehabilitation centres be transferred to the Ministry of Education and Sports. I would like to recommend that the mandate of this ministry be reviewed so that some of the work, which actually remains redundant, can be dealt with by other ministries.

Mr Speaker, when I was reading the budget revenue and expenditure report, I noted with serious concern that this report talks about under-funding of the district councils of persons with disabilities. I would like to share with this House that if you actually read that report, the allocation is the same; whether the council is for Kampala, Kabarole, Kamwenge or whatever, it is Shs 3,500,067 and yet other councils’ figures vary. So, I would like, in the next financial year, this figure to be varied according to the needs of the district as it is varied by other councils.  

Mr Speaker, I also support the gazetting of the International Day of Persons with Disabilities, which takes place on 3rd December every year. I would like to request the ministry that on top of gazetting this day, let there be adequate budgets to handle this day. Experience has shown that whenever we go to celebrate this day, the ministry of course works in liaison with the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda. But let it not be made an NGO issue. Let the ministry actually support us to fully support this day.  

Mr Speaker, just out of courtesy, the United Nations is developing a UN convention on the rights of persons with disabilities. I just thought that the ministry last financial year must have been part of this process and when they were giving us this report, they would at least have told us how far it has gone. I understand that at the end of the day, those provisions are going to be domesticated in our laws, but I did not see anything.  

Lastly, Mr Speaker, on the issue of rent, I feel that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should shoulder this burden so that these resources, which have been going to rent, can be given to marginalized persons like women, youth, and persons with disabilities. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.47
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): I thank the committee for the work they have done and my shadow minister for her contribution. As we are time-barred, Mr Speaker, I will comment on two issues. 

One, particularly, I draw the House to page 19 of the committee report where the issue of NSSF was raised. We all note that Ugandans who are employed contribute willingly to the NSSF, with the hope of getting benefits at the end of the day when they retire. However, the benefits of the employees of Uganda are overtime. They have got problems with getting the benefits of their retirement, and this is always reflected in the delayed payment of the benefits. This is especially so when those who are supposed to benefit are already aged, sometimes sick, or have to travel from a distance. They are very often troubled and by the time the benefits come, some of them would have even died. This is of concern. We would want people who deserve retirement to get it timely. Therefore, we urge those concerned in NSSF to speed up the process of giving retirement benefits to our laboured Ugandans.  

In the same respect, Mr Speaker, we note that employees are productive when still young and energetic. With the NSSF policy, these benefits are paid to people who are already retiring, old and probably sick. These people are really not energetic, not very productive and cannot reinvest the retirement benefits profitably to help them. On the other hand, we hear that sometimes this money has been allocated to Government programmes without the consent of the owners of the money, that is, the employees. 

It is in this vein that I propose that a mechanism be put in place, so that all the employees of Uganda who contribute to NSSF have a means of accessing this money while they are still able to enjoy or to reinvest in something viable that benefits them. This would be better than the money being kept at NSSF under lock until you retire, when you are sick and cannot ably enjoy your benefits. It would help if they, say, put soft loans or a revolving fund in a way that the owners of the money can access it while they are energetic. 

I hope the minister will also help us clear this allegation that the money is allocated to Government programmes without the consent of the owners of the money.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, my shadow minister has commented well on the issue of policy and minimum wage as well as youth and children. However, for emphasis, I would like to make this clear. It is very important that Ugandans reap the fruits of their labour. This can only be possible if there is an enabling policy in place for a minimum wage and employment, so that this is not mishandled as we have heard the shadow minister propose. 

Lastly, I want to emphasise that the women of Uganda have over time been upheld when they needed our mandate. As has been said in the committee report, issues which should benefit women are being handled silently or even postponed until campaigns come on board. We would want this Government to take women seriously, so that we are given what we deserve all the time not only when they need our support. Fellow Ugandan women, let us insist on getting what we deserve all the time not only during the elections. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.53
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to start off by thanking the chairperson of the committee together with her committee, and also my counterpart for the good analysis of our policy statement. I would also like to thank colleagues who have made very good contributions.  

On page 5 of my counterpart’s report, where she said that the President is responsible for the mess, I want to say that that was a mistaken statement. I am sure she meant the contrary.  

Having said that, Mr Speaker, since we are short of time, I will quickly run through. I agree with the comments of the committee and everybody who has spoken here that the ministry is seriously under- funded, considering the diverse mandate we have. I welcome your proposals for increasing the ceiling.  

I also welcome the proposal from the committee of restructuring the ministry. It is true we need to restructure the ministry. We have started on consultations with the Ministry of Public Service to trigger the process of restructuring the ministry.

Mr Speaker, on the burden of rent, I cannot agree more with the speakers who have strongly spoken in favour of Government buying the building to save that money, which is going out as a recurrent expenditure expense, and convert it into a capital expenditure.

On the cultural leaders lining up in the ministry, it is true the responsibility was passed to the ministry without the mandate. Therefore, whenever there are problems of funding they are equally affected. We hope that with the regional tier becoming a reality, this responsibility will either remain with us or be taken elsewhere.

Mr Speaker, we benefit quite a lot from international organisations like the ILO. We benefit from things like training and technical assistance. I agree with the committee that the membership to this committee should be met.

It is true the employment policy is not yet in place, but it has been drafted and it is true that it has taken a long time. It has taken a long time because it is a very important policy, which needs time to be developed and requires a lot of consultation with the various stakeholders. It also needs to take into consideration regional and global changes. I want to say that recently, we had an Eastern African Community meeting of ministers of labour here in Kampala. At that meeting, we agreed that all the partner states should have the employment policies in place by July next year.  

Mr Speaker, the NRM Government takes the rights of workers very seriously. That is why we are committed to upholding the tripartite arrangement between the employers, Government and the employees. My ministry is committed to supporting and upholding the rights of the marginalized. We are, therefore, doing our best to see that those workers who want to unionise are allowed to do so. Right now, I am engaged in dialogue with the hotel owners, with the view of getting them to allow their workers to unionise. We have agreed on a timeframe in which they are going to open up for the relevant trade unions to access their workers and interest them in unionisation. 

For the textile industries, I think this is where we have had a bit of problems. The Tri-Star workers have not been allowed to unionise and have faced what has been termed as, “unfair treatment” at their place of employment. We are doing everything possible. We have given them a six months timeframe to sort out the mess and allow the workers at Tri-Star, and the textile industry generally to unionise. 

Mr Speaker, on the revitalisation of the labour advisory board, this board is in place but it is affected by the under-funding. We have no money to operationise it, but it is in place. The Industrial Court is also affected. It is supposed to be at the level of a high court, which is supposed to draw money from the Consolidated Fund directly. We hope that Government will be able to sort out this anomaly soon. It is only the president of the Industrial Court and not the vice president or the rest of the team of the court that is allowed to access money from the Consolidated Fund like the rest of the High Court staff do.  

Mr Speaker, on NSSF, I am bound by collective responsibility; this was a decision of Government. We made this decision, but arising out of the concern expressed here, we are going to take your concerns to Government to see whether it can be reviewed. I would like to say that NSSF pays promptly. Maybe my sister, hon. Atim, mistook pensions with NSSF. I am told that NSSF pays promptly. If it does not, we shall take up this matter with the management since our ministry is still the custodian of the policy.

There is a minimum wage but it is hopelessly low. We are working towards fixing a meaningful minimum wage. Government is carrying out consultations to amend and get appropriate sector specific minimum wages. A blanket minimum does not benefit us, since different sector employees carry out different tasks. This Ugshs 6000, which was fixed before the NRM came, did not take into account that. We are proposing something, which will be sector specific, and consultations are ongoing under the tripartite arrangements for the workers, the employers and this Government. 

We are seriously reviewing the productivity because one of the key factors in determining a wage is the productivity of an employee. Government is putting a lot of emphasis on this. One of their proposals is to even put up productivity centres to enhance the capacity of our people, so that they can earn profitably from their sweat.

The chairperson of the committee talked about the acquisition of land for the national library of Uganda. Consultations are ongoing. We are seriously examining the expansion of library services to the districts in a decentralised function. We are finalising a national library policy to guide the districts on provision of library services.

On the Equal Opportunities Act, the NRM Government is the discoverer and protector of the marginalized so we are very mindful about the deadline. The principles have already been passed and drafting instructions have been passed to the First Parliamentary Counsel for the drafting. I beg this House to enact the law quickly when it is presented.  

Uganda is privileged to host the Eighth Women Affairs Meeting of the Commonwealth, which is to coincide with CHOGM. Arrangements are in high gear. A national organising committee is in place and key stakeholders are also going to be involved in this.  I hope next week or the week after, I will issue letters of invitation to the key stakeholders to come and participate in this important arrangement.  

I am very grateful to those who have appreciated the efforts of the ministry in promoting adult literacy.

Relocation of the rehabilitation centres for persons with disability: I think it is a welcome proposal to us because wherever the marginalized people can benefit most we support the arrangement. If they benefit more by relocation to the Ministry of Education, we fully support the proposal.

Externalisation of labour: This is a new innovation. For a long time, there has been an exodus of labour from Uganda to other countries, but no Government prior to the NRM Government came up with the policy on externalisation of labour. But being a new subject that may have even been hurriedly done, there may be some few issues, which may not have been captured. We have a policy in place and we have licensing regulations for those who are externalising labour. We are going to improve on this policy continuously.  

Mr Speaker, on the women and youth councils, the government is carrying out consultations. My sister, hon. Bintu, was concerned that the law for repealing them is being passed. Government cannot pass a law secretly; that is the mandate of this House.  Before the law comes to you here to repeal, these councils still exist legally. Until the Attorney General brings that law, I take it that these councils, which are very useful and have produced so many leaders, are still in place. The youth councils under the NRM Government have been exemplary unlike those, which were there during the UPC days. During the UPC days, for us in Luweero if they said that a youth is from NUYO or NUSU, we would just go for cover. 

The objectives of the youth councils under the NRM Government are very good, they are developmental and they have created leaders. I am happy to say that my brother, hon. Ekanya, is a product of the youth council. Hon. Bintu is a product of the youth council. I can quote half of this Parliament as products of these youth councils. What we are trying to do is to carry out consultations to see that these youth and women councils and councils of people with disabilities adequately fit under the new multi-party dispensation. That is the debate going on and nothing more.

Mr Speaker, Government condemns, in the strongest terms, child sacrifice and all other brutal acts against children. Government is committed to enforcing the provisions of the Constitution, the provisions under ILO to which Government of Uganda is signatory and the Children’s Act in protecting the children of Uganda. Whenever cases of child abuse are reported, my ministry follows them up promptly. My colleague, the Minister of State for Youth, is always on the road. Be it midnight or early morning, whenever there is a call hon. Kinobe goes there. Some of you must have seen him on TV when they were exhuming the half body of the child who was murdered in Nateete.  

What is important really is not fire-fighting but getting to the core of the problem. That is what we are trying to address. What are the causes? Why is the community silent? Why are the parents not suspecting? That is what we are trying to address. To be able to carry that out effectively, we need rigorous awareness campaigns for the children themselves, the parents, the communities and even those who are engaged in this silly business. I would like to invite the honourable members of Parliament to join us in this struggle.

Mr Speaker, Government has developed programmes to address issues of women and children in war-torn areas. We are working with UMCF, UNFPA, and UNIFOM, among others, to protect and promote the rights of our children and sisters who are under those very difficult conditions.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by requesting this House to approve the budget as presented by the chairperson of the committee. We are aware that we are going to operate in very low gear, but being part of Government we understand the constraints of Government. We understand the priorities, which were set this year. We are quite hopeful that next year the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is going to become a priority ministry in funding, especially with regard to those programmes under PEAP under the President’s Manifesto. I beg to move. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The prayer when the report was presented is that we adopt the report. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you see on your Order Paper that the next report should be that of Social Services, but I seem not to see the ministers here. They rung me in the morning saying that they were somewhere, I do not know whether they will be coming. Therefore, I am changing from Social Services to Trade to give time for the ministers to come from where they are. They are somewhere, but they will be coming. So, we prepare for Trade first and then we shall end with Natural Resources. I thank you for your understanding, honourable members. We now suspend the proceedings and we shall resume at 3.00 prompt. 

(The House was suspended at 2.11 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.20_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES FOR THE BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2006/07

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, originally, when we suspended the proceedings I thought you had reports on Trade, but I understand there was a breakdown of our machines and we could not get enough copies for you. Within an hour we shall have the copies, but we have copies for Natural Resources and the ministers are back from their meeting, so I think we can receive that report. Again I want to remind you, we agreed this morning that each report will only take one and half hours, that is, for presentation and necessary debate.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

3.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Emmanuel Dombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will try as much as is humanly possible to fit within the allotted time. I followed all the proceedings since morning, using the advantage of the advanced telecommunication video we have within the facilities of Parliament.  

Mr Speaker, I wish to present before this House the minutes of the Committee on Natural Resources as a requirement of our Rules of Procedure. 

The Committee of Natural Resources has the mandate of Vote 17, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; Vote 19, Ministry of Water and Environment; Vote 150, National Environment Management Authority (NEMA); and Vote 157, the National Forestry Authority.  

Mr Speaker, during the deliberations and the discussions of the policy statements, the committee also had an opportunity to interact with the public corporations that fall directly under the respective ministries over which we supervise. 

We did make a general observation. The committee noted that the role of Cabinet in reviewing and approval of the ministries’ business plans has been rather limited. The committee proposes that in future, the ministries’ plans and approval should be done by Cabinet before they are brought to Parliament. This would improve policy scrutiny and handle the crosscutting issues to avoid duplication of activities. This issue came up because in the report there were so many issues from the ministries, which required attention of other ministries yet we did not have enough time as a committee to interact with all the committees and ministries.  

Under Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, when you look at the performance of the budget, that is page 5 of the report, we noted as a committee that there was under performance of the budget to the tune of about 66 percent. The development budget particularly, under performed because there were significant shortfalls in Government counterpart contributions to Power IV project and also donor contributions to rural electrification. This is important because the budget process we undertake in Uganda is one of the most comprehensive ones. When we undertake such elaborative processes and then the performance is low, it demoralizes those people who effectively participate in the budget as a plan. This issue must be seriously noted, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, when you look at page 7, under the planned activities, we noted that the ministry plans to undertake rural electrification. They also undertake to conclude the financial closure of Bujagali hydropower project and Karuma. All Members and the public know that there is right now a crisis because of energy deficiency within the country. The performance of GDP has dropped by two percentage figures, from an estimation of about 6.5 percent to 4.5 percent. Mr Speaker, this is not in anybody’s interest. 

Besides that, the criteria for Government’s intention to extend power into rural areas have not been properly streamlined. Although there is a policy that the power will be connected to district headquarters and also key viable economic areas, at least as for the selection of those areas, nobody would really come up to say, “I come from such and such an economically viable area, therefore, I am a due candidate and must be considered.” We raised all this and agreed with the ministry that collective action is going to be taken, to which we were very grateful.

I also wish to note here, honourable members, that as a committee we did major in the areas, which we felt Government needs to take intervention. The ministry has done a lot of commendable jobs, but we felt it was not our responsibility at the moment to come to the Floor of the House and begin applauding whatever the ministry has done. In these observations, nonetheless, we want to note that there have been a lot of achievements.

When you come to page 8, we did note that the Ministry of Water and Environment has instructed the Ministry of Energy to gradually reduce the amount of water used for hydropower generation. We anticipate that by this period, there must be generation of about 120 megawatts only. Honourable members, energy demands in the country now come to about 380 megawatts. If we are generating 120 megawatts, that is a huge energy deficiency. This calls for urgent action by Government, to ensure that the energy deficiency is reduced.

The committee also observed that one of the ways we could improve on energy saving is by the use of energy saving bulbs. Government has proposed that they are going to import about one million bulbs, which are likely to be distributed through UMEME.  Since this is an economic activity, we wondered where other private participants would want to participate. The ministry did not have a clear policy on how best other private participants would participate in case they wanted to. As a committee, we did recommend that it would be better if this were properly streamlined so that it does not become an area of abuse.

Honourable members, on No.6 the committee noted that thermal power, which is meant to provide a major intervention, is extremely expensive and unsustainable. We noted that currently, Government subsidizes this sector to about $6.0 million per month. This is extreme! If we triple this to 150 megawatts, Government will be subsidizing this sector to about $18 million per month. This undermines the ability of the ministry or Government to even save money for further generation. The earlier we come into generation of hydropower the better because it will save this country a whopping subsidy in the production of power.

The other issue we observed as a committee is that, there is a very huge disagreement between the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development about what is responsible for the diminishing levels of waters in the lake. Honourable members, you will note that the water levels have been diminishing. Consequently, the advice by the Minister of Water was that we reduce on the flow. 

One major issue the committee brought up is that, there has also been a decline in the water levels of other neighbouring water bodies like River Nile, Lake Tanganyika. Power production in Rwanda and Tanzania has also gone down and yet they are not directly affected by the discharge at the Nalubale and Kiira power stations. To this end, we observed that maybe Government is taking the simplistic view of what exactly is happening without taking into consideration a thorough investigation of what could be responsible for what is happening in the environment. 

As a committee, we recommended that there is need for Government to immediately harmonize between its water and energy departments, to find out what and who is responsible for the decline. Secondly, we need to get a thorough investigation to establish exactly what is responsible within the sub-region for the declining water levels.

Honourable members, there are many issues that we observed. Look at page 9 of the report; we also noted that the persistent power increments within the sector may rise the cost of production, making Uganda’s goods less competitive within the region. To this, we asked the ministry to provide us with a comparative analysis in respect to other prices within the region. We did observe that Uganda in some sectors is really cheaper compared to others, but when we asked about the per capita within the East African region, we discovered that Uganda’s per capita is slightly lower. This by comparison makes Uganda’s energy very expensive. Until a few days ago, Uganda had a competitive advantage within the generation of hydro electricity. Now what is our competitive advantage? We need to streamline and also make sure that the increments do not negate prices and the quality of our products within the region.

The rest, honourable members, you will read for yourselves. Observation No. 15. It was observed that the ministry’s capacity to supply hydro electricity, which we want so much, depends on how sustainably the environment is exploited and yet there isn’t any integrated plan within the ministry’s activities to conserve the environment. The ministry, for instance, has continuously blamed the drought for the falling levels of the lake and reduced generation yet in its planned activities there is nothing on how they want to mitigate this.  

There may be crosscutting issues, but at least the ministry should show us that it is conscious that deterioration of the environment is impinging on the ability of the ministry to provide its mandate.

The other issue, which we observed and made recommendations on was the concessionaire agreements for UMEME and ESKOM. Honourable members, you know that Government entered into a concession for power distribution and power generation. Under the agreements, the concessionaire is required to undertake certain obligations over a period of time by investing a specific amount of funds over the period. We would have expected the minister, in his policy statement, to brief Parliament on the performance of these concessionaire agreements and how far the investment has gone. Unfortunately, there has not been anything like that. 

We did request the minister that in future, before the next statement we need to observe how these concessionaire agreements of ESKOM and UMEME are performing. We want verifiable figures of the investment that has been done in this sector by the investor, so that as a committee of Parliament we can crosscheck to ensure that the performance of the agreement is on course. This is the only way we can protect the assets of the people of Uganda, which we have been mandated by the law.

Mr Speaker, we discovered that the energy mix in this country has a problem. Until recently, we have been relying on hydropower, with over 90 percent generation capacity, but we discovered that over-reliance on one source of energy can become a disaster if that source experiences a problem. 

We do appreciate the ministry’s capacity and intention to drill oil within the respective regions. We could have made substantive mention of this, but we have not got any substantive information about the oil sector. We plan as a committee to visit these areas before we can comment on some issues that are happening. So, honourable members, we did request the ministry to make sure that we diversify the energy mix so that in case there is a problem with oil, we have enough gas, and if there is a problem with gas, we have coal. Reliance on one source can become a problem.

On the petroleum sector, honourable members, the committee observed that although the petroleum supply sector was liberalized with a view of increasing competition in the sector, so that the prices can be forced to reduce due to the market forces, the sector has continued to witness unexplained price hikes by oil companies. That was an observation to which we make a recommendation: It is important for the oil supply sector to be reinforced by having enough staff to make sure that they can supervise the sector effectively and ensure any excesses by the oil companies are minimized, if not reduced completely.

We also did observe, honourable members, that right now Uganda spends a lot of money in the transportation of oil by road haulage. It is expensive because it is costly, it has caused many avoidable accidents, and the wear and tear on the roads is high. As a committee, we feel the ministry should expedite the process of the procurement of the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline, which will in effect reduce the cost and, I am sure, the price of fuel.  

Besides that, the committee also recommends that Government should explore the possibility of bringing on board other stakeholders like Rwanda and Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). The continued haulage of fuel to DRC and Rwanda on our roads would negate the achievements of the pipeline if Uganda has any. Besides that, if there is an oil pipeline going to Rwanda and Congo and tomorrow Uganda is going to begin producing oil, we could use the same pipeline for the exportation of Uganda’s oil resource.  

In the petroleum exploration sector, Mr Speaker, although we have not got the details but at least we have got some facts. Allow me to applaud the government and the ministry for the deliberate effort taken in ensuring that over time, Uganda may become self sufficient within the oil sector and become an oil exporting country. (Applause)  

Mr Speaker, we had an opportunity to interact with the minister, the permanent secretary and the staff. I want to assure this House that the potential and the capacity the ministry has built, in form of human resource in the oil exploration sector, is such an achievement. The fast tracked oil that has been reported is not basically the responsibility of the exploration companies alone; it is more a product of the human capacity that Uganda was able to build in the department.  

I want to tell you that Hardman Resources was given a license to go and explore and they were supposed to drill within Lake Albert. Because of the statistics and the investigations being done by the Ugandan technical team, they teamed up and told them, “Before you do that on the waters, why don’t you try on this area because we have the statistics?” When they did it, within a period of time they had struck the oil. If this capacity had not been built, we would be far. So, as a committee we are grateful and a lot is being done.  

We need to make the following observations, even when they are doing a good job. The department continues to receive inadequate funds for its operations and yet many of the activities are field-based. One of the problems we saw with this, honourable members, is that we cannot rely on the oil prospecting companies to give the government data about what is available if our staff themselves in the field are not given enough resources and capacity to ensure that they supervise the process. We do recommend that the ministry be given enough resources to ensure that they can supervise the prospecting activities by the prospecting companies.

Although the ministry has trained many scientists in the oil exploration sector, the levels of remuneration for the staff is still very low and uncompetitive. This has therefore led to many employees leaving the sector in search for greener pastures within and abroad. Oil is a resource, and we noted that some of the engineers and geo-scientists that had been trained have been taken up by the same oil exploring companies because of the quality of the people we are employing.  Besides, a number are leaving and are going within the region.  This is a challenge to the ministry and to Government. 

In the recommendations, we proposed that Government considers creating a petroleum authority, which should be able to streamline the policy, setting up the law on the management of the workers to ensure that this sector is run professionally.  This is an area for further investigation but it is a recommendation, which the committee has come up with. 

Mr Speaker, we would want the exploration and discovery of oil fast tracked. Although Government is in advanced stages of confirming this discovery, as most studies conducted have been provided, it appears Government is less prepared for the next phase, which is the development phase. This phase requires enhanced capacity in oil economics, oil refining, engineering, marketing, transportation and even the related infrastructure like roads, storage, security and the like. Government does not seem to be adequately prepared. So, if we must fast track the process, Government must be seen to be putting the attendant structures and building capacity in the next phase, so that we do not reach there when we do not have the necessary technical people.

Observation No. 5 page 16: Honourable members, you have read in the media a lot of speculation and concerns about the production sharing agreement.  During the interaction with the committee, the minister and the permanent secretary assured us that Uganda does have a very favourable production sharing agreement. 

I want to say here that we have not had an opportunity to look at it, but we have demanded for it. A production sharing agreement is a public document that should be transparently managed to ensure public confidence in the government’s ability to manage the oil wealth in trust. We did observe that because Government is negotiating with other potential prospecting companies, it was not proper to make it public now but at least as a Parliament of Uganda we demand that we need an opportunity. Even if it requires doing so in a closed session, we need an opportunity that will give the public confidence. At least we would be able to monitor what Government is going to achieve so that we are not cheated.  

Honourable members, you have been reading about so many countries, which I will not mention here, that got a raw deal in the process. The permanent secretary gave us indicative figures that actually Uganda might be sharing about 70 percent and a prospecting company about 30 percent. All this to us was hearsay until we can confirm it by looking at the agreement, which we are going to demand for soon.

When we go to the mineral sector, honourable members, like the oil exploration sector, Government has also invested a lot of money in the development of human capacity. When you go to Entebbe, you can get mesmerized at the number of geoscientists, geochemists, geophysicists and geo everything we have and their quality. When seated here, you cannot be sure that Uganda has that potential. There are people graduating within the country and also being sponsored to do advanced training abroad but we have the same problem, poor remuneration. Many people after training just leave. 

Honourable members, you remember that mining is a strategic sector for investment, if Uganda is going to break even. The Minister of Finance, however, continues to release these amounts of money that can hardly sustain its operations. For the month of July, for example, after the Vote-On-Account the Minister of Finance released only Shs 10 million for the department for two months. To us this was so dismal that it negates the activities of the department, yet this department earns a lot of money for the Consolidated Fund. The whole of last year, for example, the department raised about Shs 2.8 billion for the Consolidated Fund. We were sure, and we have been assured by the department that if they are given more money, they can be enhanced to do more.  

Honourable members, this Parliament approved a loan for the department of mineral development but most of the activities that are being undertaken are donor funded, with little commitment of funds from Government. We are afraid that when this project expires after five years, unless Government commits more money it may be difficult to sustain their activities, which are a strategic area of investment for the country. Besides that, the equipment and the buildings in this sector leave a lot to be desired. Some buildings were erected in the 1920s. The machines themselves are an occupational hazard, which is very unfortunate.  

So, we recommend that Government undertakes its obligation to provide enough funds for the project and also to ensure that the dilapidated buildings are either destroyed or rehabilitated to ensure human habitation. Honourable members, that is for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.

Under the Ministry of Water, their mandate is very clear on page 21. We observed on page 22, that their budget performed literally better. It performed about 94 percent, which to us is good.

Under NEMA’s budget, at the end you will discover that out of the Shs 7.17 billion, which is provided for the department, only 0.43 is the government of Uganda’s contribution. This raises a lot of questions as to whether the activities of NEMA will be sustainable after or if the donor funds are not provided.  

Besides that, the ministry is new. Originally, it was the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, but right now this is the Ministry of Water and Environment. About two billion shillings is required to make the ministry function, but this money has not been provided for in the budget and yet the ministry must run. As a committee, we recommend that there must be a supplementary budget to ensure that the ministry performs its activities.  

On page 24, honourable members, the achievements of the ministry are presented. You will notice they mentioned that under the rural water sanitation, construction of piped water has been extended to Kabwohe, Itendero town council and is ongoing in six rural local centres of Kachumbala, Rwebisengo, Bulanga, Muyembe, Rushere and Kazo. We did not have an opportunity as a committee to go to these areas to confirm. We have highlighted them here so that if there is any Member who has better information about these areas, they should go ahead to inform us during the course of this debate, to ensure that we can do cross-examination or crosschecking on what exactly is happening in those areas.  

The same goes for recommendation No.4; construction of water systems was completed in eight towns: in Mubende, Hoima, Kyatiri, Bwijanga, Bujenje, Bwizibwera and Kaberebere. We have not had an opportunity to go there. Whereas it has been reported to us as a committee, I cannot stand here authentically to say this has been an achievement because we have not crosschecked. However, we are grateful to the ministry if it has actually fulfilled its mandate in these respective areas. 

Among the observations are recommendations on page 26. We did observe that the technical support unit being used by the ministry to supervise the water services in districts is inefficient. They have not been able to prevent shoddy work done by the contractors. Some boreholes that have been drilled are unproductive and yet this is the arm of Government that should monitor many districts on the implementation of their activities.  

Another issue, which has come up and has been presented on the Floor of this House, is where the department of water for production should be located. Before I read the observation in the report, allow me to say this, Mr Speaker. Wherever the department is located, if it is not funded it will be ineffective. Shifting it from the department of agriculture to water will still be a problem. When we look at the technical capacity, ordinarily this should be located in the department of water and environment where the capacity has been built. 

A memorandum of understanding has been signed between the two ministries to separate the responsibilities. Those for irrigation are being undertaken by the Ministry of Agriculture and those for construction and delivery of water should be the preserve of the Ministry of Water. Continuing to shift it left and right without providing the resources will not provide any solution to the problem. 

We observed, as a committee, honourable members, that the VAT charged in the ministry’s operations is more than Shs 23 billion, and yet the budget for the ministry to this department of water is less than that. The question is, should this continue to be the case? Why shouldn’t the activities of water department be VAT-exempt like they have done in the department of works? We recommend that the activities of water development be VAT-exempt to ensure that enough funds are provided and the ministry provides the desired service. 

Honourable members, one of the issues we observed is that, because of the dropping levels of Lake Victoria, the intake pipes for Entebbe Water Works and Gaba Water Works need to be extended urgently if Kampala, Entebbe, Jinja and the neighbouring areas are to get water at least by the month of October. It is anticipated that if $ 3.0 million is not provided as promised by Government to extend the intake water pipes, Kampala, Entebbe and some areas of Mukono will not have water. 

At Gaba Works, the intakes must be extended for over one and a half kilometres. That is how bad the problem is. National Water has promised to provide one million dollars out of its own operations, but they require the ministry too to make its provisions. As a committee we recommend that the ministry urgently makes these funds available, to ensure that what the ministry and department intends to do is fulfilled.

Under the recommendations on page 27, honourable members, you will see that the water sector procurement works should be VAT-exempt. The ministry should take affirmative action by providing water to communities that are most needy, to ensure even distribution of water in the country. They gave us statistics of about 67 percent water coverage in the whole country, but we know some districts have water coverage of 25 percent. 

The shadow minister for water did specifically point out that Kitgum has water coverage of 25 percent. Whereas the ministry has attempted to do a good job, we do require that the areas that have less percentage be given affirmative action to ensure that there is even distribution of Government resources.

The other recommendations, honourable members, you will read for yourselves, as we have noted them. Recommendation 11 says that the ministry should secure funds to construct an office block. Honourable members, when we visited the ministry headquarters we noted that, first of all, the ministry had taken over an office for the Director of Water Development and some of the workers had been crammed in the corridor. This affects the productivity of the worker, yet the ministry has land, which is being threatened with encroachment. 

We do recommend that Government provides funds to build an office block where the water department will be housed, to ensure that employees work in a conducive environment and also to protect the land, which is prime land, around Luzira.

On the corporations under the ministry, Mr Speaker and honourable members, we want to take this opportunity to register our appreciation, as a committee, on the performance of National Water and Sewerage Corporation despite the problems that do exist. Honourable members, you are aware that until recently, many Ugandans thought that the solution to poor management in public corporations is privatisation and liberalisation. What has happened to National Water? It has not been privatised but the management has been enhanced by able and trained people. The performance of the corporation rose operating income to 57 billion in the last financial year. 

For over five years, the corporation has not received any subsidy from Government. It has also set up an external services wing, which has been able to generate one million dollars, and they have set up a water services institution. To us these are indicators that if the management of these public corporations is enhanced, it can even provide a better job than what we think about privatisation being the answer to all this. 

Because of the above, we did recommend that the National Water and Sewerage Corporation should not be privatised. It should remain a public corporation and it should be enhanced. Let me mention more about this. Honourable members, if a private company came here to run National Water and Sewerage Corporation, all the earnings from it would be repatriated as profit. The corporation has now been able to use all its earnings to extend the water services. They are going to extend water from Jinja to Iganga town, Soroti to Kaberamaido, Mbale to Butaleja. If our corporations are not enhanced, then as a country we shall not be doing much. 

The only problem we noted, honourable members, is that Government charges VAT on water and yet water is life. To us this is contrary to the government policy of water is life. We do recommend that VAT on water should be removed to enable the corporation retain money to do its services. This is a lot of money. Even where it is paid, the corporation did note that they are charged VAT on billings and not on the money collected. Government is one of the biggest victims, which does not pay, and yet the corporation pays VAT on the bills of Government. This is very ironical. As a committee we do recommend that Government expedites the process of paying their bills to National Water. 

I want to note one final issue on National Water, honourable members. Mr Speaker, you did note that Members of the Opposition can do effective work within the committees of the House. While we were deliberating the issues of the committee with the National Water and Sewerage Corporation, one Member, hon. Kyanjo, did raise a very important issue, which we had not thought about as a committee. He did observe that many places of worship (churches, mosques) have ablutions but many cannot use them because they fear the bills and yet Christians and the other religious people do not collect enough money in their churches. So, the honourable member and the committee did request National Water to consider giving concessionary rates to places of worship to, which they immediately accepted.

Mr Speaker, you remember this Parliament passed a motion to pray. The honourable member did request that when the committee has an opportunity to meet UMEME, he would want to extend a similar request to UMEME. We assured him we shall let him know, although he is not a Member of the committee. Since it was a plausible request, we shall let him know in advance so that he can put his request. 

We also noted that land is being encroached on at Gaba and this is a direct threat to the quality of the water and the health of the people who are going to use that water. We did recommend to the corporation and the ministry that these encroachers on that land should be evicted immediately. If they came there with the knowledge of Government, then Government should make sure they find them an alternative place where they can be. 

Honourable members, the last issue on National Water was the sewerage coverage. Although the water performance and connections improved to 70 per cent, we did discover that the sewerage connectivity is only seven per cent. The question is, where do the people discharge the water they take in if this is the comparative? We did recommend as a committee that the simplified sewerage connection policy which has been adopted by the corporation should be expedited and funding provided so that if this one is not done, the rate of disease and Government expenditure on health will continue soaring, which is not proper for us as a country. 

You have noted on page 31, what recommendations we have made; Government provided $3.0 million for Gaba Water Works and counter-part funding to ensure that by the end of this we continue receiving water and this is a major recommendation as a sector.

On page 32 is the department of environment in the Ministry of Water and Environment. On page 33, the committee has observed that there is duplication of activities between the department of environment affairs in the ministry and NEMA. According to the work plans of NEMA and the ministry department, it is difficult to apportion responsibility for any failure of implementation, should this occur. The department of environmental affairs should be limited to monitoring and policy guidance. This is a recommendation of the committee and if there are any funds that have been provided in the budget for this department to implement activities that NEMA is doing, those funds should be remitted to NEMA to ensure NEMA does a good job because by the Act, this is a direct responsibility of NEMA.

Although the current drought has been mainly caused by environmental factors, little effort is being made to halt environmental degradation. People have continued to encroach on the riverbanks, the lakeshores as the water level continues to rescind.  This is a huge problem and it was observed by the committee.

Observation 5, the meteorology department: Many have read that Entebbe does not have a weather radar. This is very dangerous! If we are going to host CHOGM and the queen is going to fly to Queen Elizabeth National Park and we do not have a radar to monitor the weather, how will the queen land there? I want to tell you that the Committee on National Economy was supposed to fly to Kasese this morning, but the flight was cancelled because the weather is not clear in Kasese and we did not know whether we would land properly. So, if the radar and the attendant equipment are not procured, for the safety of the people, but also for the successful hosting of CHOGM, then, this is going to be a serious omission.  

So, we do recommend as a committee that this department should be facilitated - under number six, you see the amounts that are required - and also to improve the meteorology services. 

Yesterday, I heard the honourable member from Busongora complaining about the weather forecasting. But how do the departments do effective weather forecasting when they do not have the equipment and they are under-facilitated?  These are problems and challenges that must be looked into.

We also recommend that the role of NEMA vis-à-vis the department of environment affairs should be urgently streamlined. The department of environment affairs should be left with funds for policy guidance, monitoring and oversight; support, supervision and any funds for implementation should be diverted to NEMA.

National Forest Authority:

On page 35, honourable members, you can see the planned activities, but on page 36, we have the observations. The problem of forest encroachment is widespread and needs to be addressed urgently as it has been a source of unrest in the country and a discouragement to donors and private sector investment.
  
Number two, the sustainable management and conservation of the natural forest is a key challenge to National Forest Authority. Many central forest reserves are in a sorry state and the demand to change central forest reserves to other land uses of being degazetted is growing everyday. The committee was informed that METHA has requested for part of Mabira Forest Reserve for sugar cane plantation. We treated this as information, but the committee has not gone fully to discuss the request and whether Mabira should be degazetted or not. 

But in principle, honourable members, if you read on page 37(2), the committee appreciates the need for increased effort in the sugar cane sector and the need to create more jobs for Ugandans. The committee, however, recognises the need to preserve the natural forest in order to conserve the environment as being eminent. The committee therefore, recommends as follows:
•	That before Parliament makes any recommendation for change of land use or to degazette any land, Parliament should make a thorough analysis of all previous recommendations and establish whether the basis and rationale was followed and implemented? Honourable members, you remember that before Parliament degazetted Namanve, Government was required to get exactly similar land elsewhere to make sure Namanve is replanted elsewhere. But I doubt, the minister will stand and confirm whether Government has done this, because as a committee, we have not come across anything like that.

•	We pray that Government should increase funding to the department of National Forestry Authority and also the people should be sensitised on the value of forests cover to the environment, as this will enhance the protection of the forest.

The National Environment Management Authority (NEMA): The planned activities are on page 39 and the key priorities for the sector are also on page 40. But the committee on page 41 did observe that NEMA’s activities do not seem to be felt at the grassroots since the funding for local Government is very limited. We also observed that NEMA should ensure that the process of eviction of encroachers should be as transparent as possible to change the public perception that NEMA is partial in the way it conducts its evictions. 

One of the examples given here is Nyakana’s house. That whereas NEMA was demolishing Nyakana’s house in the wetland, in the neighbour hood there were so many houses in the wetlands, yet they were standing still and NEMA was doing nothing about it. For an ordinary onlooker on TV to see the activities on NEMA or in the neighbourhood, they really doubt the motive of NEMA in conducting into that. So, if they improved on the transparency on how they conduct their work, it would increase the effectiveness of NEMA.  

Honourable members, one of the things we noted under NEMA is that there is pollution of our soils, the water works, the water systems by the use of the polythene bags the so-called “kaveera”. This is very dangerous and if it is not urgently addressed, a few years from now, Government will pay colossal sums of money trying to remove the effects of the “kaveera”. As a committee, we recommended that there should be urgent measures taken to progressively ban the use of “kaveera”. 

This is recommendation number 5 on page 41. That the low-density polythene bags should be progressively phased out and Government should help in exploring the possibilities of getting an alternative method, which the people could use. You can use paper bags, you can use other technologies, and you can even invest in research in some of our universities to make sure we come up with some of the issues that we use.

In brief, these have been the committee’s observations on the two ministries and in conclusion, I wish to beg as follows:

That the House approves for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development a recurrent expenditure of Shs 6,165,900,099 and then the development expenditure of Shs 238,689,258,000 for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. I also move that for the Ministry of Water and Environment a recurrent expenditure of Shs 3,519,879,000 and development expenditure of Shs 61,747,102,000 be approved. For Vote 150, that is National Environment Authority, recurrent expenditure of Shs 832,000,000 and development expenditure of Shs 6,548,514,000 be approved and the National Forest Authority recurrent expenditure of Shs 100,000,000 and development expenditure of Shs 6,318,937,000 be approved. Mr Speaker, in anticipation that the ministries will take into account the recommendations of the committee, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have 60 visitors from Luuka who are represented by hon. Meddie Mulumba. They have come here to see how things are done. You are welcome!

4.12
THE SHADOW MINISTER, ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Harry Kasigwa): Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence that given the gravity of the energy crisis in Uganda, you allow me to present this five page document verbatim such that everybody gets to understand the gist of our position as an opposition. Thank you.

The mandate of the ministry is very clear and derived from the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which stipulates under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XXVII (iii) that, “The state shall promote and implement energy policies that will ensure that people’s basic needs and those of the environment… are met”. Therefore, this august House has a crucial role to play and consequently choices to make in order to uphold this Constitution regardless of the political divide or affiliation. For the effects of our weakening energy sector are brutally crosscutting and non-discriminatory. This is an issue that stands beyond partisanship; we are faced with the crisis and I think we should stand up and address it seriously. 

Pursuant to this constitutional mandate, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development in 2002 came up with an energy policy and in her foreword, the then honourable minister had this to say, “Maintaining the current growth and ultimately achieving sustainable development is a challenge that calls for long term strategic planning.  Energy planning and development is a key input in the overall strategic planning cycle. 

In the past, this important linkage could not be adequately addressed since the energy sector lacked a comprehensive integrated policy framework; annual ministerial policy statements accompanying the budget drove the sector. This holistic energy policy will go a long way in laying a foundation for the country’s development.” This is what hon. Syda Bbumba had to say in 2002. 

As to whether the spirit behind this statement is a reflection of the terms, is anybody’s guess. For the 2006/07 ministerial policy statement is the usual statement and we are highly doubtful that the budgetary requirement of Shs 244 billion that the ministry is seeking will enable it execute its mandate to the required levels. 

Our document is based on the executive summary of the ministerial policy statement; so I go to the energy sector. Mr Speaker, you recall that when the shadow minister of finance and planning prepared the opposition position to the budget, he pointed out that Uganda’s energy shortfall stands at 800 mega watts as opposed to the 200 that the Minister of Finance presented in his budget. It is, therefore, important to note that the amount of power that Uganda can produce is 350 mega watts and what is being generated actually is 170 mega watts. 

While presenting the State of Nation Address, the President did state that Uganda was going to build two hydro power stations within 44 months and if I can report him so well, he did say that he is no longer interested in the circus that we have been engaged in. The stations at Bujagali and Karuma unfortunately in our considerable opinion reflect the usual fire brigade approach that has characterised this Government’s long-standing disregard for institutional plans. 

It should be brought to the attention of this House that the defunct UEB under the able leadership of hon. Simon D’Ujanga, who happens to be the Minister of State for Energy, had long done the sequencing of construction of hydro power plants along the line.  Government disregarded this plan and instead got preoccupied with the privatisation of UEB, the effect being the undue delay in the hydro power project and the resultant cost being loss of production and load shedding that we are grappling with today in chain. 

Even with the implementation of the President’s new promise, we must remain deeply concerned.
The Bujagali hydroelectric power project is envisioned to have a 250 mega watt generating capacity and is welcome. However, the amount of water that can be drawn from the lake today and for the next so many years is only 750 cubic metres per second. This pillage, as the committee chairman did say, translated into 120 mega watts of power from both Nalubaale and Kiira power stations. Thus, Bujagali only being five kilometres down stream with no additional reservoir, we are highly doubtful that it will generate more than 130 mega watts of power.  

This scenario raises so many questions.  One, what will happen to the unutilised installed capacity for as long as the water levels remain low? Two, assuming Government under the power purchase agreement is to pay the investor for the unutilised capacity, what will be the cost and what is its sustainability? Assuming the tariff is passed onto the distribution chain, will the Bujagali electricity be affordable to both the domestic and industrial consumers as the chairman did state?  Taking into consideration the above, is Bujagali project Uganda’s energy dream solution as the President wants us to believe?

Karuma project is designed to deliver approximately 250 mega watts into the grid on completion. However, unlike Bujagali, owing to its additional reservoir of Lake Kyoga, the amount of water for power generation at Karuma makes this project more logical of the two options. One then wonders why Government continues to give precedence to Bujagali dam in spite of the risks and the costs; surely, why not Karuma first because the investor already has his funds at hand?

Thermal generation:

In a desperate measure to mitigate the power crisis that has since shattered our economy, the government of Uganda licensed ADREKO to install a 50 mega watt light fuel diesel generator at Lugogo in May 2005. This generator consumes an average of 180,000 litres of diesel per day. Inevitably, the cost of this power translates into an exorbitant tariff when put into a distribution chain at market price.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, what is strange but true is that because the pricing is unaffordable, the government had to buy down the tariff with a monthly subsidy as the chairman said of approximately $7 million from the energy stabilisation fund which has since run out. With the depletion of this fund, Government has been forced to borrow to maintain the subsidy. 

What comes to our mind is, was this decision rational and in the interest of the nation to set up a 50 mega watt light fuel diesel generator at Lugogo at a subsidy of Ugshs 152 billion annually? Government is hoping that when they borrow money, the money that we use to repay will come from the tariff increases in the Bujagali power project; it is a complex situation.  

Renewable energy generation:

We in the opposition are very supportive of the renewable energy development programme if implemented rationally and without undue political interference. The areas are not easily accessible to the grid will be serviced. However, if you look at the spread out of the many hydro sites that are prioritised for development, 90 per cent are in the Western region leaving out the Elgon region which has a great potential.  

Secondly, we are cognizant of the wonders of generation in sugar mills have done Mauritius. In this regard, we would wish to urge Government to get out of the illusion that having three sugar mills in the country is a critical mass desired to consolidate the sugar industry in Uganda. We propose that Government designs a vibrant sugar policy with special emphasis on the Acholi, Lango and Teso sub-region for co-generation and post-war reconstruction.

The question of the President re-gazetting Mabira Forest should not arise. What we should look at is to begin thinking of setting up new sugar factories in this country. Mauritius has got about 15 vibrant - from 250 they came up with 16 after consolidation. But here we are talking of three and we believe we create a critical mass. We believe that is quite unfair.

Rural electrification:

Mr Speaker, rural electrification per se is a noble concept for it takes power to the vast economy where 80 per cent of our population derives their livelihood. However, for this concept to outlive its intended design, the agrarian question ought to be addressed in a more holistic and realistic manner as opposed to the PMA, NAADS, resource gosling approaches whose results you can hardly measure quantitatively and qualitatively. We say this against the background of the ever rising poverty levels in the rural setup and affordability of our brothers and sisters in the rural areas to getting connected and the fact that some of these lines have never seen electricity running through them ever since they were installed.    

The petroleum supply and distribution sub-sector:

We appreciate the ministry’s efforts to streamline this very important sub-sector that is by seeing the Petroleum Supply Act through Parliament and liberalisation of the sector that had for quite a while been in the hands of multi-national players who transacted more or less as curtails to the consumers.  

However much progress has been made in the sub-sector, we wish to put it to this House that the profit margin on white petroleum projects in Uganda remains the highest in the sub-region. This coupled with the high tax regime per litre of fuel leaves the population grumbling because of an upward trend in the cost of living, production and the cut in saving. 

We in the opposition believe in innovative management and we, therefore, propose that Government should immediately create a fuel consumption for electricity fund out of which a win-win situation will emerge. We propose that the fund be based on a Ugshs 50 per litre profit forfeitures by the oil companies and that Ugshs 50 per litre tax forfeitures by Government with an annual fuel consumption of 700 million litres. These forfeitures will raise the electricity fund to Ugshs70 billion.

With the fund operational and prudently managed, any financial institution commercial or otherwise across the globe will provide upfront financing for a number of power projects without much ado. All it takes is commitment and amending some sections of the Petroleum Supply Act of 2003 that is Section 6, 26, 35 and 44 among others.

Mr Speaker, I come to the petroleum exploration and development sub-sector. Energy supply is a global challenge and we as a country must adequately prepare for it. Mr David Orel, Chairman and Chief Executive of Chevron Corporation, one of the world’s leading petroleum giants, recently put this challenge in clear perspective when he had this to say, “Energy will be one of the defining issues of this century. One thing is clear, the era of easy oil is over. What we all do next will determine how well we meet the energy needs of the world in this century and beyond.” 

Demand is soaring like ever before, as populations grow, economies take off. Millions in the developing world are enjoying the benefits of life styles that require increasing amounts of energy. In Uganda, it is characterised that people are driving the harmers these days, the six litre vehicles by our colleagues who have been in Government and taken some of the global fund money. In fact some say that in 20 years the world will consume 40 per cent more oil than it does today. At the same time, many of the world’s oil and gas fields are maturing and new energy discoveries remain occurring in places where resources are difficult to extract physically, economically and even politically. 

When growing demand meets tighter supply, the result is more competition for the resources. We can wait until the crisis forces us to do something, or we can commit ourselves together and start by asking the tough questions of; how do we meet the energy needs of the developing world and those of the industrialised nations? What role will renewable and alternative energy policies play? What is the best way to protect our environment? How do we accelerate our conservation efforts?  Whatever action we take, we must not look just to next year but to the next 50 years. 

Going by the citation, we did not belabour the importance to our nation of the old discovery in the Albert region. All that we demand is that this process of exploration production and consequent legalities should be handled in a transparent manner as enshrined in our Constitution.  Therefore, the notion that the agreement signed between Energy Africa Limited oil and the government of Uganda are classified documents should not arise.

Mr Speaker, going by the ministerial policy statement, Government has already signed production sharing agreements with the mentioned companies.  Under what legal framework did the government proceed with these agreements? For section 244(2) of the Constitution provisions provide that, “Subject to this Article, Parliament shall make laws regulating-  (a) the exploitation of minerals and petroleum; (b) the sharing of royalties arising from mineral and petroleum exploration” etcetera.  Under which confidentiality provisions of the laws enacted did Government act? 

That aside, we would wish to bring to the attention of this august House that production sharing agreements are an extremely complicated model for our poor country like Uganda yet it is a system that most oil companies favour. That is why you see a country like Nigeria despite having discovered oil way back in 1974 is still poor. That is why countries like Angola have a problem; it is because of the production sharing agreements.

Mr Speaker, in theory, the state has ultimate control over the oil while a foreign company a consortium of companies extract it under the contract. In practice, however, the actions of the state are severely constrained by the stipulations in those contracts. They are normally huge documents and are complicated documents as we shall prove at a later stage.

In the production sharing agreement, the foreign company provides the capital investment in exploration drilling and eventually the construction of infrastructure. The initial production of oil extracted is then allocated to the company which it sells to recoup its costs and capital investment. This oil is referred to as cost oil. Going by the recent interview by the hon. Minister of Energy in one of his diaries, he did state that for any other amount of oil that will go as cost oil is going to be between 50 and 60 per cent. 

This is a nervy - because once the costs have been recovered, the remaining profit oil is divided again between the state and the companies. So, in reality, you will discover that if you calculated it, the government of Uganda if it is true, these agreements are in place, and if the 60 per cent is going to go out as cost oil, is going to get less than 20 per cent of this.  

At a later stage, we shall demonstrate the intricacies that the government may have got entangled in bearing in mind the level of corruption in our country and mismanagement and corruption associated with oil production in other African countries, demand that the existing petroleum production sharing agreements be tabled before this House for perusal.  

Mr Speaker, we did make some recommendations. One, Government should review its strategy of involving the private sector in the development of electricity sub-sector by legislating several benchmarks that will regulate the financial and cost norms for power purchase agreements that normally bear inherent risks. 

In particular, we urged Government to firmly regulate the following: to avoid parrying undue cost factors in any PPA. Financing charges, for example, interests on loans borrowed by the investors, the inflation factor on foreign exchange risks, return on equity and incentives such as on deem degeneration and operation and management costs; all these build into the tariff. These are the areas that lead to corruption in negotiations of PPAs and resources of high tariffs and abnormal profits for investors.

The single buyer model currently in operation in the electricity sector, that is Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited in our considered opinion is risky. Therefore, since the trend is to develop several mineral hydros across the country and introduce an energy mix, Government should undertake to develop the transmission grid and ensure that it is managed at regional levels in order to enhance inefficiency and create equal opportunities. In other words, Government should adopt a multi buyer model. 

By evacuating power from Jinja to come to Kampala and service the industries, more than 10 mega watts are lost because of inefficiencies in the system.  So, we are proposing that this should be broken out on regional levels as we enhance efficiency.

Government should immediately create an electricity fund from petroleum sales as we have proposed above in readiness for our entry into the oil production curtail. Government should also immediately through open consultation start developing a national petroleum management policy and petroleum trust fund to enable prudent management of petroleum income and effective investment in the future.

Energy development and petroleum exploration attract huge sums of money and vested interests.  You have read about people running to buy land in the Albert region, therefore, being susceptible to corruption and high level of political interference. We urge Government to practice transparency to its highest level if we are to develop resilient homegrown solutions to our problems.

In conclusion, the challenge before this House is enormous and the manner in which we handle it could either drive the country forward, lead to stagnation or a total halt in major economic activities. It is, therefore, our humble submission that we adopt a bi-partisan modus operand to sort out this energy crisis once and for all without recourse to apportioning blame.

Mr Speaker, I was part of the blame in the last campaign when the President came to Jinja and said that I and my colleagues were responsible for the black out in the country, yet I think he is a Chief Executive. The issue is, he has failed to manage.

Mr Speaker, it is our sincere request that the ministry’s policy statement be given additional time in order to generate consensus on the way forward. I say this because we might rush to pass the budget, fine, but at the end of the day, it is our people, it is ourselves that are going to suffer. The tariffs will be high for all of us regardless of where you belong. 

In the spirit of building nationalism, we in the opposition believe that this crisis began way back in 1991; it is not a yesterday affair. It has been growing over the years systematically and that is why we suggest that in the Constitution of this august House, we discuss the energy crisis in this country.  

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I thank you. I beg to move. Permit me lay this copy on Table.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. But it has taken some time yet there is a second one. But can it be summarised? I think even this one could have been summarised.  

4.39
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Beatrice Anywar): I thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee where I belonged for the work presented to the House.

Mr Speaker, I am quite aware that time is not our best ally today and I will do my best for the interest of the nation to give the basic outlook to this. 

I begin by noting the great work and burden and responsibility this ministry is holding to which I am responding. It is really the issue of life.  When we talk about water and environment, we talk about life and in that respect, I will do my best to talk about how to protect the life of Uganda.

The minister concerned with water - I would like to also thank her for her report to which the committee reacted. Of course it is mandated by the Constitution to do that and bearing in mind their mission of promoting and ensuring the rationale and sustainable utilisation, development, effective manage and to safeguard water and environment resources for social welfare and economic development of Ugandans.

I will go on to the recommendations in reaction to that and our position as the opposition. The highlight of it is that when we talk about water, Ugandans are looking towards having clean and safe water for human consumption, both for urban and rural areas. We are talking about sanitation facilities for both urban, rural and trans-highways. We are talking about water for production, crops, irrigation, livestock, agriculture and water for rural industries.  

When we talk about the environment, the highlights are that there should be strategies designed to implement policies meant to sustain the environment use and preservation and in the long run the renewal of the environment.

When we talk about meteorology, we look at them providing early warnings for the safety of the life and protection of property and the natural environment. We need also to look at the data which the meteorologist give for navigation and provide for our custody weather or climate changes, information to sectors like energy, water resources, wildlife, agriculture for use in planting seasons.  

In that respect, we start with water and sewerage services. Before I embark on that, I would want to make one correction, which was made by my Chairman for the Natural Resource Committee when he mentioned that the land, which is a water hazard to Luzira for building was being threatened by encroachment. But the fact is that this piece of land is not being threatened by encroachment, but threatened by the rampant giving a way of land by the President to investors. I would like this to be put right because this is what we got on the ground and I think it is absurd because water is life and its survival is the survival of Ugandans. [Ms. Eriyo rose _] Mr Speaker, I need to proceed. My hon. colleague will have ample time to respond appropriately. 

I would like to talk about water and sewerage services. I thank the minister that he has really indicated that the VAT ought to be waived away from water so that it becomes affordable and National Water and Sewerage Corporation could save some funds for expansion and offer better services. We do recommend her for that and we in the opposition are also in agreement to that.

On average, we also recognise that National Water has done a good job. According to their achievements and report, they have made expansions in various towns of about 28,968 new connections.  They have reduced on unaccounted for water to 28 per cent. These are good indicators. 

However, I would like to bring to the notice of this House that the side expansions of National Water services to various towns - and we have mentioned many of them including Bwizibwera, where I personally once reached and up to now there is no water. Most of these extensions are pipes, there is no water; there is a lot of air supply in there. So, the pipes have been extended extensively, but because of the crisis of water, the water is not in the pipes. That is the shortfall, which this House should also note.

With the water not being flowing in the pipes, many times you know that when the taps are open and the pressure comes without water, the meters are turned on and as a result, many customers have found that they have to foot high bills due to air supply. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, this has been rampant and it should be taken note of. In the same light, when they talk about the reduced unaccounted for water – unaccounted for water is that water which is not going through the meter for billing. This reduction could also include the fact that there is reduced flow of water in all these pipes and with the low pressure there is no way most pipes could burst as they used to do. 

I say authoritatively because I have known how these things have been operated because I worked there personally. I know that with very low pressure, the pipes are not most likely to burst and therefore cause unaccounted for water.   Therefore, the management of National Water and Sewerage Corporation should take note of this and make correct observations to that effect.

Mr Speaker, I also noted that in the statement of the minister, with the water shortage, which is now in the countryside and it is of great concern, I would have wished to see a lot of emphasis put on the remaining little sources whereby – actually it is being threatened by drying up. But immediately for remedy, we should have gone ahead and protected these and it should have been well spelt out. 

For instance, the melting ice on Rwenzori Mountain should have been of concern because it is still a source we are banking on. The silting of our water systems is also a source, which is threatening the supply of water. The minister concerned should have urgently addressed that in light of the water shortage we have.  

All good has been said about National Water and Sewerage Corporation, but I would also want to bring to the notice of this House – the Baganda say that, “Nomulungi tabulwa kamogo.” I am not a Muganda, but they say that even the most beautiful one has “akabala”. Therefore, National Water and Sewerage Corporation has done a commendable job but I would like to bring to the notice of this House that it is sad that National Water and Sewerage Corporation has expanded, has done splendid work, but it has neglected the most important part of its service, that is, the sewerage service. 

It was noted from the committee report that the coverage of sewerage now is only seven per cent, compared to their massive extension of water lines. That one is negligent and is life threatening. We are all aware of the black spots of sewer flows. We have Naguru, Katanga, Lubiri Barracks, which burst in the city and this is sad and it should be taken note of.  

National Water and Sewerage Corporation as a corporation should work around the clock. They have given the sewer policy in the offering, but still it needs to double that because if the coverage is only seven per cent it will not still be sufficient for the problem we have at hand. In fact I emphasise that because the community out there is also very disgusted with sewer bursts. You can even see that the bursts even threaten the very sources of our drinking water as it was reported in the newspapers and exhibited here. Mr Speaker, I can just read the headline that, “Sewerage flows in Kiswa wells,” and this one is now the public outcry. I think this corporation should work very fast to help us evade disaster.

National Water and Sewerage Corporation in their report as presented by the minister has given that Government owes the corporation arrears, which are amounting to Ugshs 9.9 billion. We urge the government to come up and pay these arrears to help National Water and Sewerage Corporation probably extend the sewer lines so that we do not die very soon of cholera. 

In the same vein, National Water and Sewerage Corporation reported that there are also domestic arrears; most of the domestic arrears need to be synchronised. As I mentioned earlier, there is a lot of air supply, which raises the bills to domestic consumers.  Therefore, they need to synchronise and come up with proper figures for the arrears of the domestic users.  

I would also want to mention that the water policy that prohibits the construction of boreholes where the National Water and Sewerage Corporation is operating is not friendly. You are aware that we do not have enough water supply from National Water and Sewerage Corporation; and in most cases where they take over the towns before they give their services, some other consumers would have gone up to construct some boreholes but they are told not to use them. I think this is not proper. 

We in the opposition think that National Water and Sewerage Corporation can work along side the supply of boreholes probably once they are found existing; and where their water is not reaching like Namugongo, Mukono and elsewhere. Why not have boreholes because we are talking about life? 

We shall not wait for water to come from National Water and Sewerage Corporation and the leg is coming down and yet we have no immediate solution.  We do not need to die. That should be an alternative which should be there; and even it is sad that in some places like in Pader, the borehole which is in Kaloa Hospital has to be paid for to be maintained. So, I think National Water and Sewerage Corporation should revisit this policy for the good of Ugandans in the light that they are not able to supply their services effectively.

Mr Speaker, we in the opposition also note with concern that the statement of the minister did not emphasise the water harvesting at household and community level because right now it is a crisis and we need immediate remedy. Water will not wait until stories are told; we need immediate remedy.  A lot of water has been wasted; we occasionally have rainwater, which just flows without us taking charge of that. 

We believe that the government can give incentives to households and communities to build water tanks to harvest water so that whatever little we get as a country, we reserve it and it is of benefit and it supplements the service of National Water and Sewerage Corporation as the situation stands. We also think that valley tanks should also be encouraged so that water is availed to the communities.  

Mr Speaker, the problem of water is still high; the corporation informed us that by December this year if they do not have some funds to help them do the extension, Kampala might not have water –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can you deal with another subject? 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is already mentioned, I was just mentioning for purposes of reference. It is important that the government releases those funds to help the situation. 

Mr Speaker, I also draw the House to the commitment the government made. The pledges of dams and valley tanks in the districts of the cattle corridor, which up to now not all the detailed reports are clear on valleys completed and factors that delay them have not been availed. We urge that this should also help us because that problem has caused problems on the over grazing of other places because animals have to be crossed to other parts where there is water and grass.  

Mr Speaker, we also want to mention that the minister did not emphasise much on irrigation, which is needed in this country. Being an agricultural country, irrigation scheme used to be there sometimes but currently not much is being said about it. We in the opposition recommend that the budgeting for the rehabilitation of irrigation schemes and the entire existence should be planned and budgeted for with water harvesting plan. 

The environment, which is supposed to sustain national resource management and use - we mentioned about the problem of plastic bags which the committee has also ably talked about. We recommend restriction of the use of non-degradable plastics especially “buveeras” and we want them to be replaced with paper bags, which are degradable. We recommend plastic bags, which can be recycled and disposable for use as for the short term and the long term it should be phased out.  

We also note with concern that the minister in her statement did not highlight the partnership, which is needed between the communities and the government in implementing the environmental protection measures and resource utilisation. In order to make sure that the environment is well protected, all the stakeholders must participate in protecting it and that means involving them. So, we recommend that there should be a deliberate move to involve all the stakeholders from the planning to implementing stages so that the environment is protected. 

We are talking about the civil society, the private sector, the academicians and the rest of it. In the same way, we also noted that the environment is being degraded at a high rate and this is not acceptable because it threatens our very existence. Particularly, we made reference to protests that Mabira Forest as it was reported - we in the opposition disagree; we do not recommend its sale because it is a catchment area and is a centre of tourism especially the CHOGM delegates who are coming to see our beautiful birds. So, we do not recommend its sale.  

Mr Speaker, we talk about the Tree Planting Authority; the plants, which are at their nurseries - to the ordinary Ugandan, we note that it is quite costly. The cost should be minimal and affordable to the ordinary Ugandan so that they can buy and the planting countrywide is being done.  

We also note that the problem of deforestation is because there is also a lot of pressure for use of the products like the charcoal, which is used in every household. This one means that the demand for it is quite high and it culminates in having our trees and forests cut down for charcoal use. We in the opposition propose that Government looks at reducing tax on paraffin, which can be used in homes and should be affordable so as to reduce the pressure on the use of charcoal.

Mr Speaker, in the same avenue, we think –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can we go to metrology, please?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I leave the environment, we think that the use of plastic furniture should be promoted so that the pressure on wood products is reduced and our environment helped to restock.  

Metrology
As its duty to give us the early warnings of safety of life protection, our property and natural resources, it has been noted, in their report as it was presented, has been neglected by the government. You find that they basically need to do their work properly. For example, on page 10, I have highlighted their report that they needed 250 operational rainfall stations that is only out of 100. 

So, you can see the percentage they have compared to their load. Out of 60 climatologically stations, they have only two and out of 17 synoptic stations, they have only 12 and out of two radio stations they have only one. They have no pilot –out of 17 stations required, and mostly they are supposed to have two radars but they have only one which is obsolete. This leaves us to believe what they are saying that the data collected cannot be accurate because the basic requirements are not there for their use. Therefore, this is a sign of negligence by the government; it is not serious about the metrological department. 

We in the opposition think that the department’s requirements should be looked into urgently to help us reverse the appalling situation. That is, if possible all the funds required should be given to them to make them run especially when we are looking towards hosting the CHOGM, which is very vital for our country.

In conclusion, we in the opposition take note of the above concerns and note that Government is not committed to the metrological department given that the funds they have raised as it is in the appendix and in the annex of my report are not sufficient and do not show seriousness. I hope I will avail copies to Members later so that they will look at the table behind of Vote on account and how much has been released. I can only maybe take only one out of those.  

In that report you find that for example, contribution to international organisations was Ugshs 4,300,000 but only Ugshs 666,667 million was released. And in one instance, on the Ugshs 444 billion for advertising and public relations only Ugshs 66,667 million was released. This shows there is lack of seriousness; we urge the government to revisit the situation and help the meteorological department give us a better service.

We propose that National Water seriously addresses the issue of sewer services and its extension so that the customers’ lives are addressed instead of extending their service across the borders looking for more service to deliver to them. We request that they first fulfill the domestic Ugandan customers before they go across the border.

Mr Speaker, since water and environment is life, we implore the Members of this House to accept our humble input as opposition in good faith so that we live in a better Uganda. For God and my country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

5.07
MRS FLORENCE NAYIGA SEKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman of the committee and the committee members for a comprehensive report on the two ministries. 

I have a few comments to make. The first one is on the polythene paper or polythene bags. Polythene bags are affecting our natural resources; the arable soils. Many of our people and the majority 80 per cent live on land where they earn their living. Right now, our soils are being polluted by the polythene paper. When people buy from the markets and from the shops, they go with the polythene papers and they throw them in their plantations and in their gardens. So, I would like to call upon the ministry to come out –(Interruption)

MRS RUTH KAVUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I would like to give some information that people go with “buveeras” and their “buveeras” are a nuisance. But I would like to also say that quite a lot of paper, the paper we use here can also be a nuisance if only ministries could coordinate so that our e-governance is put in place very quickly and all this information is posted to us so that we get it by internet or by e-mail. 

This is because most people are going to take these reports ,which are printed on one side and they will just throw away the paper. And all those are trees that are being cut. It is not only the “buveeras”, but even the paper we use and use it badly and yet we cannot recycle it. We need to do something about it. So, the ICT Ministry needs to coordinate with this ministry seriously so that we can get into that and not lose so much in our environment. Thank you.

MRS SEKABIRA: Okay, thank you very much for that information. I appreciate it, but at least this other paper can decompose. Now, the problem with polythene paper –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Whoever stands to contribute will not go beyond five minutes. And this would include yielding your ground to information.

MRS SEKABIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Polythene papers are destructive to our soils; they are dangerous to our livestock; once a goat or a cow eats it up, it will die. They are also dangerous to the children. So, we need to have a policy and there should be messages continuously on radio, in papers to remind the population on the dangers of the polythene paper. 

It is also important that some funds be put aside to encourage people to collect the polythene papers so that it can be recycled or it can be handled in such a way that it does not continue to disorganise and to affect our soils.

Our weather favours quick decomposition of organic waste, but polythene paper - like here in town, the polythene bags are used for dual purposes such that even the waste, which would decompose cannot decompose because it is covered within the polythene papers. So, polythene papers are now polluting the urban places and even the rural areas. 

Some organisations are coming up to help in collecting polythene papers but there must be a fund. And the factories that produce polythene papers should be charged a tax so that we can be able to reduce on the polythene papers or to ensure that they now move to produce polythene paper, which can disintegrate shortly. 

In the past, we had polythene paper in which they used to park milk, but the polythene paper would disintegrate after a short time. So, I call upon the ministry responsible to give us a way forward on this and to consider the proposals I have made.

I would also like to make a comment on water for production. I know that the Committee on Agriculture has already recommended that this water for production should go to Ministry of Agriculture. However, the committee is also recommending it should remain in the Ministry of Water. 

As far as I am concerned, we need water for production. Among others, if the Ministry of Water is concentrating on water for consumption of the people, let the water for production go to its rightful place. However, my district, the three sub-counties in Bbale Constituency are made up of majority cattle keepers. Right now, whenever there is a dry season, we lose many livestock. We need water for production. Instructions were given sometime back to the minister responsible but nothing has happened so far. 

Lastly, the issue of power; I know that the ministry is concentrating on developing the power stations. But I also know that some donors are being contacted for some projects. I want to request the Minister for Energy to consider the Kayunga - Busaana power line because this has been promised by the top most office for quite some time and the people have waited; they are very productive; we need power for Busaana. I thank you Rt hon. Speaker and I thank you chairman for the committee for the report.

5.13
MR FRANCIS MUGARRA (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all thank hon. Dombo and Members of his committee for this elaborate presentation. 

I would like to comment on page 9, observation 16. The committee observed that electrification projects either stall or at times get abandoned after elections. Now, I would like to get clarification from the ministry concerned. How does – I mean, it may be understandable, Government may at one time fail to have money to continuously execute a project, but there are projects where there is funding from our development partners. 

I would like to give an example of Bundibugyo district. We were informed early this year that funding to extend the national great Bundibugyo town had been secured from one of our development partners, Sweden or some other country, I do not remember exactly. Now, under what circumstances would such a project fail midway or get abandoned? Does the ministry, maybe midway choose to use funds for some other activity or what? 

Then my second comment is on water. When hon. Dombo was presenting his report, he requested us to inform him as to whether the various water projects that have been reported on are indeed there on the ground? 

And at one point, the shadow minister for environment said that there was air supply and the pipes did not have water. One of the growth centres reported on page 24 called Bwebusengo is in my constituency. I would like to inform this House that this water project is on the ground. Water is running in the pipes and the people are enjoying this water and appreciate the government for this extension. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.17
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Environment for the elaborate report on natural resources.  

However, I am greatly disheartened because on page 17, he mentioned among other achievements the activities going on in Kiruhura and Bundibugyo districts. But nothing was mentioned about the strategic industrial mineral found in Kooki, which I laboured on in my maiden speech to mention that it exists and it would save this country about 30 billion shillings every year if that mineral is exploited. Nothing has been mentioned of it. 

Now, it is also very important, I should have a message for the people of Kooki. What do I tell them? That your mineral has been shelved up to when? Let the minister or whoever is concerned come up and tell us how the people of Kooki expect to eradicate poverty when even there are natural resources, which are there in abundance and they are not even mentioned in this major report. 

I have got another issue as number two, the issue of water. The report was elaborate enough, but put more emphasis on Kampala and Entebbe and yet the Minister of Water is aware; you also being our neighbour, you are aware that Kooki Constituency is greatly distressed; there is no water. Nothing has been mentioned and I do not know whether the government is prepared to either provide free food perpetually to the people of Kooki and free money.  Because if you do not avail them with water for production, what will they do? Those are my issues where I would like some clarification. Thank you very much, Sir.

5.19
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): I have three concerns to rise on the energy sector. One is that according to what I have heard, there is a concession arrangement between Government and Umeme to distribute power within one kilometre along a given line. 

Now, unfortunately we in Kisoro have sufficient power, but the problem is that this power is not distributed among people who can afford it and are willing to pay for it. In other words, there is effective demand for that power along the Kyandika - Kisoro grid. The request I am trying to make briefly to the Minister of Energy is to ask Umeme to put in place and offer that kind of facility according to an agreement made. 

The second point I am trying to make, Sir, is an offer by Japan Government to build a mini hydro-electric power station at a place called Nyamahuhe in Kisoro district. This is a grant; it is free money and all that is required is for the Ministry of Finance together with Ministry of Energy to put across that request to the government of Japan and have the mini power station built and this to my understanding is that a feasibility study has already been done and it is feasible. The only thing that I know is that Japan will not assist private sector, it is Government to Government and Kisoro district administration could in this stand in as Government to handle that one.

Finally, Sir, is a concern on water. Buying of water by rural communities is difficult. As you know, most of our people in rural areas are extremely poor. There are people there who may not earn even a thousand shillings for a whole month.  Now, to ask them to pay Ugshs 100 for three Jeri cans - that is the cost - it is extremely difficult and yet we know that a lot of diseases are water borne diseases. 

Consequentially, in trying to control diseases, the question of paying for water in rural areas is a limiting factor. I want to put this to people responsible for water, to reconsider that cost. There is no problem in town where people earn money and can afford water, but in rural areas, it is counter productive. People are suffering from water borne diseases and when they – they get offended; they have attempted to spoil the pipes.  Those are the points I had, you can go ahead.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.22
MS ANNE AURU (Independent, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. I have two areas to comment on; that is energy and water. 

In fact with water, I would like to thank the committee for their observations on water coverage and subsequent recommendation on increasing safe water to the nation. I would like to comment on the point of rainwater harvesting. 

When the President was giving us the State of Nation Address, he even mentioned that in a place like West Nile, most of the houses are grass thatched. It is a good recommendation, but taking into consideration the kind of the population we have in our nation, how do we collect rainwater? How do we then benefit from it? 

In my own village which is within the town of Mwoye Town Council, there are only about 10 homesteads which have iron sheets. Whereas it is a good recommendation, I would like the ministry to think of the majority of the population of this country –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether you would like this information. I have lived also in an area where they do not have iron sheets on houses but they can harvest water with a fig tree; you can put something and get it. No, in absence of the – I am just improvising a fig tree. You can put a banana fibre, put in a pot and you harvest water.

MS AURU: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that information. Unfortunately, West Nile region is not a region that really has a lot of bananas.  Otherwise, specifically, I would like to talk of a county within my district Moyo that is Obonyi, which has no underground water. They have been trying to install boreholes but it has failed all through. You have heard recently a lot of people dying of cholera. So, I really appeal to the ministry to come up with a policy to address the issues of water in areas where construction of boreholes is difficult and also harvesting rainwater is difficult.

The second issue is energy. I am grateful for the effort this Government is putting despite the shortfalls we are experiencing in water for energy production. In Moyo district, we have been yawning for rural electrification; we are not even on the list up to now and we do not hope to get there soon. I would like the ministry to come up with a policy for districts which cannot access this rural electrification and who have no access for maybe water powers from within which they can generate their own electricity. I thank you so much.

5.27
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman, the minister and the shadow ministers for the wonderful comments and recommendations made on this report. I have two comments to make from this report.

In his State of the Nation Address, His Excellency the President of this country noted very clearly that we have as a country an energy crisis. That is the fundamental difference I see between very many parties and the NRM. NRM is not yet to cut and run in the facing problems. We are ready to tackle it head on and that is why there is that huge difference.
On energy, Mr Speaker, I wish to make this very small contribution that whereas Government is looking at construction of big power projects like on Karuma and Bujagali, there are very many potential areas upon which Government can construct relatively very cheaply and very quickly power generation dams like for instance in Kikagati. 

Kikagati happens to have been one of the areas, the very first I think, in Uganda to generate power and fortunately, it was the first very area to suffer the consequences of the liberation war. The generation power dam was the first victim of the 1979 liberation war which liberated this country. To date, it has not yet been redone. 

I, therefore, wish to call upon the ministry concerned and I know because as I talk Government has solicited support from China and this Chinese company is in high gear of ensuring that this dam is put in place. I would, therefore, like to call upon the ministry concerned to expedite the process of operationalising this power project.

You talked about water coverage in areas; I happen to come from an area that has the lowest clean water coverage in this country and that is Isingiro District. Isingiro South is the worst in this country; it has less than 9 per cent clean water coverage while the whole district has 21 per cent much lower than very many other parts of this country.

 I would like to thank the chairman for emphasising the fact that areas that are under served should be given that affirmative action so that they reach at least near the national average. This is where Isingiro comes in. How do you come - you might not be able to have a borehole in Isingiro because most of the water drilled is very salty. So, it will be very useless to have a borehole there. 

What about dams? They are very difficult to have because it is not feasible there. The only alternative is rainwater harvesting, which is very feasible. I would like, therefore, to call upon the ministry that in their next policy statement- and if they can squeeze from wherever and think about Isingiro in as far as rain water harvesting is concerned.

Finally, I want to make a very quick comment on “buveeras”. I think hon. Members of this august House, those of us who are new here were hearing; we used to listen to a lot being talked about “buveeras”. It is a menace; let us all accept this. In fact, I used to think that the factory maybe working on this “buveeras” is owned by- I do not know what, but I am beginning to realise that most of this “buveeras” is imported in this country.  Honestly, let us face the fact; it is a menace to our environment; a lot has been talked about it should not be phased out; it should be now for goodness sake. Let us start being a little bit more serious. 

With our neighbours in Rwanda, it is terrible. You go with a “Kaveera”, you will not be allowed to cross with your “Kaveera”. They will say, “Oh! thanks very much from buying bread from Uganda. Could you please kindly take back that “Kaveera” from where you got it?” Every “Kaveera” is dumped in Uganda before you cross into Rwanda. It is a terrible pain and I am very sure and confident that the government of the National Resistance Movement will not hesitate to ban this “Kaveera”. Now that we are in the Eighth Parliament, I can assure you, let us ban this “Kaverea” here and now.

5.31
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start on the point of rainwater and make a few other points. A lot has been said about rainwater but I am one of the people who started a project to implement rainwater harvesting.  For the assurance of this House, rainwater is one of the most environmentally friendly sources of water we have in this country. In my sub-county during the last two years, I have constructed 150 rainwater tanks for households with people’s participation.  

Borrowing from the experience of Isingiro about the rainwater and also trying to help my sister from the other area, currently we do not have a policy framework that Government supports. We have had rainwater projects on trial basis with small contributions. We started the Rainwater Harvesting Association of Uganda and it has got some little support but we need to learn from what it has done.  

Rainwater is a means that can sustain and be accommodated by small income families. For example when we are in a water crisis we consider first of all quantity before quality. Therefore, if you go to Moyo where all the houses are grass thatched and ten out of the many are the ones with iron roofs, what we can do is give incentives to those who have the iron sheet houses so that the others can learn from that.  

Secondly, in areas where we have only grass-thatched houses, these houses do not leak which actually means that the rain kept out. What we need then is to devise means of guttering that water so that we can have other simple means of protecting it from contamination like boiling or filtration.

Mr Speaker, another point is about sanitation and hygiene education. I have heard people talking about Global Fund. I initially thought it was a lot of money that was involved only to learn last week that it was only Ugshs 3 billion. All this money was for medication but most of the diseases that we have in this country are about 90 percent water borne and they can be prevented.  

I would like through this policy statement and the budget to see that the appropriation of funds mainly targeting - I am comparing this with the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Social Development and those in charge of water. They should work out a comprehensive plan to ensure that our interventions in the areas of sanitation and hygiene education are stepped up.  

Mr Speaker, for your information and this may sound vulgar but any person in this country who suffers from dysentery has actually eaten raw faeces. It is a national shame and the same applies to cholera. This is unacceptable.  

Mr Speaker, about National Water and Sewerage Corporation in the areas of sewerage systems and construction. I know that the corporation is doing very well in areas with water supply but in all these mushrooming towns and centres wherever you go every house has a septic tank. There are so many septic tanks that they will eventually become an environmental hazard. We need to look at a simple project maybe in conjunction with the Minister of Urban Planning to see how we can bring in private players. 

If I go to my village or my LCI in Mbarara town where I have a house and I look at the investments that have been put in the septic tanks and the soak pits, if we had a simple system where we worked with National Water we could have a simple sewerage system that is supported by the local communities. This is because the investment in septic tanks is enormous. We need to be organised and work in partnership with National Water and Sewerage Corporation and Government to have a few of these investments turned into appropriate sewerage systems so that they can also look at the end of treatment points.

Mr Speaker, I want to give you some information, which is very important in relation to the statement from the Shadow Minister of Water.  I come from Mbarara and I am the past Minister of Works in that district. I want to assure you that in Bwizibwera we have running water and we are actually extending it to a nearby town called Rutooma. 

There is confusion about what the shadow minister said that you can actually get air being measured through water meters. I think that this is technically impossible because we have a difference between water valves and air valves. Therefore, there is no way air can go through and be measured in a water meter. We have air valves on all these water pipes that actually release the air so water does not go through.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you realise that it is almost twenty minutes to six and we have to consider other reports.

5.38
MR WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee for the eloquence he showed in presenting the report. It was clear. I will only make one comment on water. People have talked about water and it is true that water is life. 

Physiology has said that 75 percent of the animal body is water and what I am trying to bring forward to the hon. Members is that a significant number of the people of Uganda actually do not drink clean water but diluted mud.  

My survey in the countryside indicates that people actually need water, and I would like to suggest here that the ministry moves very fast to try and consolidate water in the rural areas because most of the diseases we are getting in the rural areas are water borne. Once clean water is provided most of these diseases will be history.

The other point I would like to bring forward is that people have talked about the success of National Water and Sewerage Corporation. However, there is only one fact that made this success a reality and that is the non-interference by Government in the affairs of these public utilities. If this could be maintained at this stage of our development then public corporations would be the best. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.41
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and its members for the comprehensive report and pertinent observations they have made. More so I want to thank the shadow ministers for the pertinent issues they raised concerning energy. My prayer is that these observations are taken into serious consideration.  I hope an immediate solution will be given and a long term one at that. 

Of course, many people have talked about the problem of energy. In Entebbe it is amazing that you have the only hospital next to the International Airport and there are areas within Entebbe Municipality that have permanent power lines yet the hospital has not. I think the Ministry of Energy needs to link up with the Ministry of Health so that if there are any such Government institutions near areas that have permanent power supply then they should be hooked there.

You may recall some time back when the Commissioner of South Africa died on his way to South Africa. His body was brought back to Entebbe and then referred to Mulago for post-mortem. Mulago Hospital rejected it and Government had to move fast and ferry it in a fridge to store the body until an appropriate time to carry out a post-mortem.  Suppose there is no power for the next three or so days and the body of a VIP is here? 

Even as we prepare for the conference we are going to host next year, we have come to believe that if you have power consistently for next four days in your home you get surprised because we don’t expect it. We have come to believe that having power consistently is abnormal and that the normal way is to have it today and not have it the next day.

We realise the government subsidy accorded to power of Ugshs 160 million. What amazes me is the splitting of the former UEB into production, generation and distribution. This implies a lot of administrative costs, which costs we are supposed to be subsidizing. 

Mr Speaker, this august House needs to put into consideration the alternative pertinent issues raised by opposition because 20 years down the road we are getting worse. Production in industries is going down and I think that should be considered.  Thank you.

5.46
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. May I use this opportunity to thank the chairman of the committee for the kind words he attributed to me? I also want to thank the shadow minister who is apparently a member of the same committee for a job well done. Let me make a correction that may otherwise create a wrong impression of this august House. 

The water metre is not sensor triggered but manual in nature. Therefore, pressured air counts as running water and air can be counted as running water in terms of the metre counts. Let us go and check with scientists and they will prove this. Also those from National Water will give you this fact. 

Mr Speaker, my first point concerns Government’s non-compliance of its financial obligations to its subsidiaries. This matter has been raised across board and time has come for this House to consider a law that is going to ensure Government compliance.  These institutions do a good job and quite a number of them have premises and Government is a tenant there. However, it does not pay yet it harasses them. This is very painful and we must institute a law that makes sure that Government pays these dues.

Mr Speaker, about pollution. This has generally been attributed to buveera.  However we have not looked at the mechanism of re-collecting the used manganese alkaline and cola tine butteries, some of which are used by mobile phones. These are more dangerous than these buveera.  

Mr Speaker, it would be grossly wrong for a Parliament of this size and with people of our modest education, sorry to say, to stand up and say we are banning buveera.  Buveera are a menace and nobody should come out and dispute this fact. However buveera in specific terms polythene is mild plastic and you are forgetting the major component of plastics that are all over the place and talking about the mild element of buveera. 

As a solution, what can be done is two way. One, it is a self-discipline. I have for example registered myself with my small shop where I buy things for minimum package of buveera. Usually whatever you buy be it milk or bread is packed in kaveera yet you have a car. Why should you take an extra bag when they are willing to carry your purchases to your car?  Let us exercise self-discipline so that we can come here and talk authoritatively. Let us reduce the amount of buveera we carry.

Furthermore, let us ask the National Bureau of Standards to put as a prerequisite a component that breaks down the non bio-degradable element of buveera. When this plastic breaks down it can be degradable and this is the plastic that is used all over the world as it is very easy to handle. Factories in existence can equally be promoted through that arrangement and the buveera menace will be no more. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.50
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairman of the committee and members for this report. I would also like to thank hon. Members for their valuable contribution and for the support they have so far extended to the energy sector particularly at this time. 

Honourable Speaker, I would like to make a few comments on the report. I will start with the need to streamline power extension such that district headquarters and areas of economic importance to the country are given priority consideration. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, it is true that some areas that are economically viable and district headquarters have not been connected to the national breed and we are extremely sorry for this. However, this has been occasioned on us by the limited resources that we have at our disposal.  

As you may be aware hon. Members, recently when we were hit by power shortage we had to reallocate Ugshs 20 billion which was intended for rural electrification and connection of district headquarters and other economically viable areas. This has had an effect on our ability and capacity to connect some of the areas that the chairman of the committee had pointed out to us as being in need of power.  

Nevertheless, this does not mean that we do not have clear criteria that we follow in the course of the power extension to the various parts of the country. Ordinarily we have five key considerations, the first being areas of economic significance. Areas of potential economic gain which would otherwise be constrained in their development due to lack of electricity, so those are given priority consideration.  

When you read the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, the component for power extension is clearly articulated and because of that we have been able to extend power to major coffee processing areas, such as the Kaweri Estate in Mubende. We have also been able to extend power to fish landing sites such as Majanji and we are currently working on Wakawaka. We have also been able to extend power to major tea-processing areas such as Kayonza, Muzizi and we are now working on Buhweju. We have also been working on mining areas for instance Namekara and Busunju –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see the hon. Member of Buhweju has walked away in protest.

MR MIGEREKO: No, the fact of the matter is that we started on the line to Buhweju essentially because we had to make power available for a tea factory in that area. It is a fact also that budgetary pressures had temporarily affected the work. But otherwise it is a fact that Buhweju as a tea growing area is receiving attention.

Mr Speaker, the other consideration is district headquarters. We appreciate the fact that by extending power to district headquarters this helps stimulate social and economic development in various parts of the country and also reduces on the outflow of people from particular geographical areas to urban areas in particular Kampala.  

We have a very clear programme for extending power to these places and as I speak, we have extended power under this arrangement to Sembabule, Kalangala, Apac, Lira, Masindi, Arua and Nebbi. It is also true that we have lately been working on power extension to Kanungu and Kibaale and the funding for other district headquarters such as Kyenjojo, Bundibugyo and Pader have actually not been diverted. Funding from the Swedish Government is also available but as I pointed out sometime back, it had been affected due to certain considerations. Otherwise these projects are on board.

Honourable Speaker, the other consideration is reconstruction of vandalized areas. A number of areas that had been affected by war had the network vandalized. For instance, in Luweero Triangle we have committed resources to rehabilitating that network. Similarly we have given consideration to system stabilisation and in the process we have had to construct the Lira-Apac-Masindi line and the Mbarara-Masaka-Ankenda line. Other lines are also under consideration.  

Mr Speaker, as we extend power, new load centres continue emerging in between major load centres. We have given consideration to that particular category.  

We would like to assure this august House that as soon as the funding situation improves, power connections following the laid down criteria will be pursued to serve all areas including those which have been pointed out by the committee in paragraph 16, on page nine of the report.  In that regard we appreciate the committee’s support in recommendation No.7 on page 11, which has called for increasing the budgetary allocation to rural electrification to the tune of Ugshs 10 billion.

Mr Speaker, the report raised the issue of importation and distribution of energy saving bulbs. It alluded to the fact that we may not have a clear framework that we are following for the importation and distribution of these bulbs.  I would like to assure the House that the policy on the institutional framework to handle the importation and distribution of these bulbs is actually in place.

If we were not clear during our appearance before the committee in regard to delivering our framework, I would like to state that we are working with UMEME, which is currently the distribution company. UMEME was picked on because of its linkages to the network within the country and therefore being in touch with all the consumers that are accessing power from the national grid. Therefore, we have a clear framework for handling the importation and distribution. 

I would like to assure members of this House that by mid October distribution will have started all over the country and we hope that when UMEME handles the initial distribution, this will help popularise these energy saving bulbs such that other players from the private sector who pursue this kind of business will in future find it easy to deal in this particular business.

Mr Speaker, the committee raised the issue of electricity billing and attendant problems that consumers have faced whenever they receive these bills.  We would like to admit that electricity billing has been a problem for the energy sector for quite a while. That is why the distribution segment of the electricity business was concessioned out to a private company called UMEME, which had partners with experience in handling distribution business and billing.  

We have had interaction with UMEME on a regular basis on this matter. We have requested them to expedite the procurement of a new billing system such that the general consumer does not continue being punished with bills that are not easily explainable.  We would like to assure this House that we envisage a positive change in billing in the near future.

The chairman raised the issue of performance of the various concessions that the sector has undertaken with a number of companies.  We have been having periodic appraisal of these concessions. As a matter of fact, as I speak we are having an audit exercise of the investment that has been undertaken by UMEME. I would like to make a promise to this House that we shall be in a position to provide reports on the performance of these concessions as has been demanded by the chair of the committee.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the committee raised the issue of hydropower generation, supply and other environmental issues.  This august House is invited to note that the ministry takes environmental issues seriously and part of our integrated plan and action hinges on enforcing environmental impact assessment guidelines for investment in the energy sector. These were developed together with NEMA. Among others, the specific guidelines are intended to ensure that energy investments uphold sustainable environmental management. 

In that regard, the ministry’s integrated plan that will help to conserve the environment includes the diversification of energy sources, which will also help to address the imbalance in the energy mix, which the committee has shown concern for. Such a plan encompasses hydro resources, renewable energy programmes, geo-thermal, solar as well as advancement of hydrocarbon products to generate power.  

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, we appreciate the committee’s concern regarding environmental issues around Lake Victoria and water levels thereof for power generation.  I wish however to point out that the problem we are dealing with is multidimensional and ought to be appreciated in that manner.  For example, it is a fact that the management of the catchments area around Lake Victoria plus the worldwide global warming are affecting water levels of that lake.  

In addition, the impact of other forces on the basin like geological phenomena and silting need to be evaluated. As such, the ministry’s blame on the drought for the fall in the water levels on Lake Victoria should be taken in line with the committee’s observations in paragraphs two, seven and 17 of section 5 of the report. We also pray and hope that we shall get more rains around since we know that drought and plentiful rainfall supply are cyclic issues.  

Mr Speaker, the committee raised issues on the petroleum sub-sector and there was concern that much as there has been liberalisation in the sector we have not witnessed the corresponding fall or benefit in prices that those who procure petroleum are enjoying. Our view in the ministry is that the bulk of increase in prices can at most be attributed to increase in international oil prices over time.  For example, whereas the average price of crude oil for OPEC baskets stood at $ 31 and $ 35.8 per barrel in 2003 and 2004 respectively, they reached an average of $ 50 per barrel in the year 2005. 

During 2005 alone the average price of crude oil for the New York mercantile exchange rose from $ 41.6 per barrel in January to slightly above $ 59 per barrel in December. As of today the average price of crude oil is about $ 70 per barrel. Such international price movements partly explain the pump price trends that have prevailed on our local market. 

In general, however, the fruits of liberalising the petroleum supply sector are emerging as reflected in the market shares of the oil companies that are operating in Uganda and the distribution network, which now literally reaches every part of the country.

Mr Speaker, the committee raised the issue of monitoring of downstream petroleum sector and how it is being hampered by failure on the part of the Minister of Public Service to approve requisite staff for this department and the fact that we have not formed the Technical Petroleum Committee. I would like to assure this august House that Cabinet has approved the Petroleum Technical Committee and I am sure you will be reading about the names that were approved by Cabinet a few weeks ago.  

It is also true that we are in touch with our Ministry of Public Service and I believe very soon we shall be resolving issues of manpower for the Department of Petroleum Supplies.  

The chair raised the issue of the Uganda-Kenya oil pipeline.  The process of constructing the key Uganda-Kenya oil pipeline has been delayed a bit and its delayed implementation has increased fuel prices because the transportation costs are born by the consumer. The haulage of oil on our roads occasions many problems to road users and also results into a lot of wear and tear on our roads.  

I would like to assure the members that we have finalised the process of selecting the private sector player to work on this oil pipeline. This was done in a very competitive and transparent manner as we normally do things in the NRM Government and we shall continue appraising the committee on the progress that they are making in regard to implementation of the Kenya-Uganda Oil Pipeline Project.  

The report made observations on petroleum exploration and development in the country. We appreciate the committee’s concerns and the general anxiety on the part of the public regarding developments in this sub-sector. However, despite what we read in the papers the fact of the matter is that some tests are still being carried out. Some data is still being processed and we also need to interpret the results of the analyses and tests that have been taking place.  

In that regard Government will in the near future be in a position to make a statement to this House and the nation at large on issues relating to petroleum exploration, discovery, production, sharing agreements and all relevant issues in this sub-sector and this will not be very far from now. 

Mr Speaker, the committee raised certain points in regard to the mining sector and we would like to appreciate the concerns of the committee. In general, however, the ministry is aggressively embarking on mainstreaming the Mineral Development Sector, as it is able to play a central role in the economic development of the country. A number of countries in Africa that have mainstreamed mining such as Tanzania and Ghana have clear results. That is why we have embarked on extensive geological, geo-chemical and geo-physical surveys to generate sufficient data that will attract private sector investments into this sector.  

In that regard, the ministry is not only attending to the human resource development needs but also to capacity building in areas of infrastructure, rehabilitation at both Entebbe offices and in other regions. In addition, seven region offices and nine stations are going to be constructed. In the meantime Government is exploring mechanisms of retaining the highly developed manpower to manage the sector as we endeavour to develop our economy and this sector sustainable as the chairman of the committee has pointed out.  

I would also like to assure hon. Magulumaali of Kooki that the Kooki chlorine prospects are going to be investigated with effect from the 7th of September this year. The mere fact that this was not mentioned in the report should not mean that Government is not attending to matters you consider to be very important in your constituency. We pray that when our team gets into the field you can give them the necessary cooperation and support.  

Mr Speaker, the honourable Minister for Energy and Mineral Development on the opposition side presented a report. I would like to thank him for the contribution he has made.  There are a number of issues he has raised. I would like to state that we shall sit down and exhaustively discuss the issues he has raised and give them the necessary consideration. I would, however, like to clarify on just a few points. 

The first point is that reinstalled capacity is no longer 350 mega watts. When we consider the facilities we have around the country, we currently have an installed capacity of about 450 mega watts of hydro power and the other energy sources.  

As for your observations in regard to Bujagali, the development of Bujagali at that particular site was replenished on the understanding that at Bujagali as compared to Nalubaale and Kiira, we would be in the position to take advantage of a higher and better height.  Therefore, given the volume of water from Nalubaale and Kiira, we would be in a position to generate the anticipated power.  

There are issues, which you have raised concerning the drought. Our view and I am sure this is based on available information overtime is that drought is not a permanent feature anywhere. You can have drought this year or every period of years but this would later on be followed by plentiful rainfall and therefore change in weather pattern.  Therefore, we believe and firmly too that the weather pattern is likely to change. We shall have more rains and the water levels are likely to improve.  

We should all be rest assured that the decisions we are taking in regard to development of the various hydro power sites in the country are not misplaced. 

Hon. Kasigwa, raised the issue of why not Karuma instead of Bujagali? We have had this debate a number of times on this Floor of Parliament. The decision of the NRM Government is that we shall develop both Bujagali and Karuma and necessary plans have been put in place for doing this. 

We are not only stopping at that because given the level of economic development that the country has been able to experience under NRM, we need more power supply in the country than has ever been the case.  Therefore, we shall develop more hydro power stations to take into account the level of economic development and demand for power.

Mr Speaker, there is the issue of AGGREKO. It is true that AGGREKO is not a cheap power source, but it was an emergency stopgap measure. We all know that when you generate power from diesel, it is actually expensive. 

As I speak we have clear plans for putting in place thermal stations that will be run on heavy fuel oil. This should help us access relatively cheap power. On top of that, we are also diversifying our energy sources as I have pointed out and we believe that the net effect of all this will be to ensure security of power supply as well as affordable power for the various users. 

Hon. Kasigwa raised the issue of development of mini hydros only in the Western parts of the country. I want to say that that is not true. We develop mini hydro power stations wherever there is a site to be developed and for which developers have shown an interest. I want to assure you that in the Mt Elgon and Sipi area, a company called Elgon Company has been granted permit for the development of the various mini hydro power sources in that area. 

Obviously I know that those of us from Jinja have also suffered accusations that all the big hydro power stations are being developed in our area. But this is normally based on studies that have been carried out about availability of investable funds. It is not true that the Eastern parts of the country are not being given adequate consideration in as far as this is concerned.

The hon. Member also raised the issue regarding the laws pertaining to the mining and petroleum sector. We have available the Petroleum Exploration and Production Act. We also have the Mining Act of 2003 and the Petroleum Supplies Act of 2003. These are the laws that we follow when we are regulating the industry or managing the affairs of this sector. Honourable member in charge of this sector on the side of the opposition, I will make it a point to avail you copies of these laws. 

The honourable member also raised an issue in regard to our capacity to meaningfully negotiate production-sharing agreements. I want to assure you that the NRM Government has worked on training people for this sector to handle the exploration and petroleum business, including negotiating production-sharing agreements. I am sure –(Interruption)

MR OCULA NYEKO: Mr Speaker, I have been listening very carefully and the hon. Minister has been referring to the NRM Government having trained. However, we know the NRM Government has just been in place for about three months. What we had before was the Movement. Is he really in order to say that the NRM has done all these things yet we know that the NRM Government has been in place for only three months? Is he in order? (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: I think these are issues, which you should never exploit. When we talk about failures, we count failures for 20 years. When we talk about successes, you want to count them for three months -(Applause)- these are things over which you should not be sensitive- (Laughter) 

MR MIGEREKO: Sir, I thank you for that wise ruling, but I also would like to thank my brother for having raised that very pertinent point for clarification.

I was just about to wind up and I wanted to make an appeal to my hon. brother that as and when he finds time, we should create an opportunity for him to come and interact with some of our staff particularly the experts in these areas so that as we discuss these things he can also gain comfort to count on whatever information they may make available to him.

I would like to thank the committee for the support they have given us as well as the members for the cooperation they have extended to my ministry. I would also like to point out that we shall take off time in the ministry to attend to the important issues that you have all raised here and give them the due consideration that they deserve. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we get the report on Water and Environment?

6.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee for the elaborate presentation, observations and recommendations made by the committee members. My ministry agrees with most of them and we shall continue to work together to implement them.

I also want to thank my counterpart, the Shadow Minister for Water and Environment from the opposition side for her paper and constructive criticisms which we have taken note of. I also want to thank my colleagues for the issues that they have raised and I would like to respond to just a few of them.

In the report of the committee, the committee observed that on the budget performance of the ministry, out of Ugshs 118 billion only Ugshs 94 billion was spent. I would like to comment that there are a number of projects that are ongoing and others are on contract. This was also due to the fact that some officers in the ministry were promoted and therefore their salary scales went up and it caused this difference. Therefore, most of this money had to cater for some of these new requirements.

The chairman expressed some skepticism about the information on rural water and sanitation projects in some of our rural growth centres. I would like to say that the ministry is not a liar but is very faithful. I would like to urge the committee if they are still skeptical to visit some of these projects. I would like to thank the member who gave information that actually these water projects are in place in his constituency.

The committee on page 27 is also requesting the ministry to inform Parliament on the Nile Basin Initiative. I would like to confirm that the ministry will bring a paper here and brief Parliament not only on the Nile Basin Initiative but on a number of projects that are ongoing in the ministry so that Parliament is kept abreast with what is taking place there. 

The committee noted the difficulty that our ministry is facing due to lack of office space. I would like to agree with the chairman that it is true the ministry is now housed at the former offices of Directorate of Water, but it is not true that the minister took over the office of the director. I would like to inform Parliament that the minister already had an office at the Directorate and that that is where she is sitting.  

A few other officers at the Directorate were displaced so that space would be created for the Minister of State for Water, the Minister of State for Environment and the Commissioner in charge of Environment Affairs. The director’s office is still available much as he is currently acting as the PS of the ministry. We are still waiting for Public Service to post a number of officers to the ministry.  

The ministry is also planning to construct office space as we have some land in Luzira. I would like to say to my colleague that, yes, there was some encroachers on that land but none of it has been sold to investors. Maybe she was talking of another piece of land but not the one that belongs to the ministry.  

I would like to agree with the committee chairman on the issue of VAT, which is collected by water. This matter will be discussed at the executive level and we shall see how much of this money will be retained for extension of water services.

I would like to inform my colleagues who are lamenting about the issue of shortage of water that the ministry is working very hard to address that issue. We have a sector investment programme, which is being implemented, as well as a number of gravity flow schemes for rural areas that are being phased out, because of the investment requirements that are very huge. The ministry is however expanding these investments so that at least a majority of the sub counties, which are growth centres, can access this gravity flow scheme so that water is provided for the growth of populations in those centres.  

In the meantime, boreholes and protected wells will also continue to be constructed in rural areas. In urban centres, many projects are also going on for the water and sewerage sub sectors in small towns. We are offering support to Small Water and Sanitation Projects, the Mid-Western Towns Water and Sanitation Projects, the North-eastern Towns Water and Sanitation Project and Small Towns Water and Sanitation Projects. All these are on going. Contrary to what my colleague was alluding here, the ministry is concerned about lack of water for the majority of our population. 

My colleague, hon. Prof. Anokbonggo, was referring to people who drink diluted mud. I did not understand that expression, who dilutes the mud that is given to people to drink? The way you expressed that could have been misunderstood. It is as if someone gets water, dilutes mud and gives it to people.  

It is true that in a number of areas people are still drawing water from swamps, rivers and so forth. However, as I have already said, the ministry is working hard to ensure that clean water is provided for all the people living in this country. It is not our intention to see people drinking dirty water and getting water borne diseases.  

We are also educating people and I encourage colleagues to also sensitise their people as regards safe water management and the treatment of water locally. If they draw water from unsafe sources, they can still use simple technology to treat this water as we plan to extend water to all of them.  

On the issue of water coverage being higher than sewerage coverage, we have taken this concern and we are well aware about this. However, I also think that my colleague should take in the fact that in most places our people use pit-latrines instead of flashing toilets. Furthermore, the capital investment level for sewer construction is high and so we cannot have sewerage construction and water availability at the same percentage. 

We also need to sensitise our people in the construction of improved pit-latrines so that we can solve the problem of sanitation. Sometimes people fetch water from safe sources but this water gets contaminated in the process of carrying it home, storing it and using it. In some villages you find the same cup is put on top of the pot and everybody who comes uses that cup while children come and also dip their hands into that very pot. In the process the water gets contaminated. It is our role as representatives of the people to sensitise them on water quality.

As regards water for Northern Uganda, it is true that even as peace talks are going on, some people are already going back to their homes. We know that even within the IDP camps, water is not sufficient although programmes to supply water at IDPs have been going on. There is also a plan to construct water in the villages as people go back.  Under the Prime Minister’s chairperson, there is a joint ministerial committee, which is looking at the issues related to people resettling in their homes and availing water is one of the activities to be undertaken. Our development partners are willing to support that and the government is also going to put aside money to this effect.  

Mr Speaker, let me go to environment. A number of concerns have been raised but I will not answer all of them. I would like to say that NEMA is very transparent and I urge Members of Parliament to visit the NEMA offices and see how much work they have done there. This is because in the committee’s report, there was a recommendation that NEMA should be more transparent in its work. There is a lot that you can learn from there. We have a resource centre, which has a lot of information for your own use. Also the National Environment Management and Capacity Building Project is on-going to build capacity at national and local levels in regard to environment conservation aspects.  

On buveera, it is a concern for all of us that the use of polythene bags or polythene materials is degrading our environment especially the soil quality as well as blocking drainages and causing a lot of stagnant water for mosquitoes to breed thereby causing malaria.  A draft Cabinet paper on polythene bags is already in place and we are studying this paper. Consultations are also going on and we shall also consult Parliament and eventually have a law on polythene bags.  All your concerns are taken into consideration.  

On duplication of NEMA and the department of Environment Affairs, there are just a few areas of duplication, which we are trying to iron out. In fact I would not really say there is duplication, it just seems that there is and this is due to the fact that while the 1995 National Environment Act Cap 152 was enacted in May 1995, the Constitution was promulgated in October 1995. Now under the National Environment Act, NEMA was assigned some of the roles, which this department was assigned by the Constitution. This Act is also going to be reviewed so that it can be in consonance with the Constitution. 

Environmental sustainability is a role of the Central Government and therefore this department plays a very critical role. Some of these roles include policy evaluation, supervision of the activities of NEMA, supervision of activities at the district level as well as collaborating with partners in this country in the area of environment.  

Mr Speaker, I do not think it is true for my colleagues to say that water meters can be tampered with by air and therefore people pay for water that they have not used.  

THE SPEAKER: I think let us leave that, we shall investigate it.

MS ERIYO: I think this is trying to create a very bad impression in this country. We do not want to have an up rise in this country by uttering such a statement. We are going to consult further on this so my dear sister, just be calm.  

Allegations were also made that the ministry is silent about monitoring and protecting the country’s water sources. I do not think this is true. We have water officers at all district levels. We also have a monitoring and evaluation department that does this work, and if the policy statement is silent about this, please be rest assured that this function is ongoing in the ministry. 

I would like to add that the ministry is concerned about protecting water sources or water catchments areas. I would also like to inform this House that a number of laws have been enacted and a lot of work is going on to ensure that these areas are protected. We have the National Environment Act, the National Environment Regulations on the Management of River Banks, Lakeshores and Wetlands enacted in 2000 and the National Environment Regulations on the Management of Hilly and Mountainous Areas also in place.  

However, Mr Speaker, by the time these policies were passed or enacted, many people had already settled in some of these areas like river banks, lakeshores, mountainous and hilly areas due to the pressure of land. Therefore, enforcement is a bit difficult but we are trying our best to make sure that these areas are protected and our water bodies remain natural and safe. 

It was also said that the policy statement did not mention anything to do with the partnership between Government and communities in the Environment Sector. Mr Speaker, I would like to disagree with this because we have district environment officers in place as well as environment committees at LC1, LC2, LC3 and district level as well as a committee at Parliament level. Government is working in partnership with communities through these structures. Also a number of community-based organisations are working in partnership with Government and NEMA to ensure that the environment is protected. 

We shall study and review the prices of seedlings to determine whether they are expensive especially for the rural people in a bid to encourage more people to plant trees. However, Mr Speaker, some of these seeds are purchased out of the country and they are indeed expensive. 

We hope that the National Forestry Authority will become self-sustaining. I know that they need activities that will raise funds to enable them to become self-sustaining because much as the development partners may continue to support them, we need alternative ways of raising funds and the authority is already doing well in that area.  

On meteorology, Mr Speaker, attempts to make this department an agency are being explored and once these studies are completed, the department will become an agency. There is also a comprehensive proposal to revamp the department and discussions are going on especially at the wake of CHOGM so that the department is fully prepared for the many visitors coming to this country. I would like to say that Government has not neglected this department. All is being done amidst resource constraints to improve services to this department.  

Studies are also going on for the Sector Investment Programme and you can refer to page 80 of our policy statement. For this purpose funding is being provided to improve equipment and basic infrastructure. Also under the support for PMA funding from the Arab Bank of African Development, we have obtained some funding for this purpose.  

Mr Speaker, last but not least, I would like to say something about the concerns raised about our forests especially Mabira. It is true that Metha has made a request to expand their sugar cane plantation and a joint Government committee is evaluating this request.  Unfortunately, people are being misled by the press that the forest has already been given to Metha, which is not true. Discussions are going on and if we have to de-gazette the forest then Parliament will be involved during this process. Be Rest assured my colleagues. 

I want to emphasize that we are continuing to work with other sectors and today we launched The Guidelines and Code of Ethics for Voluntary Compliance with Environmental Requirements for the financial sector in Uganda. We are calling upon all Ugandans especially the banking and insurance sector to invest in the area of environment. We need to involve our people in tree planting and the protection of wetlands. 

If for instance you have land and you would like to sell it to an investor, understand first what this investor is going to use this land for.  If it is a wetland or a forest then you must make sure that the law is taken into consideration and environmental impact assessments are carried out before such land is used for any investment.  Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee and the House.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank the minister for giving us an insight of what is happening in this new ministry. We are now more knowledgeable about what you are doing. Thank you.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to make an observation that because of the budgetary requirement we had to make this response to the House. However, the work of the committee is ongoing.  There are so many issues that we are going to investigate and we shall report progressively.  

Also noting from the contribution of the members on the Floor of the House, I have come to believe that the members of the Natural Resources Committee did a good job. I want to take this opportunity as chair to thank my colleagues who made a tremendous contribution towards presenting this good report.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much and I want to thank the committee, the members and all those who had an input in this work for what you have done. It is very good.  

Now hon. Members, when the report was presented the prayer was that we adopt the report. I want to put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today is 31st of August and according to the Budget Act, which became operational in 2001 we should have completed considering the reports of the Sessional Committees today. There is one committee report that I have not considered, namely trade and this is because there are problems in producing copies and so forth.  The question is what do we do?  

I realize that when this law was made in 2001 the problems that we are currently facing were never envisaged. Problems of electricity and machines breaking down were not there.  It was also never envisaged that the committee, which is handling this business could be different from the one that handled the initial stage of budget processing in April. I realize that this fact has negatively impacted on the committee’s work and that mainly members were learning what to do with the processing of the budget after the old Parliament had started the process.  

Taking into account that you have exhibited extreme diligence in attending to the work of Parliament, I must say thank you very much for that. I have now found a way out. Apparently the Bill has a small section that permits me to exercise my discretion to extend the period prescribed in this law. 

Under Section 9, at the end of the Bill, there is sub Section 22, which provides that, “The Speaker may extend any period provided under this Act for a reasonable period.” Having taken into account the positive attitude you have exhibited and most especially your diligence, taking into consideration the fact that it is a new Parliament, I have decided to extend this date mentioned in section 9 to tomorrow which is 1st September so that we can deal with the last report on trade.  

We shall come back here tomorrow to finish the process of considering the reports of the committees on the estimates and then you will be informed of what will happen thereafter. Let us start at ten O’clock. I think two hours will be enough for us to consider the report and finalise the process. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, we did not know that you would be so gracious as to extend the period and tomorrow there is a special Cabinet meeting. Under the circumstances the ministers of finance and trade must be here but other colleagues will be in Cabinet. So when you do not see us, please understand.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.55 p.m. and adjourned until Friday 1 September 2006 at 10.00 a.m.)

                             



