
Tuesday 31st, August, 1993

(The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

(The Council was called to order).


SUBMISSION OF PROGRESS REPORTS BY CHAIRMEN OF SECTORAL COMMITTEES


MR. MORO (Koboko County, Arua):  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the Council to proceed since we do not have the quorum?

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is not in order.  What do you want us to do?  We adjourn for 15 minutes, Chairman for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

MR. ZACHARY OLUM:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to make the following report as regards the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  The Committee elected me this year again to be Chairman of this Committee -(Applause)- and hon. Lukwago is honorary Secretary of this Committee.  The Committee this time has a list of 27 regular members.  Contrary to a report that appeared in the papers, I think we have maintained the same strength almost, because nobody run away from the Committee as was alleged in the Newspapers.  Members were allowed to change their positions, and I think we only lost about three Members, which should not cause much alarm to the public.  

We have gone through the Policy Statement of the Ministry and had three discussions with the two Ministers and their officials.  These meetings were fruitful and I would like to report here that we were able to review the policies together and also look at last year’s report and recommendations.  We have been able to find some places where the recommendations were implemented and some areas where they were not implemented.  Part of the reason why some of the recommendations were not recommended was due to lack of funds. There was a funding up in certain areas that we shall be able to highlight when we present our full reports.  This is a progress report but we cannot at this moment give you the details because we are just presenting to you what we have done so far, we have identified the funding ups like in the training programme of the Ministry those are the colleges, the Bukalasa Agricultural College, Arapai Agricultural College, Busitema and the BMIs.  They are terribly underfunded – (Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Since the hon. Member does not have a ready report and since very many Committees are still very busy meeting various ministerial officials and writing reports, would it not be wiser for us to adjourn and continue to meet until we are ready to present complete reports, Mr. Chairman?  (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  So you mean the Committees are not yet ready?

HON. MEMBERS:  No.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. OLUM:  I just wanted to say that actually, we have not written our report yet and what I wanted to say was in conclusion, that we are now compiling the reports, so we shall be able to present our full report may be at the -(Interruption)-

THE CHAIRMAN:  That means that you are not yet ready? 

MR. OLUM:  No.

THE CHAIRMAN:  We now adjourn until Tuesday 7th September, 1993.

(The Council rose at 3.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 7th September, 1993).

