Thursday, 30 August 2007

Parliament met at 10.36 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you and to further clarify that yesterday we decided that we should deal with three committee reports and others will be presented in summary. But this does not mean that you will not have an opportunity should you wish to discuss the policies of the other ministries that were not debated in detail. This was for purposes of the Budget and it is not true that we are just simply going to pass the figures. Should you, during the Committee of Supply, have an objection to any figure, you will be able to raise it. But this is done in Parliament where just few votes are discussed in detail; hon. Wadri brought it and we dealt with it.

We shall definitely give time should the committee - for instance, today hon. Dombo told me that there are certain policy matters, which he would like the House to discuss in future. I said, yes, that will be possible. So, anyone of you who thinks that certain policies of a certain ministry should be discussed, we shall do it.  Discussing policy matters does not stop at the budget time because these committees are supposed to continuously report to us what is happening in their ministries. So, we will definitely be given time to debate.

10.39
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): I rise on an entirely separate matter from what you have communicated to us and this is to do with the welfare or well being of Members of Parliament. I have patiently waited for the Commission to rescue Members of Parliament but this does not seem to be forthcoming. 

Sir, this is a matter to do with the parking space at Parliament. I have conducted a research as a result of the difficulties that I have personally realised while coming to Parliament. I would like to inform the House that there is a total of 220 parking spaces at Parliament of which 104 are in the North Wing, 70 in the South Wing and 43 in Bauman House. This does not relate very well with the number expected in Parliament. There are about 300 members of staff who work in Parliament and there are 320 something MPs who are expected to park within this limited space.  As a result of shortage in parking space, many of us have been forced to park on the streets.  

I have had to go through the unpleasant experience of being accosted by a PGB security officer asking me to remove my car. I believe probably the person underrated the car, being a pick-up; he thought probably this is not what a Member of Parliament should move in. But I stood my grounds and the argument that ensued was very unpleasant.  

Mr Speaker, I believe this is a concern of us all and I would like to see a day when we do not have to scramble over the limited parking space and that Members of Parliament do not have to make rounds: go to Bauman House find there is no parking, come back to the North Wing find there is no parking; and go to the South Wing find there is no parking and eventually be thrown out on the streets. We are Members of Parliament and we deserve to work under good conditions.  

Now that the Commission has failed or has ignored to address this issue, I have some proposals; if you allow me to move this proposal on the Floor of the House, I pray that 200 parking spaces be reserved for Members of Parliament. As you may notice, these are too few really to go round all the Members of Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you allow me to just come in here. You are lamenting at the position as it is now but without hiding facts from you, the position is going to change. Even the parking you have is going to be reduced because we have decided to have a new structure to serve as the plenary venue in that space, which is for parking now. You have to balance between leaving it for parking or getting a new structure. Fortunately, the Commission sat and had a meeting with the architect and we agreed that we have a new structure and that structure will take that parking. But it is up to you to –(Interruption) 

MR MUTULUUZA: Does that new structure have parking facilities as well?

THE SPEAKER: No, there was technical advice, which I do not want to reveal to you because it is a security issue but unfortunately it will not. What we are going to do is to take an anti-congestion programme as is done in London where certain vehicles have to stop somewhere. I cannot promise you that we are going to accommodate the 300 and so Members of Parliament and the staff; I would be telling you a lie.  

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, an architect worth his salt will know that while designing a building, they have got to make adequate provision for parking. Just like when you are designing a building, you will have to make adequate provision for toilet facilities.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, what you have to do is to balance up the interests. What are our interests? You are now struggling for parking while others are struggling for seats of Members of Parliament. This place was built for 82 MPs; it was later expanded to accommodate 120 MPs and we may go up to 400 MPs in ten years or so, I do not know. I think it is better that you are seated rather than talking about your parking. We have discussed that and I have told you that for security reasons, I do not intend to reveal what we plan to do here; we were advised not to.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for giving me this opportunity. Given the developments that are coming up that we may lose the other North Wing, I had a suggestion because I have been following up this matter administratively and we have come to realise that we have 70 members of parliamentary staff who drive and they happen to come to office by 8.00 a.m. I have seen in other government ministries like Education and Health; they do not provide parking for their staff. So, if we can administratively say that this side can be left only for heads of department who are about nine and Members of Parliament so that the other staff can sort themselves out the way it is done in other government ministries; it would go a long way in resolving the problem. Because people have a lot of money now; these days almost everyone drives. That is a suggestion. I will formally move at an appropriate time that we exclusively leave this parking area for Members of Parliament and heads of department. At least it will be able to accommodate most of the parking.

Secondly, there is a recent development with the Police; you park and give them the keys because you would have blocked someone. I do not know where those orders have come from but Members of Parliament have been complaining that they lose certain valuables from their vehicles. So, Mr Speaker, I would still believe that the parking this side could be exclusively reserved for Members of Parliament. And I will beg you to give such an order so that it just remains with the implementation.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, hon. Otto, for that information. Besides that, there is also a tendency for Members of Parliament and some members of staff to use more than two vehicles. This constrains the other Members of Parliament who have just one vehicle or who are disciplined enough to drive one vehicle into the precincts of Parliament.

Finally, I do not know how this collision between us and the members of the Presidential Guard Brigade can be avoided. Some days we find ourselves in such hopeless situations where we have to try to communicate with members of the Presidential Guard Brigade. Some of them are actually short of the command of the English language. I have offered even to speak Runyankole with them because I understand a bit of that language, but it really does not help so much for a Member of Parliament to be confronted by a guard. I think Parliament needs to think seriously about the welfare of its Members and to see how confrontations can be avoided in future. Thank you very much.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to raise an issue of national importance.

THE SPEAKER: No, let us conclude this matter. I think we have heard the problem and I have told you the facts. There is nothing I have hidden from you; definitely that parking lot is going. I have heard the suggestion of hon. Otto on sharing the little we have; that matter will be considered. I have heard your problem that some people drive two to three vehicles in here. We may find a way of giving stickers so that we give you one sticker and it is only that vehicle with a sticker that is allowed to park here. (Applause) Those are the sorts of things we are going to do. 

There are times some people have said they need plates labelled “MP” on their vehicles but there are others who do not want them. (Laughter) These are matters that we are going to discuss when the Commission sits. As for the sticker, you are given one, therefore, any vehicle without it is definitely ruled out. If you want those plates, that is up to you. But we are faced with that problem because of the development, which I have told you. We balanced it up in the Commission and resolved that rather than keeping it as a park, we would rather have a structure that will accommodate us and give us space. But I sympathise with the Members. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, hon. Amuriat raised the issue of the Presidential Guard Brigade.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let me answer. As you know, the Presidential Guard Brigade personnel are here because we have one of us who is entitled to this protection. As for confrontation, it is not a question of an MP being confronted; nobody should be confronted. You see, whether it is an MP or an ordinary person, there is a way of handling people. So, it is not a question of being an MP; we shall find out under what circumstances this confrontation comes and, therefore, minimise it. The confrontation could even come from Members of Parliament towards members of the Presidential Guard. You know, it is because you feel you are a Member of Parliament. I think we have to know how to relate with people, even those that are below us. But we shall examine and find a remedy. You should be known but you do not have to say, “I am a Member of Parliament!”

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, still on that one, there are obvious areas where we need to be told by the Sergeant-At-Arms who mans parliamentary security because as of now plain-clothed men in suits with at least two guns are moving everywhere in Parliament, including the Members’ Lounge and the parliamentary canteen. We should be told clearly even at the check points whether it is the PGBs to check us or whether the parliamentary   Police have the capacity to do that. The moment we are told in black and white that, “Honourable members, if you see somebody without a name tag, dressed in a nice suit coming to check you, please do not raise any objection.”  We want the rules to be set clearly so that any gunman does not walk towards me and say, “Can I check your waist?” We want to be told whether parliamentary Police can man all the check points or how the Presidential Guard Brigade come in, and whether we should comfortably be having lunch with gunmen. Because you sit in the canteen, you see a man with guns around the waist. It is a traumatising experience. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a matter that I would not have liked to talk about here but it has come to my notice that among us here there are people who come armed. I am not going to reveal their names. I have stopped there but please, do not come with arms whether you have a license or not. Please, desist from doing that. It has come to my knowledge; talking about those sorts of affairs is not good.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, the matter of the housing of President’s Office has come before this House before. Probably this is the time for Parliament to begin thinking about appropriating money for the construction of a new President’s Office so that the entire precincts of Parliament remain in the ambit of Parliament in order for us to continue enjoying the facilities that are available to Members of Parliament. This would certainly draw a clear line between where the PGB can come and where Members of Parliament cannot go. The onus is on the House and it is my earnest appeal that in future budgets, probably some kind of thought should be given to appropriating money so that we close this chapter once and for all. Otherwise, we shall continue to collide with members of the Presidential Guard Brigade; the President requires security and we also need our liberty. At the same time I think that the point of convergence is not visible. 

THE SPEAKER: But I have said, honourable members, those who have arms should desist from coming with your arms here. If you do, you will be confronted. [Hon. Members: “By who?”] By the Parliament security.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I think these two issues can be handled administratively. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR ODIT: There are two suggestions. This House was constructed with various wings; there is the presidential wing for the time being with access gates. I suggest that the presidential guards be limited to those areas as we handle the main entrance to Parliament using our security system for the time being. This is because even if we are to suggest the idea of constructing the President’s Office, look at State House in Entebbe. It has taken a decade; so that will need another two decades to complete. Therefore, for the time being, let us get the best way of handling the security system in the House.

My last suggestion would be that instead of occupying the parking yard fully with a new building thereby leaving no alternative parking for Members of Parliament - and I know that even the basement, these days we have Al Qaeda everywhere in the world. Somebody can come with a small bomb and park in the basement and blow the whole building. That is a statement of fact. There is no way Parliament can negotiate with the city council either for the space outside the fence because they are busy planting grass. However, it has no value to them and we could design it as parking for Members of Parliament. Thank you.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of constructing a new chamber for Parliament has come up time and again and I have my reservations on this matter. More often than not, we lack a quorum in this House. It was only the first few days of sitting after swearing in that the House was packed. Are you sure we are not going to construct a white elephant? I request that this matter be studied more critically so that the decision, when taken, will not be a waste of money.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, your statement is to the effect that we are not diligent. We are planning for diligent Members of Parliament and, therefore, we expect them to be here. We cannot tell the public that we are not diligent. Anyway, a decision has been taken that we shall have a structure and plans are being finalised.

10.58
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to raise an issue of national importance concerning the status of our people on Lake Victoria. As the country is preparing to host the Commonwealth Heads of State Meeting in November, there is a group of security operatives on Lake Victoria telling our people that during that period there will be no fishing activities. They have also gone ahead to tell them that if at all they are to be allowed, they should mobilise some funds. I have received several calls from various islands and I have tried to dispel their fears but they do not believe me. Therefore, my appeal is for the Minister responsible for Agriculture to come up with a statement because if we do not sensitise our people very well, people can use that to extort money from others. 

Furthermore, in one of my sub-counties, that is, Bwema sub-county, a resolution was passed that all fishermen in that island are supposed to get an identity card that costs Shs 4,000 per person. The residents were actually wondering why they cannot use their voter’s cards as they contain all their details therewith. However, the sub-county officials refused. They have even been told that during that period from October to November, people will be issued with permits. As such, if you are migrating from the island to the mainland, you must first get clearance and state how many days you are going to take in the mainland and when are you reporting back. People are confused. We are ready to receive the heads of state but government should come up clearly, especially the Ministry of Local Government, and tell us whether that resolution is valid. 

THE SPEAKER: I think those are two points: One concerns the activities on Lake Victoria during CHOGM and you are asking the Minister in charge of Agriculture or fisheries to make a statement. I think the Leader of Government Business will convey that. The other issue concerns your local island. That is a local matter and you know that under the Local Governments Act, local councils are entitled to make laws that will operate within the local jurisdiction. I think you will have to address that issue to the local authorities that are imposing that condition. In other words, Parliament cannot intervene in a matter that is within the jurisdiction of a local council.

11.01
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Mr Speaker, further to what you have just said, recently hon. Kabuusu complained that there is a curfew on Lake Victoria now. After a certain time say after 10.00 O’clock, and you know that fishermen fish at night, they say no fisherman is allowed to go on the lake. I think the minister should also explain that because that means there is no work being done if they cannot fish at night. 

MR NSUBUGA: We should give a deadline for the statement such that our people can be informed much earlier because if we do not give a time limit, it could go on.

THE SPEAKER: She will communicate to the responsible minister because one minister is in the hospital and another is outside the country. However, there must be a minister acting on their behalf. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, what hon. Nsubuga has said this morning reminds me of the issue of national identity cards. I remember there was a project that was brought on board –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. Given the constraints of time that we have, both Members and especially chairpersons have been coming here from beginning to end, is it really procedurally right that we continue dragging on the communication from the Chair?

THE SPEAKER: I think that will be handled, honourable. Just leave it.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
i)THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2006/2007.

ii)THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2007/08.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

11.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr George Wopuwa): Mr Speaker, this is the report of our committee -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I understand that copies were given out.

MR WOPUWA: They are even available there.

THE SPEAKER: Ok, proceed.

MR WOPUWA: The committee considered the votes for the Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Local Government, the Public Service Commission, the Local Government Finance Commission and the Local Governments of Uganda. We had the opportunity of having a Member who is the Shadow Minister of Local Government, hon. Arumadri and the Shadow Minister for Public Service, hon. Otengo and we harmonised our positions. 

Because of the time that we have, I will try to summarise. Honourable members, I suggest that we move to page 10 of the report paragraph 2.5, which is under the Ministry of Public Service. The amount of funds requested for by the sub-sector for the financial year 2007/08 include: 

- Recurrent expenditure, Shs 3.92 billion;
- Development expenditure, Shs 1.0 billion;
- Project expenditure, Shs 40.9 billion;
- Statutory expenditure, Shs 78.38 billion;
- Pension arrears, Shs 200.65 billion.

The table shows the category of payments for gratuities and monthly pensions for this financial year. At the bottom is the Shs 200.6 billion provided for pension arrears for this financial year. Mr Speaker, I wish to report that all this money has been provided for in the budget for this year and, therefore, we are seeking the House to approve it. 

On page 11, the committee made a number of observations:

a) That although government has been paying salaries by the 28th day of every month, the new process has caused a lot of delays in the transfer of funds.

b) We noted the selective salary awards and lack of uniform pay policy.

c) The facilitation of former leaders. The committee noted that there is no comprehensive law covering entitlements for former leaders, for whatever duration or criteria as to who qualifies as a former leader and this has led to ambiguity of those entitled. For example, the former Vice-President, Dr Speciosa Kazibwe, is not among the beneficiaries although Gen. Idris Mustafa is benefiting. The committee also noted that the criteria as it is now does not show how long a former president or leader continues getting entitlements or which family members continue getting it upon his or her death.

d) On the issue of pension arrears, the committee commended the pronouncement by the President for the financial year 2007/08 of Shs 280 billion for pension arrears and the committee was grateful that all this money has been provided for in the budget. On the next page, which is page 12, the details of allocation of the pension arrears for 2007/08 are indicated. These include civil service pensions, teachers pensions, defence pensions, validation for old pensioners, local government pension arrears, defence pension arrears for widows and orphans and compensation of former East African Airlines employees totalling to Shs 186,462,898,000.

e) The committee also noted that the ministry reported that they are working out a contributory pension scheme. The committee was informed that the Ministry of Public Service has submitted a detailed concept paper to the Ministry of Finance as agreed. However, the Ministry of Finance has delayed in giving its formal position in regard to the regulatory authority. While the Ministry of Public Service prefers a separate regulatory authority, the Ministry of Finance insists on using the National Social Security Fund. This would create a monopoly and the problems inherent in NSSF may not be favourable to the public service. The adoption and enactment of regulations in the form of the Public Service Pensions Fund and the Pensions Authority Bills shall address all the impediments currently affecting the pensions’ scheme.

f) We also noted the issue of government offices. Currently, government spends a lot of money on renting offices. It is our view that this is not a healthy position. It was also noted that currently we don’t have the national records and archives centre.

g) We also made a comment on the Public Service Commission Bill but it has been laid before the House.

h) On payment of severance packages, the Ministry of Public Service made available to the committee details of those who benefited from severance packages and annex A is attached for details.

i) The committee was also informed that the Office of the President has submitted all the 181 cases because last year we had a problem of workers of Radio Uganda currently UBC. However, it was reported that many of these have been paid.

j) On restructuring of local governments, the committee noted that the Ministry of Public Service restructured all local governments and in so doing created new posts while abolishing others. However, not all the new districts have been restructured. Our view is that a number of posts were given very high designations, for example, it was noted that all chief administrative officers are at the rank of directors, even though the districts have become smaller. Therefore, in the current arrangement all CAOs can only be supervised by the Permanent Secretary because all commissioners are under the directors, who are CAOs. We thought that this position requires a policy review. 

The committee made the following recommendations:

a) Government should put in place a transparent system of paying out the money committed for pension arrears.

b) The Ministry of Public Service should update pension arrears for local governments since 2001 so that the amount is captured in the 2008/09 budget. We have been talking about Shs 17.5 billion for local governments but that is as per 2001. We do not know the figures from 2001 to date.

c) The ministry should expedite consultations for a Bill for entitlements for former leaders.

d) The ministry should develop an integrated salary and pension pay roll management system.

e) The Ministry of Public Service should review all local government structures including the grading of posts so as to be realistic.

f) The ministry should update pension records to reflect the actual outstanding figure.

g) The Presidential Act should be amended to include the Vice-President as a former leader.

h) The ministry should prioritise the issue of the official residence of the Vice-President. The committee noted that we have been lucky that we have been having vice-presidents who have residences nearby but if you get a vice-president from Karamoja or Manafwa -(Laughter)- it would be difficult.

i) The government should expedite the policies of the production of a cabinet paper on pension reform including the implementation of the contributory pension scheme. The issue of the contributory pension scheme has been outstanding since 2003 and we would like to have it resolved.

Mr Speaker, concerning Vote 106 for the Public Service Commission pages 15, 16 and 17 dealt mainly with the activities both recurrent, development and planned. 

On page 18, 3.5, the Public Service Commission has requested for recurrent expenditure of Shs 2.7 billion and development expenditure of Shs 0.63 billion and the sub total is Shs 3.33 billion.  

The committee made the following observations on the Public Service Commission activities:

The committee noted that within the limited resources and without the enabling law, the Public Service Commission was performing very well. The committee noted that while it was always recommended that vacant posts as per approved structures should be filled, this has not been the case.  

The committee looked at the policy on civil service examinations, the commission’s policy on job adverts, which takes the greatest percentage of the recurrent expenditure of the Public Service Commission although the money released normally is very little. 

On the relationship with district service commissions; the committee recommends that the Public Service Commission should guide districts particularly to put in place competent people. Many districts, especially new districts, have got only one person or two people. The district service commissions are not full and, therefore, the recruitment procedures cannot take place.  

Mr Speaker, we also looked at the Vote of the Ministry of Local Government especially page 25 because the others are mainly recurrent and planned activities. The Ministry of Local Government has requested for the following monies for 2007/08: recurrent expenditure is Shs 4.61 billion, development expenditure Shs 3.6 billion and the sub total is Shs 8.21 billion. The local governments unconditional grant of Shs 132.7 billion, conditional grant of Shs 912.8 billion, equalization grant Shs 3.5 billion. Although in the last financial year Shs 3.7 billion was approved only Shs 2.4 billion was released and the committee had recommended that to make the money meaningful, the Ministry of Finance should release Shs 6.0 billion but they only released Shs 2.4 billion out of Shs 3.5 billion that was passed.

Vote 147 is Local Government Finance Commission on page 29. The recurrent expenditure requested for is Shs 1.77 billion and development expenditure is Shs 0.12 billion and the sub total is Shs 1.89 billion. 

We made the following observations on the Local Government sector: 

We noted that there has been no provision for graduated tax compensation in the Ministry of Local Government budget. In fact, when we were discussing it we had a problem. The Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Finance deal with each other as if they had not been attending several cabinet meetings. While the minister was completely opposed to the graduated tax compensation, the Minister of Local Government was saying, “No, the issue was taken without being consulted.”

The decline in local revenue generation, especially after the suspension of graduated tax, has greatly affected the performance of local governments especially in donor-funded programmes like LGDP. The committee noted that although the Ministry of Local Government is to introduce alternative sources of local revenue collections in local governments, the enabling law is not yet in place.

While the government is commended for providing Shs 33 billion in the budget for 2007/08 to enhance the unconditional grant, it must be pointed out that the cost of fully implemented structures is about Shs 120.8 billion. The gap, therefore, still remains enormous and shall continue to be a problem to local governments who have additional responsibilities. The details are in annex C.

The committee also noted that the relationship between ULGA, UAAU and the Ministry of Local Government has improved. The committee also noted that urban authorities were experiencing problems.  Releases to urban centres particularly town councils go through districts and in many cases, the districts do not release the money to town councils in time. And when districts get problems like it happened in Lira, the money for town councils is withheld. In some districts like Sironko, the money was not released to Sironko town council by the districts.  

The committee also noted the issue of chief administrative officers and deputy chief administrative officers and most town clerks.  These are people appointed, posted and disciplined in the centre and yet they are not provided for by the centre. The committee noted that the Ministry of Local Government normally carries out national assessment reports but these assessment reports are only distributed to local governments. 

The committee also noted that while the enactment of local council courts has taken place, the regulation for operationalising the Local Governments Act has not taken place; there are no regulations to guide the implementation of the local council courts.

Sir, there is no common standard by which new districts share assets and liabilities. Normally, the new districts go only with assets and the liabilities are left with the old districts. There is no law in place; all liabilities are left behind.  

The formula for allocating funds to districts is not transparent. While the local government finance commission developed a new formula so that the money distributed to local governments is done transparently, this policy has not been taken on by government.  

The committee also noted that the greatest percentage of our political leaders are in local governments and yet they are the only public officers who work on full-time basis but they are paid a salary subject to PAYE and yet they are never paid any gratuity. For example, chairmen are paid Shs 2.0 million, which is subject to PAYE but they are not paid gratuity. Yet, other categories like RDCs are paid gratuity when their term expires.  

The committee also noted that almost all other political leaders in the country have standard and regular allowances. The local government councillors who form the biggest percentage of the political leaders and the critical actors in the realisation of the government objectives and programmes, there is no standard regarding how they are paid allowances.

They have introduced a new arrangement called sub-county models but these models are being co-ordinated exclusively by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development without specific reference to the sector Ministry of Local Government. In that meeting, we were informed that even motorcycles are being given out to sub-county chiefs and the Ministry of Local Government was also hearing about it for the first time in that meeting. A substantive Minister of Local Government attended that meeting, hon. Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire. 

The committee also noted that Karamoja as a sub-region is hanging between regions, North and Eastern. This has created difficulties in co-ordination of the programmes meant for the region. For example, during regional workshops organised by government for political and local leaders from Karamoja region, the leaders from the districts of Abim, Kotido, and Kabong usually attend the one for Northern region at Lira. And the leaders from Moroto and Nakapiripirit attend under Mbale, which is Eastern. During the Youth MP elections, the youth from the Kotido, Kabong and Abim vote for the youth MP of Northern region while those from Moroto and Nakapiripirit vote for the one for Eastern region. This is similar for all elections of MPs for PWDs. Due to this the Karamoja sub-region has most times missed out on programmes targeting Northern and Eastern Uganda. For example, NUSAF, when it reached Karamoja, it stopped in the Northern region. When this new programme under agricultural modernisation came, it reached Sironko and could not go to Karamoja. 

The committee made the following recommendations on the local government sector:

· That graduated tax compensation should be continued for the financial year 2007/08 and that it should be increased beyond the level of 2006/07 by Shs 35 billion so that the total figure is Shs 80 billion.

· That the wage component of the unconditional grant should be topped up by Shs 25 billion. In the last financial year, we had a wage component for local governments at Shs 57.3 billion and that means local government structures would only be filled up to 37 percent. Now, with the recurrent of Shs 61 billion, the local government structures can only operate up to 52 percent. Our view as a committee is that this money should be increased by Shs 25 billion to make it Shs 86 billion so that staff in local governments can be at the level of 70 percent. Our view is that, we can have programmes of local government implemented properly if we have proper staff in their places. 

· The Ministry of Local Government should provide modalities to enhance and standardise the allowances of local government councillors as the case for all other political leaders.

· We also recommend that the unconditional grant should be divided into specific items. We should have the unconditional grant, which is a wage component, and then the non-wage component. While the Ministry of Finance is able to reflect these figures in the book for estimates when they are releasing money, that figure is not reflected. Therefore, many districts are not able to pay their salaries properly because the money for the wage component is already calculated. We already have models and it is easy to establish the exact money required for the wage component.

· We also recommend that the district of Maracha and Terego, in which we see a dispute over the location of district headquarters, should be split to form two districts. (Laughter) Our recommendation was based on the fact that the dispute has been hanging for almost one financial year and the two are not able to live together. But, good enough, the Minister of Local Government who attended the meeting said it is fine and he is going to follow it up.

· We also recommend that the controversy surrounding the creation of a new district out of Tororo District should be resolved and a new district created. 

· Karamoja should be accorded its own regional status to be called North-eastern region comprising the districts of Abim, Kotido, Kabong, Moroto and Nakapiripirit.

· The government should commit itself to pay Shs 17.5 billion for pension arrears for local government within this financial year. Last year, Parliament approved Shs 5 billion for local government pensions out of the Shs 51 billion budget for pensions; but it was not even paid. Our view was that the budgeting is okay but it should be supported by actual paying. 

· The utilisation grant for local government of Shs 3.5 billion should be paid in full instead of Shs 2.4 billion, which was released of what was budgeted.

· The Ministry of Local Government should develop a comprehensive policy on sharing of assets and liabilities during the creation of new local governments.

· The ministry should also develop a comprehensive policy of tax education to sensitise citizens and various players with a stake in the taxes, including the new taxes being introduced. 

· The ministry should work hand in hand with the Ministry of Public service to streamline the qualification and grading of administrative officers in charge of district municipal councils, county and sub-county councils. Currently, deputy town clerks or municipal councillors are not centralised and yet the deputy chief administrative officers are centralised. We are recommending that the Ministry of Local Government should cause the relevant amendment to centralise the deputy town clerks and municipal councils.

· Government should provide facilitation including housing and transport to chief administrative officers, their deputies, and municipal town clerks who are now appointed by the centre. 

· The local council courts’ regulations should be expeditiously approved and disseminated.

· We noted that under the new arrangement, no municipal council can become a city because the law requires that to become a city you must have a population of about 500,000 people. The committee recommended that the Ministry of Local Government should initiate the relevant regulation so that the acquisition of a city and municipal city councils changes from the current one, which requires urban councils to have a population of 500,000 to qualify for a city. We were informed that currently it is only Kiira Town Council, which can qualify to be a city because it has a population of about 500,000 people but all the other municipal councils like Mbale, Soroti, Jinja, Gulu cannot qualify because they cannot raise those people yet people are aware that out there, there are cities with even 30,000 people.              

· The Ministry of Local Government should work hand in hand with the Ministry of Public Service to update the pension records for local governments. The current figure we have is Shs 17.5 billion, but the figures for the period between 2001 and 2007 has not been captured. 

· Mr Speaker, when we looked at the policy statement for the Ministry of Local Government, we realised that the amount of releases to local governments had not been captured and when we inquired, the Ministry of Local Government said that Ministry of Finance never gave them that information early. So, we are recommending that if there were going to be a committee, it would be good for us to discuss the policy statement for the Ministry of Local Government when we have specific details of allocation to the districts attached. This would help Members of Parliament to know how much money is going to their respective districts. 

· We recommended that government should provide a research fund to the Local Government Finance Commission to assist it in its research studies, and that a forum should be established in the local government sector to implement recommendations made by this commission. We are saying this because the scenario now is that once the Local Government Finance Commission has made recommendations, there is no forum to follow up to ensure that those recommendations are implemented. One of the examples is the issue of the new allocation formula. The Local Government Finance Commission made a recommendation that we should have a new formula but three years down the road, there is no feedback on whether that recommendation was bad or good.

· Lastly, Mr Speaker, we are recommending that government should finance local governments to at least a tune of 70 percent in terms of the wage component. This is so because currently local governments are only getting 22 percent of the national budget and yet most of the government activities are in local governments.  So, we are saying that at worst, 70 percent of the wage component of local government staff should be paid.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee requests the House to approve the following votes:

Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service: recurrent expenditure is Shs 3.92 billion; development expenditure is Shs 41.9 billion; statutory expenditure	is Shs 78.38 billion; pension arrears are Shs 200.65 billion; and the sub-total is Shs 324.85 billion.

Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government: recurrent expenditure is Shs 4.61 billion; development expenditure is Shs 3.6 billion and the sub-total is Shs 8.21 billion.

Vote 146 - Public Service Commission: recurrent expenditure is Shs 2.7 billion; development expenditure	is Shs 0.63 billion and the sub-total is Shs 3.33 billion.

Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission: recurrent expenditure is Shs 1.77 billion; development expenditure is Shs 0.21 billion and the sub-total is Shs 1.89 billion.

Votes 501 to 761 for all local governments of Uganda, I want to say that we made a bit of re-allocation here. In order to save local governments from collapsing, the committee has made a re-allocation of Shs 25 billion from the wage component to open up a graduated tax compensation budget line. The committee urges government to make additional Shs 25 billion as a wage component so that the figure above would become Shs 86 billion. We have made an internal re-allocation so that both programmes of recruitment and the graduated tax compensation can start moving together.  

Therefore, we are requesting the House to approve Votes 501 to 761 for an unconditional grant of Shs 107.66 billion. Under this unconditional grant, we have two items: the wage component, which is Shs 61,380,000,000 and the non-wage component of Shs 46,280,000,000. The other conditional grant of Shs 912.8 billion is for SFG and UPE salaries for teachers. There is the equalisation grant of Shs 3.5 billion with graduated tax compensation of Shs 25 billion. This gives us a sub-total of Shs 1,048.96 trillion.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to move and may I, therefore, lay a copy of the report on the Table?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Before I proceed, honourable members, permit me to welcome to Parliament the headmistress, teachers and pupils of Mary Immaculate Primary School, Gulu Municipality, represented by hon. Betty Ocan. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

Honourable members, there was something, which caused a problem here as far as the positioning of Karamoja is concerned. It is confusing. Sometimes it goes to eastern; sometimes it goes to Northern Uganda. Anyway, the recommendation of the committee is that a new region be created for the districts making up Karamoja. However, my problem is that I do not know under what law we can do this? Because when I look at the Constitution, I see that Acholi is a region. All the districts forming Acholi, by Constitution, fall under the Acholi region and all the other districts forming Lango, fall under Lango region. So, where is Northern region in this Constitution? Apparently, it is not there. Is it an administrative or legal concept?

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, our recommendations will not be constitutional recommendations; they will be, merely for administrative arrangements.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but now will you combine constitutional regions with those that are non-constitutional? I am saying this because Lango is a region; Acholi is a region.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, you have quoted the examples of Acholi and Lango regions, but what does the Constitution talk about Karamoja?

THE SPEAKER: They are just districts.

MR ODIT: That is a very serious omission, Sir. I think they should be given their sub-region to be called Karamoja sub-region.  

THE SPEAKER: No, because when you read this Constitution, it says that the only regions in the Northern Province are Lango and Acholi.

MR WADRI: I think that administratively the present status quo puts many government functionaries into a problem. The example given by the chairman of the committee, that when it comes to electing the Youth Representatives of Parliament Karamoja is divided and yet it will be in the interests of the people there that Karamoja goes with its identity, is very pertinent. I am saying this because when you look at some of the government conceived programmes, such as NUSAF or NURP, Karamoja is entirely taken as part of Northern Uganda. The recommendation given by this committee from the administrative perspective will help government a lot in rationalising its programmes so that if there is anything to do with Karamoja, we know all its six or seven districts are looked at as a block rather than dividing them. That is where the difficulty is. I do not know how technically this can be possible but, Mr Speaker, you will guide us. Otherwise, it was that kind of administrative unease, which this recommendation seeks to address. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we have to address it in the Local Government Act by stating the purposes of these regions, in which we can say that for purposes of so and so, Karamoja is a region. But constitutionally, apparently it is a different concept. But since we have a Local Government (Amendment) Bill, maybe we may have to address it at the time of considering it. Otherwise, it may cause some confusion.

MR ABURA PIRIR: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of a status of a sub-region.  If you go back to our history, you will realize that in 1962 there were only 16 districts with Karamoja as one of them. As you enter this Parliament every day, at the gate, you see the symbol for the Karimojong; it is a giraffe. If other regions have been elevated to the sub-region status, what measures do you use to demote us to a district yet we are already a sub-region? (Laughter)

I do not know why you still want to refuse to award us a sub-regional status when our population has now grown from 200 people in the 1960s, to more than 900,000 presently with Karamoja being an area of land that takes almost half of the country. In that sense, therefore, can I get a clarification on what measures are used to determine that this area should be a sub-region and this one should not?

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Abura, we agree with the recommendation of the committee that Karamoja could become a region. But how do we do it? Is it administratively okay to consider it as a region or we legally make it a region? The problem is that if you make it a region legally, then under what law will you be doing this? Is it about amending the Constitution because for insistence as I have told you, in Northern Uganda, Acholi and Lango are regions constitutionally. The question is: do we put this Karamoja as a constitutional region or we just amend the Local Governments Act and define it as a region in that sense? We are just trying to help you, but how to do it is what we are trying to find out. Otherwise, we definitely agree that Karamoja is a big area. (Laughter)

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to draw your attention to the first schedule of the Constitution. Those of us who have got a copy can look at it. Under this schedule, we have districts of Uganda and under districts we have got regions. This is under Article 178(5) of the Constitution of Uganda. If you look at the third list, there is Karamoja. First of all, we have Rwenzori, which comprises Bundibugyo, Kasese, and then we have got Bukedi as a region –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: As districts?

MR OMWONY OJWOK: No, Rwenzori is not a district –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, the First Schedule is talking about districts and the name you give to Kabong is Kabong District of Karamoja –(Interruption)

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Yes, but what is that Karamoja?

THE SPEAKER: When you come to Moroto, the proper name for it will be Moroto District of Karamoja.

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Correct, so the point I am trying to make is that, therefore, there is already Karamoja just in the same way as Acholi, which is on numbers 24 to 27. So -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: My OB, what you are reading is for purposes of naming districts, but we want to give a different status to this combination of districts that they be known under one region or province, but how do we do it? That is all. It is true that there are many districts but should they form their own region? This is what we are trying to do and, therefore, we are suggesting that either the Local Governments Act takes care of it by creating this region or the Constitution also names Karamoja as a region. I think it is okay. Yes, hon. Minister of Local Government.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Under Article 178 of the Constitution, there is provision for the formation of regional governments and the ministry is in the process of operationalising that and I want to promise that while we do that we will take care of the concerns that have been raised on the Floor about Karamoja and others. Thank you.

11.50
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr John Arumadri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As already mentioned by the chairman, I sit on this committee and I can say that most of the sticky issues were harmonised. So, my job is really very simple. 

But for emphasis, let me point out that the teething problem with local governments is funding. Once we provide enough funds down there, the local governments will continue to function well and much of this noise will cease. The new avenues as contained in the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2007 will not come on board immediately. So, my request is for government to bring compensation for graduated tax that was abolished some time ago. This should be timely and adequately done. 

Secondly, I would like to request the ministry to quickly come to this House and resolve the feud between Maracha and Terego counties because it has gone on for too long; we now cannot afford it any more. 

We have many lessons to learn from this. One of them is that in future government should not come to Parliament to pronounce itself on the creation of a district before fundamental matters like the headquarters and the name have been agreed upon by the local people. The government should not impose the name of the district from above. I believe you are aware the issue of Maracha and Terego counties is now a matter of litigation in court, but which puts Parliament in a very awkward position -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. What my colleague the minister in the Opposition is trying to say is not only in reference to Maracha. In my district, Kitgum, we are moving into having Lamwo become a district. I remember last year I stood on this Floor of this Parliament to inquire about the status of this district. This was because I had got information from the hon. Hillary Onek that the Seventh Parliament had, by the time of winding up business, already passed Lamwo to become a district. He even showed me a letter written by His Excellency the President instructing the Ministry of Local Government to implement that decision. Also recently, it came out in the press that Lamwo is already a district yet back home there is already a controversy. People are already lobbying for positions to become MPs, to become interim chairpersons and these are the controversies, which probably the minister will help us clear. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, this is off record. On Saturday, I was in Buhweju constituency and I really saw that the terrain of Buhweju is different from the rest of Ankole. There is a problem of accessibility to the area. The area is mountainous; not hills but mountains -(Laughter)- there are valleys. I do not see how vehicles can pass each other. I was attending a ceremony where I witnessed 200 couples getting married and 1,600 people baptised. So, they took the opportunity to read me a memorandum asking for a district of Buhweju. This is off record.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that kind observation. The people of Buhweju are law- abiding. They took steps to request for a district according to the Constitution. They wrote their memorandum, a copy of which you received. Another copy was sent to the authorities, and they presented it to the district council, which passed a resolution, which it forwarded to the local government for the creation of Buhweju district, among others. As you have rightly observed, people requested for services to come near them but up to now the council and the people of Buhweju are wondering as to what happened because it is coming to a year since the council passed that resolution and forwarded it to the Minister of Local Government. 

I want to take this opportunity to ask the Minister of Local Government how far they have gone in implementing or discussing the decision of the council and how soon they will bring it to the Floor of Parliament so that Buhweju district is created. As it has been observed by Mr Speaker and colleagues who have been to Buhweju - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I would like to give you is that there are 39 groups of people demanding for districts as of now. You may have to know that we may be expecting 40 districts alongside your request. (Laughter)

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I just want to confirm what you have said. During the Sixth Parliament, we had an association called YPA. We were invited as MPs to go and visit Buhweju. Most of us had never been to Buhweju but in order to attract as many MPs as possible, the area MP drew a map without indicating the terrain and distance. So, when Members of Parliament put fuel in their cars, they anticipated that the distance would be okay. I want to tell you that most MPs who went to Buhweju got stranded because they ran out of fuel. If it were not for the good Samaritans on that side - besides that we got perplexed because until that time we had been told that Bushenyi is a land of milk and honey but when we went to Buhweju, the contrary appeared! This was very unfortunate. 

But I also remember that on this Floor of Parliament there was a time when we were approving a resolution for the creation of districts, there was an amendment where one district was introduced the following day and it was approved. Everything must be done by this Parliament and government to ensure that we give the people of Buhweju a future as the Speaker has also confirmed the plight of the people of Buhweju. I thank you.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you very much, for the information. I think –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. We are not debating that. The minister was on the Floor.

MS ABIA BAKO: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, the issue of Terego and Maracha is making my work very difficult. I must be one of the few MPs with the largest constituency of around 31 sub-counties. When this matter came in and it was not resolved, working in the two counties has become extremely difficult because the relations between the people of Terego and Maracha are so strained that it is very difficult for me who particularly comes from Terego to be appreciated in one way or the other.

This has even led to loss of lives. A woman from Terego was killed on the basic argument of the district headquarters. Students from Terego crossed for a football match to Maracha and they were almost drowned in River Enyau. This is very sad and for me as the area MP it is difficult because in one way or the other I am first perceived as a Terego before I am perceived as the MP of the district. 

Since the minister pronounced himself sometime ago and since this issue is still in court, I would really call upon the relevant ministry to take it up seriously. After all, there have been districts that have been pronounced for one county Koboko, for example, Yumbe and many others and these two counties have substantial population and infrastructure to be independent districts. I think to harmonise the people of the two sub-counties, it will be prudent that the two counties become independent districts so that work is simplified for me and we minimise loss of lives in this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ARUMADRI: I thank my colleagues for the useful interjections. The other lesson to be learnt is that when government wants to introduce the creation of a district in this House, it must come with all the parameters including clear demarcation of boundaries. Not long ago the district of Bundibugyo was here about their border conflict with Kabarole and Kasese and that is only the tip of the iceberg. In the West Nile region, with which I am most familiar, a district called Yumbe was curved out of Arua. Immediately after becoming a district Yumbe laid claims to all her neighbours including the Republic of Sudan. (Laughter) Yumbe wants a piece of land from Moyo; the district of Yumbe wants a whole sub-county from Madi-Okolo of Arua District; the district of Yumbe wants many villages from Terego of Arua District -(Interruption)

MS HUDA OLERU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague, for giving way. Yumbe District has not grabbed any piece of land from the neighbours, or even other countries like Sudan. We had surveyors from the Ministry of Lands who did the surveying and that is how they have come up with the map of Yumbe. We do not have authority over any other piece of land. Even traditionally, we were extending up to River Nile. Therefore, hon. Arumadri should not claim that we are taking their land. It is our land, which extends up to River Nile. (Laughter) Even if people from Okolo are using our land, we know we are all people from West Nile. We want this to be clear. It is our land. In future we shall have our sub-county, we shall use the resources but they are welcome to stay in Yumbe District. (Applause) Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I thank the Shadow Minister of Local Government for giving me this opportunity. I think the question of boundaries for these new districts should be taken more seriously. Recently a new district was curved out of Gulu District and my constituency borders. Last week there was a dispute between the sub-counties of Atiak, which is in Kilak represented by hon. Michael Ocula, and the sub-county of Palaro, which is in Aswa County, which I represent. Yet originally, the boundaries were clearly marked on the river but now because people settled across the other side when a district is declared, people think that even their clans the other side should belong to the district. (Laughter) I wish that the Minister of Local Government takes this matter very seriously, otherwise, there is going to be many disputes and local conflicts.

MR WADRI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have the following information to give to the Member on the Floor. It is true the Ministry of Local Government and the Office of the Prime Minister did send a team of technocrats to West Nile with the Global Position System (GPS) to demarcate boundaries. When they went they discovered that nearly one sub-county of Terego was in Aringa, the present Yumbe District. I have got official communication, given from the area MP, declaring the details of the readings. The whole of Mungoyo Primary School, which is in Yumbe District, is in Terego -(Laughter)- we have that in black and white. But I think the most important thing is for the Minister of Local Government to come and do something.

THE SPEAKER: I thought this matter was raised by the minister so that those concerned look into these disputes; but we may not be able to solve this by debating it here. The point is taken that there are problems of boundaries and the Ministry of Local Government and that of Lands should take action.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your useful counsel. I hope the ministry takes note of this. Many of these complaints are documented and are with the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Lastly, of recent the Minister of Local Government came under adverse observation for entangling himself in the allocation of markets. This is not good for the good name of the ministry. We think that the ministry should act as an adjudicator for the warring parties and not be part of the process, so that peace can prevail. With these few comments, I rest my case.

12.08
CAPT. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Mr Speaker, I would like to raise a few issues especially about the Ministry of Local Government. The overall national expenditure of government last financial year is expected to grow from Shs 4.075 trillion to Shs 4.707 trillion this financial year. The important point to note is that the bulk of that expenditure, which is about 15 percent increase, is unfortunately on areas I may term as non-core areas of the public life. These are seminars and workshops, motor vehicle maintenance and repairs, travel inland, travel abroad with varying percentages. A 15 percent increase expected of the government expenditure from last financial year to this financial year of 2007/08, a bulk of that anticipated expenditure will be in those areas. 

Are these the areas government has identified to augment the welfare of Ugandans, to increase the productivity? These are areas of very serious concern, which we as people in the national assembly should be focussing on. If you look at Local Government specifically, there is a reduction from last financial year to this financial year. In 2006/07, Local Government had an expenditure of about 40 percent of the total national expenditure. In 2007/08 it has about 37.9 percent and yet you and I know that the bulk of Ugandans are under the administration of our local leaderships. These are local leaderships who handle the bulk of the services that affect the majority of our ordinary people.

Therefore, I have a very serious concern that we see a big chunk of government expenditure that we anticipate but which is going into areas that do not directly affect the welfare of our people. Specifically, look at the unconditional grants. The chairperson’s committee report is talking of about Shs 33 billion required for unconditional grants against a request of about Shs 120 billion. Local governments had requested for Shs 120 billion to be spent on unconditional grants throughout the whole country but it is only Shs 33 billion, which is 25 percent; it is not even 50 but 25 percent. So, how do we expect these local governments to perform in light of the new Prosperity-for-All and in light of the rural development strategy, a strategy that nobody knows apart from hon. Suruma and his staff who have seen its literature? 

They want to retain the communication and information strategy at sub-county level under their armpits and that it should be financed. Does the Ministry of Finance have the relevant outlying structures throughout the country at districts? Do they have the staff? Unfortunately, there seems to be no minister present from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -(Interjection)- Oh, I had not seen you. My apologies, hon. Omwony Ojwok. 

More specifically, I want to look at page 30 of the report. On this page under item (d), government is being commended for putting aside Shs 33 billion this financial year against Shs 120.8 billion, which is about 25 percent if you put it in percentages. That is a very unfortunate development; it complicates the activities of the local administrations out there. 

On page 33, I agree with the committee that the graduated tax compensation should remain in force. I saw yesterday the Bills being proposed by the Ministry of Local Government to actualise these taxes for example the Local Service Tax and others, but in the meantime I absolutely concur with the chairperson of the committee that local government tax compensation must be in place until these legal instruments are in place and when we are sure that there is compliancy so that local governments do not feel a huge gap in the revenues for their activities. 

On page 34 of the report, the chairman talks about grants to town councils, which go through districts and that sometimes districts retain these monies, and I agree. Why can the funds for –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, the complaints that I have been receiving in my office about this compensation for graduated tax are about the formula of sharing this compensation between districts and the lower local governments. I do not know whether it came to you, but several districts have been raising this with me. Proceed, please.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, even the way the conditional and unconditional grants are calculated leaves a lot of loopholes. Maybe the minister will address how these figures are determined. 

For the equalization grants, I thought that they would look at a district like Kalangala, which has difficulties and imbalances in development and say, “In order to bring parity or equality, give them more money in order to catch up with, for example, Masaka or Bushenyi, which are ahead”. But you still find districts, which are presumed to be fairly okay, getting hefty sums of money. I do not know which formula the authorities of local government use. Similarly, I do not know the variables that they will use to determine how much of the graduated tax compensation should go to each district. So, I agree that funds for town councils should go directly to them. Why should they pass through a leadership like the CAO yet sometimes these people refuse to remit the money? 

Sub-county developments model –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but I am going to limit you. Yesterday we agreed that we would each take five minutes. Please, finish your point.
 
CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, let me wind up and request the Minister of Local Government to really address some of these things so that there is harmony. Thank you.

12.18
MR SAMUEL NJUBA (FDC, Kyaddondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have two observations to make and one of them is that of providing for the past leaders. One of the reasons for considering and providing for past leaders was that after being heads of state, they are not employable. In other words, it is below the dignity of the country to see a head of state suffering after his contribution to the leadership of this country. 

Currently, people in Uganda especially those from my constituency, are concerned about the complaint from former President, Binaisa. They say that he is always in the press grumbling about this and that. To make it worse, he was pictured twice approaching a boda boda on the streets of Kampala. I think that this is unbecoming of a former President of this country. The government should ensure that it puts in place sufficient facilitation for this remaining former head of state. Otherwise, it will shame the country. It is not too much to provide for one person. I do not know how long he is going to stay, but we should be able to provide for him sufficiently so that he does not have to complain or cry before he is paid his dues. 

I am surprised that the committee has hinted that Gen. Mustafa is being paid his remuneration. Luckily, he is not complaining. Hon. Speciosa Kazibwe is not being paid and as I said at the beginning –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But why? I thought that these matters are constitutional. The pension paid to a President is dealt with in the Constitution under Article 106. The terminal benefits granted to a former President under this Article are so and so, and there is a law that we passed. Maybe what is required is to enhance what we decided some two years ago, to increase it. It could also be that one may not be satisfied with this way of living, but the formula is there; it is not negotiable. What is negotiable is that we revisit the law because of changed circumstances. Since hon. Speciosa Kazibwe was a Vice-President, she is entitled to a pension not by discretion, but by the Constitution.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the issue here about the former President, Binaisa, is not the amount he gets. His concern is the condition of what he was given; the car has broken down and it is so old that it needs replacement. That is the issue.

THE SPEAKER: Could the Minister of Public Service clarify?

MS SEZI MBAGUTA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the House that the former President, Mr Binaisa, is catered for under the Presidential Emoluments Act and the conditions for paying are all provided for in terms of allowances, vehicles, accommodation, security, and secretarial or support services. I would also like to say that at the time that he raised the issue, the process of procurement of the vehicle was in place. The vehicle is supposed to be replaced every five years and the procurement process was in place. As I speak, he actually has a brand new vehicle. The Ministry of Public Service does pay for his house rent and we also replace the furniture every five years. 

MR NJUBA: Mr Speaker, I am grateful for the information from the minister, but I would like to point out that it is not once that he has complained. All I am asking is that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Njuba, the formula of working out his pension depends on what the current president gets. If you increase what the current president receives by way of salary, you will have helped him because what is being paid to him will also be enhanced. However, if it remains dormant for five years or so, then somebody will see that it is no longer adequate because of changed circumstances. So, probably we may have to review and increase the emolument for the President –(Laughter)

MR NJUBA: Mr Speaker, my concern was not so much about the amount he gets, but its regularity. The furniture and the vehicle should be procured much earlier. 

The other issue that I would like to raise is the question of pensioners. It is terrible! People are dying after working for so many years for this country yet they die before they get their pensions. This is too much and something must be done, even if it means borrowing from heaven to have them paid. It is a request that my people have asked me to put across because as we speak now, many people have died and it becomes very difficult for their dependants to claim the arrears of their pension. 

12.26
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting such a good report. I have three issues to raise.

On page 31, item (n), if I may read: “Note was taken that grants currently provide over 90 percent of total budgets of local governments. As such, they are the main source of funding for service delivery and yet the mechanism for allocation is subjective, non-transparent and inconsistent.” Mr Speaker, for a whole committee of Parliament to state that the criteria for allocating grants to local governments is subjective, non-transparent and inconsistent is a serious issue that this Parliament should delve into. 

I looked at the Constitution, the Seventh Schedule; it provides the formula with which money should be allocated to local governments, in relation to Article 193. I am not a very good economist, but the formula is such that (Y1 = Y0 +bY0 + X1); you can see that jargons for yourself. But the interesting thing is, Y1 is the minimum unconditional grant for the current fiscal year; Y0 is the minimum unconditional grant in the preceding fiscal year; b is the percentage change if any, in the general price levels and X1 is the net change in the budgeted cost of running added and subtracted services in the current year. 

There is nothing in this formula that brings the aspects of population. If you look at the budget estimates - I have sampled out three districts to show that the criteria of allocating the money by the central government is not fair. I have sampled the districts of Soroti, Lira and Mbarara for reasons best known to me. According to the population census of 2007, Soroti District has a population of 468,000 people, Lira District has a population of 601,000 people and Mbarara District has a population of 504,000 people, which means that Lira District has a higher population, followed by Soroti District and Mbarara District. The difference between Soroti and Mbarara is close to 50,000 people, but if you look at the money being allocated to the three districts, it would raise some eyebrows yet some laptop warrior think that there are no curious people like the person speaking. For Lira District with a population of over 600,000 people, we have allocated Shs14.5 billion –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What year is that census?

MR OTTO: It is for 2007

THE SPEAKER: The census?

MR OTTO: Mr Speaker, this is from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and it has the population census of 1991, 2002, and the population projections of 2007. It is from a government ministry and I think that they are competent enough to come up with scientific projections. So I was saying -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I want to know the date because there have been mutations of districts. The population of 2000 may not be relevant to Lira because there have been mutations.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, this is census and projected mid-year population 2007 from the Ministry of Finance. If they are wrong, we shall deal with that one in another session. What I want to say is that Lira, with a population of over 600,000 has been allocated Shs 14.5 billion; Mbarara with a population of 400,000 has been allocated Shs 12.9 billion and Soroti with a slightly higher population than Mbarara, has been allocated Shs 10.3 billion, which is about Shs 1.8 billion less than that of Mbarara. So, other than the formula given in the Constitution, which other criteria are the technocrats using to allocate money to these districts?

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Otto for giving way. I would like to take this opportunity to inform hon. Otto and the House that the criteria for giving money in this regime is that you should have more ministers who are NRM from the source –(Laughter)- and that one accounts for that budget. 

The second one is, you should have very prominent people in that area and with only one minister compared to Mbarara, you can see the level of distribution of money.  

The third one is that there are no planning units in almost all these ministries these days. They are not taking the planning unit seriously. So when the lobbyists take the ground, they take the lobbying effect and power seriously. We have no people to advocate for us at that level and no one takes the planners of this country seriously. Thank you.

MS BAKO ABIA: Thank you very much. I would wish to inform this House and hon. Otto that the National Planning Authority has been rendered almost functionless. Quite a number of the commissioners who were sitting on that commission no longer sit there. The African Peer Review Mechanism, which is under that National Planning Authority, has also expressed this concern. All the powers of the National Planning Authority have been usurped by the Ministry of Finance; they are rendered functionless. There is disjointed planning for the entire country as a result of this. However, it is not in any doubt that what you have stated is absolutely true. The way resources are allocated in this country is the function of how many ministers are coming from which village. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Omwony Ojwok): The first piece of information I would like to provide is that in fact virtually every ministry has a planning unit. The problem, which many of us share, is that these planning units need to be strengthened. The planning units are there, some of them are better endowed in terms of human resources and capacity than others but we are now working on strengthening them. So, I capture the point provided that we have understood that.

Secondly, it is true that the National Planning Authority has gone through a lot of difficulties. Some of these difficulties are historical and even ideological because you remember when the Soviet Union and the eastern Europeans collapsed some people thought that planning should now disappear. All indications, observations and studies show that performing economies in the Third World are the very ones, which are planning adequately and effectively. I am happy to report that with the support of Parliament, the National Planning Authority was put in place. We have been working to strengthen this National Planning Authority to restructure it and make it effective. I agree that there is a need to further harmonise and get a common position - and we have been working on that. We are working with hon. Abia very well, as part of the APRM review, to ensure that this process is done. So, we are on course and we shall succeed.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I wish the minister told us how money is allocated in favour of some districts more than others. Yesterday we were on the Police; today we are on the Budget. Why should it always be that some districts get more money than others, contrary to Article 193 of the Constitution? That is what you should have got up to tell us because we cannot continue like this. If you look through all these books - I challenge Members of Parliament to be a little curious. Look through all these books; you will not believe the manner in which money is being distributed from the central treasury to the local governments.

Second issue, [Mr Okecho: “Can I inform you?”] as the Chairman Budget Committee, I will have lunch with you, just relax. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to the Minister of Finance because the staffing level at the Ministry of Local Government is just 42 percent. There are several vacant offices at the local government level because government does not provide funds for over 70 or 80 percent staffing and recruitment. If you are to lean on local government to implement the delivery of services - the national average of staffing level at local governments is 42 percent as of now; we have 42 percent of staff in the relevant offices. I think something should be done about this; we can have up to 75 percent of the staff so that services are delivered effectively to the people.

Lastly, on seed secondary schools; we have noted that the figure government is giving per classroom block is Shs 10 million in the School Facilitation Grants for classroom block construction. So to build four classroom blocks, one would need Shs 40 million. Interestingly, on the seed secondary schools the ministry is giving Shs 350 million -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, seed schools fall under social services; they fall under the Ministry of Education, it will come.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you but I was well informed that the contractors are the Ministry of Local Government. So, why would the Local Government build a school at Shs 40 million and lead contractors in the Ministry of Local Government award a contract for Shs 350 million for building a similar structure if there is no kickback? So whoever is concerned, we are going to follow up. This is just an eye and ear opener; we are going to follow up on why there is a deviance of Shs 40 million and Shs 350 million for doing the same work. Whoever has got a kickback from the contractors, at an appropriate time, you will vomit it. Thank you.

12.39
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee. I want to raise a point of concern, on page 24. Under development activities, I get much concerned about the Local Government Development Programme because this goes directly to the sub-counties, and this is where the population is. When I take a look at what happened last financial year - I understand that some sub-counties have been told that this financial year, they are going to miss out on this LGDP. At the same time, you realise that there is lack of technical staff at sub-county levels especially sub-county accountants who could probably work on these LGDP programmes to ensure that they work out very well. 

In my district –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: As regards, LGDP, I know that every month the Ministries of Finance and Local Government give us releases. In the current release that I saw there was money for LGDP to all districts. What I only heard is that local governments are now saying that because of this graduated tax compensation, because of the shortage, some other sub-counties are not likely to get compensation. I think that is what the honourable member means but LGDP has been flowing and it is always given monthly by local government. 

MS AKELLO: Thank you for that information. I want to give an example of my district. Last financial year, seven sub-counties were condemned. They have been informed in writing that this financial year, they will not get money for this programme. When you look through these sub-county accountants, some of the sub-counties do not have accountants and that could have resulted in the lack of accountabilities that could have led to this kind of circus. 

I want to call upon the Ministry of Local Government to make sure that accountants are at every sub-county to help in this LGDP. Unless we do this, work at the sub-county will be very difficult and the population will miss out on this money, which is meant for them. Thank you very much.

12.43
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. We have looked at the different recommendations but something still perturbs me. This is the fact that people who live in Ssese Islands have always requested for their district, which is named Kalangala, to be called Ssese Islands for reasons that would help in development because they are islands for identity, attraction of tourism nationally and internationally and other developments and investments. It is more attractive that way than when they just read, “Kalangala District”. It would be like Kampala or Kayunga, and any of these other districts. It should be named that way in order to attract development. That way people can go there and see the gist of it. 

They have requested for the renaming of the district so many times and even in writing but in the recommendations, we talk about people who are quarrelling about where the headquarters should be. For us we have no problem with where the headquarters should be, but we have not indicated anything about renaming Ssese Islands. I kindly request the minister to follow this up so that we go out of the bracket of the disadvantaged areas; by just renaming the district you would see the difference. Thank you very much.

12.45
MRS RUTH TUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make the following observations. 

On page 24, paragraph 4.5.2: development activities, No.(b) and (c) is talking about agricultural sector programme support, and area based agricultural modernisation programme. Paragraph 4.5.3(c) is talking about community agriculture infrastructure improvement projects. I am wondering: are these programmes not supposed to be in the Ministry of Agriculture, since it is mandated to do that kind of work? Why is the Ministry of Local Government implementing programmes that are supposed to be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

12.46
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleagues, Members of Parliament. I am rising on a point of pension and gratuity arrears for teachers. Formerly, I was a teacher. Teachers’ pensions are a very serious issue. I am adding my voice that in future, you should categorise teachers into three: primary, secondary and tertiary. Indicate the districts where these teachers are coming from. I am glad that you have allocated Shs 27.5 billion for the fiscal year 2007/2008. We want to know the criteria used by the Public Service to give this out. You find a teacher who was deleted or who retired say in 2000 has not accessed the payroll while the one who retired in 2003 has accessed the payroll for his or her pension. We wonder why you leave out the one who retired earlier and you give pension or gratuity to the one who has just retired recently. I would like you to categorise those who retired in 2000, those who retired in 2001, 2003 and onwards and by district so that we as Members of Parliament can know how we can help our dear retired teachers. When you say Shs 27.5 billion is going to cater for teachers’ arrears and gratuity, how do I know that Mbale District, where I come from, such a number of teachers have been included in that bracket? 

Another point is on facilitation of CAOs and municipal town clerks. These people are very big in the district and we should not beg for government to facilitate them in terms of housing and motor vehicles. Government should facilitate these big people in the district. I would have talked more, but because the bell has gone, I will end there. Thank you. (Laughter)

12.49
MR ISSA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. This is actually my first time to have a say in this House so I am likely to make it a little lengthy. Oyam South is neighbouring Amolatar, Gulu and Apac. Immediately you cross Karuma Bridge you enter into my constituency. This is important for those who do not know Oyam South. But as you are aware, I am here because we had a problem in Oyam; we lost one of the dear sons of this country, the late Dr Yefusa Okulo Epak and I would not love to forget, still though, to pay tribute to him; may his soul rest in eternal peace.

Mr Speaker, I would like to applaud your office and of course my colleagues, Members of Parliament for the reception, which they have given me since I was sworn in, and the good relationship, which I have already developed with them within the course of time.  

I have also come at the time that I have to share with Uganda and especially this House the issues related to the Budget. The point I am actually interested in talking about is the general report as committed by the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government, page 33, item 7.0(i): general recommendations on the local government sector. The committee recommended that, “The equalization grant to local governments of Shs 3.5 billion be provided in full, unlike in the last FY 2006/2007 where only Shs 2.8 billion was released out of the budgeted Shs 3.5 billion. This grant should also be protected from budget cuts/shortfalls.”  

Oyam South is one of the constituencies in the newly created Oyam District. As you are aware part of Oyam District was also displaced. The people were displaced and as a new district I am appealing to government to consider not cutting this equalisation grant because it is meant to uplift the growth of this newly created district and as you are aware my district is mostly affected. Therefore, it is affecting the operation and the growth of this district.

Mr Speaker, you are also aware currently the local government revenue pace especially with the districts is actually not there and the centre has taken over remitting of funds to local governments. So, new districts like Oyam, Amolatar, et cetera would have a lot of problems in operations especially when this money is cut or not remitted to support them. Therefore, this recommendation should be taken very seriously because it is the only way that a new district like Oyam would have the opportunity to upgrade its level of growth and development.

I have been warned by the watch but allow me to say one more thing, that is, item 7.0(c): “The Ministry of Local Government should provide modalities to enhance and standardize the allowances of local government councillors as is the case for all other political leaders.”

Article 176(2)(g) of the Constitution of Uganda empowers local governments to supervise and monitor the operations of government, civil servants and actually development activities within the district. But you are also aware that our local councils sit once every two months. Besides that, the remuneration which is given to them is so meager that sometimes it affects their activities in monitoring and supervising government activities. Therefore, I feel that this is a matter of great concern that this Parliament and the respective ministry should consider with urgency. While I know that the number of local government councillors in this country is overwhelming, if we want to get results and accountability on local government funds, which are sent to the districts, we should be able to see how we can make the operations of local councillors effective. 

I want to add as I conclude that you are aware recently CAOs were taken over by the central government. And as we talk now the local government councillors may not have – much as they are empowered by the Constitution to supervise government workers in the districts but since they directly answer to the central government, it is trying to affect the operations in the districts. I have been in my district where you find the CAO saying, “After all I am answerable to the center, who are you?” And you move down there, the councillors are not doing their work and there are a lot of problems in local governments just because the CAOS are now more interested in direct supervision from the center than from the local councillors down there.  

A lot of funds are sent to our local governments and it is very important that as government and as Parliament we should take keen interest in supervising and monitoring what is taking place in our local councils; in our districts and our sub-counties. Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.

12.57
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also take this opportunity to thank the committee for the elaborate report. I have three points to focus on.

One is on page 32, sub-county development model. Mr Speaker, if I got this correctly, I once heard His Excellency the President talking about this kind of arrangement where they are going to choose 30 farmers from each sub-county who are going to be model farmers. The committee was wondering why this activity is under the Ministry of Finance; and I am also wondering! You know these activities are in the areas of agriculture, diary farming, et cetera because villagers are engaged in agricultural activities but we are wondering why the Ministry of Finance has interest in this kind of activity?

MR ODIT: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. I think in the Seventh Parliament we were very critical to ensure that PMA is fully operationalised and one of the key pillars that we thought should have been brought on board after operationalising the extension services through NAADS and research through NARO should have now been the rural financing. After that we would be able to facilitate the farmers who would have already formed their groups; who have already been trained and prepared to implement the government programmes. Unfortunately - you know the Ministry of Finance is very shrewd, they look for where government programmes have money and they follow it. They have no infrastructure to reach the sub-counties but they hijacked the sub-county model programme. And I do not know really - you are right but initially this was meant to be the agricultural programme. Thank you very much.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you very much honourable member. That is exactly what I wanted to come to. Since we have those organisations like NAADS and PMA under local governments, why can this programme not go through those organisations?

The second point I have is on the official residence of the Vice-President. Mr Speaker, we are lucky that State House is being constructed because of CHOGM. I remember in the Seventh Parliament we toured the State House at Entebbe and by then as a Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs we wanted to request for money to either renovate State House or construct a new one but up to very recently -(Member timed out)  

THE SPEAKER: Okay finish off. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Okay, thank you. Recently when we expect CHOGM is when they have constructed State House. My humble appeal to government is to also consider the residence of the Vice-President as the committee has recommended. 

The last point is similar to that one; the government offices. As the honourable member has said, some of these government ministries want to keep renting so that they can make a difference. There is a certain section of people who gain from this renting. I think at a certain point we shall recommend that we cut some budgets in order to provide for construction of government offices for these ministries. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

1.02
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman of the committee for the report and I rise in concern with what is on page 12. 

THE SPEAKER: Yeah honourable members, when you stand up, you should, for purposes of the Hansard, introduce yourself; name and constituency so that they can capture you.

MS KIBOIJANA: My concern is on pension reforms. I note here that there has not been harmony between the Ministry of Public Service and that of Finance on agreement of what pension reforms we should have. While Public Service prefers regulatory authorities, Finance insists on the monopoly of the National Social Security Fund (NSSF). My concern is: much as NSSF has been there for a long time, it has not addressed the needs of the workers. You will bear me witness that a worker may be terminated from employment at the age of 35 but NSSF insists on one reaching the age of 49 years before they are able to give you your due. I had a case where a person actually died of AIDS in the course of trying to get this money because she had not attained the age of 49 years. I propose that either the monopoly is broken or the two ministries work out a harmonised solution that can address the needs of these workers. Currently, the Uganda Railways workers were also laid off and many of them have failed to get this money because they have not attained the age of 49 years. You will bear with me that in between one has to eat, maintain a family and children have to go to school. Therefore, I believe that there should be a workable policy that can address these needs so that the lives of these terminated workers continue –(Interruption)

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you very much for giving way, honourable member. I will start by saying that my committee is in the process of holding a workshop on social protection because we still have a big problem in this area in Uganda. However, to give you information about the current National Social Security Fund, we had a number of workshops together with other stakeholders, that is, officials of government, workers’ representatives, employers and the public. We had a very big report, which we call The Stakeholders Report that we submitted to His Excellency. It has a number of recommendations that we hope the government will adopt and one of them is to reduce the age at which people can be paid their money irrespective of whether one has reached retrenchment age or has a problem like sickness. However, it has not yet been implemented. We appeal to the government to help us out and ensure that this report is implemented as it has all those details. 

MS KIBOIJANA: I thank the honourable colleague for the information. Personally I think the report should not be sent to the President but to the relevant government and that is what I was submitting. 

My second point is on selective salary awards to workers. My concern is that because we do not have a uniform policy on salaries, many of these workers have been coming up and bringing their issues to the President and he treats them as isolated cases. Recently, the workers of URA wanted an increment because they had performed so well. However, I think there are other workers who are also performing well in their sectors. Therefore, the earlier we come up with a uniform policy on salary remuneration or awards, the better for us. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.09
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to give my comments on page 29; under the general observations of the Committee on the Local Government sector. The biggest problem with the Local Government is the question of funding and compensation of graduation tax. I have travelled all over the country and all the districts are complaining about graduated tax compensation. Even with the compensation of graduated tax, most districts are doing poorly. Now with the removal of this compensation, we should expect the worst performance from local government simply because the central government funds are conditional and there is no way any district can divert them in order to render social services to the population. 

I went to the Western part of Uganda, to Kibaale, and the roads were impassable. The same applies to the roads in Karamoja and Acholi sub-region. Therefore, I would like the Ministers of Finance and Local Government to address this issue. We appreciate the introduction of local taxes but we believe operationalisation may take time and yet we are now beginning the new financial year and we expect these districts to deliver services on behalf of the central government. I want to appeal to these ministries to revise and reconsider additional funding that will compensate graduated tax.

Finally, Mr Speaker, there is also the issue of conflicts between urban authorities and the districts. The committee noted that there have been conflicts between the urban authorities and the districts because the central government always channels funds through the districts. Recently we had so many problems with many district accounts, which were locked because of financial mismanagement and that in a way affected the urban authorities. It is my humble request that the central government considers dealing directly with urban authorities in order to correct such conflicts. Thank you.

1.12
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am one of those happy Ugandans this time round and I thank the government for the pain it undertook: unlike the previous financial year when it released Shs 50 billion for pension arrears, this time they took the pain of releasing Shs 200 billion for pensions. However, how is this going to be handled this time? 

On page 10 concerning defence, we have gallant sons of Uganda that rendered good service to this country. However, I do not know whether it is only in Kaberamaido where this is happening. These ex-soldiers were asked to open individual accounts and they have travelled to Bombo over 30 times. They have bought many pairs of shoes and worn them out but their money has never been released. I read here that the pension arrears this time are for the widows and the orphans and to cater for the families. What about those who are still alive? What is happening? They opened these accounts but they are not active and they are being penalised because the money has not yet entered their accounts. What is happening to this group this time? I request the minister to clarify on this so that I know what to tell my people when I go back.

The other issue is on page 11: compensation benefits to the employees of the East African Community. If you look at these people, they rendered their services to this country in the mid eighties but up to now they have not been compensated. I really wonder whether government is trying to compensate and thank these people for the services that they rendered to this country. This is because if they have taken all this time without payment - most of these people are dying. How do we expect them to feel appreciated? It is time that we thought about this lot because time and again these issues keep coming back. When is government thinking of paying them off so that they also die happy? 

There is also this issue of the validation exercise on local governments. The district CAOs don’t release the funds that were meant for this exercise. I want to find out from the Minister of Local Government whether they have a modality of following up local governments. The CAOs have completely refused to release these funds even after the Minister of Local Government wrote to the districts to have them release funds for this group. We have sub-county chiefs, parish chiefs and some other people affected in that exercise. How do you monitor? And if the funds were sent to the local governments for these payments, what penalty is there for CAOs who have refused to release these funds? I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

1.16
MS JULIET SEKITOLEKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for a job well done. I want to get clarification from the Minister of Local Government. I want to refer you to verification returns for payment of severance packages to former local government staff as at 31st July 2007. If you look at no. 49, Kibaale District, and you look at the number of submissions received at the Ministry of Public Service, the number was 104. The number of payments approved was 82 and the number of cheques written is 69. The number of pending or unresolved cases is 22. 

There is inconsistency in this compared to other districts for example Apac, Adjumani and others. If the number of payments approved is 82 and the number of cheques written is 69, I am now wondering when Kibaale District is going to get the other cheques that were approved and the balance from the Ministry of Public Service. This is because these people are always crying to Members of Parliament for help regarding this money. 

Secondly, when are the 22 cases going to be resolved? This is injustice. Kibaale District submitted 104 cases, which in their own wisdom they thought that these were genuine cases. Up to today they have not yet been resolved but are pending. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.18
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will take less than two minutes. I have a statement to make and a clarification that I am seeking from the Minister of Local Government. I feel that you need to work on the issue of district boundaries, especially that of Bundibugyo, which was created in 1974 when some of us were just babies. I don’t know what the problem is in identifying a district boundary. The minister should tell us what problems he has encountered in doing this. I also request that in identifying these district boundaries, it should be for purposes of administration and not separating tribes. Our biggest struggle and that of my children will be national integration. We cannot run away from each other. We found ourselves in this geographical location, which we call Uganda. Instead of separating ourselves by creating districts and therefore district boundaries, we must find a way to live together. 

There is already demand and there are signals that Ntoroko may become a district very soon. Of course for administration purposes there is no problem but if it is to separate people then you have a problem with Bundibugyo because it has existed from time immemorial and it is multi-tribal. The moment you start separating one tribe from another then you might end up having more than three districts, including the districts of those people whom you are denying power because you think that they can climb poles. You will have to give them a district and I have fears that it may be the size of a village because they are only 170. (Laughter)

The clarification that I want the minister to give - the Ministers of Local Government are my friends and they are friends of Kasese. For instance I know how the state minister has assisted us to get the Businga, which is coming soon. She has said it and I know that the file is on her table. I wonder what problems she is experiencing in failing to give us a municipality. For us the issue is not districts but municipalities. We want to draw our people into the towns and tie them in villages. Villages will be for rich men who want to put up farms. Put up municipalities; we have industries and I hear there is already demand to -(Interruption)

MR BIHANDE BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, hon. Kibanzanga and thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I am giving is in regard to the request for Kasese Municipality. The year 2004 is when we put in a request for that municipality. Much as the committee is complaining here that the conditions for granting a municipality or upgrading town status are stringent, Kasese Town has already over qualified to be a municipal council. We have a day time population of about 150,000 people and a night population of over 100,000 people. Why are we requesting for this? Kasese is very metropolitan as a district and is servicing not only Kasese District but all the neighbouring districts. 

Two, the size of the town now has grown so big that the services of an LC III level administration –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But is that information which hon. Kibanzanga did not have? (Laughter)

MR BIHANDE BWAMBALE: The LC III level administration is now too small to manage the size of Kasese town. For instance, a municipality is supposed to have a health inspector while an LC III level urban council is supposed to have a health assistant. If you look at the regulations, a health assistant is supposed to serve a population of not more than 25,000 people and here we are talking of a town of over 100,000 people. Thank you for accepting the information.

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, the former chairman LC V has spoken and he has the information on his finger tips. I only leave it to the minister to consider. I thank you very much.

1.24
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the presenter for the paper but I just have two points. 

One is asking for specificity when these reports are being written. When I look for example at page 5, they talk about laying off staff but I ask myself, “which staff”? Then when you go to page 24, they talk about sensitising local councillors from 50 districts. Which are these districts? Page 24, they talk about relocation of Jua Kalis and again on page 24 they talk about new projects. We are here to go back to account to the people but when these reports are not clear, then you cannot go back and report about which district is undergoing sensitisation and a workshop is going to take place. 

Secondly, on page 22 they talk about supporting implementation of cross-cutting projects and some of the examples of the projects are NAADS, PFA and others. Like the other Member of Parliament asked, what is the exact role of the Ministry of Local Government in this? If for example you look at NAADS, the quick mind would go to thinking that it is a role of the Ministry of Agriculture. What is the exact role of the Ministry of Local Government?

Thirdly, I just want to comment on the recommendation on forming new districts. The reasons, which were given for the dividing of the new districts, like we were given the example of Terego and Maracha, were that we know these people cannot cook in the same pot. But sincerely speaking, as much as we divide the counties into districts, these people are going to remain neighbours and we have already observed that some clans actually live across the borders. I look at a district like Pallisa where we experienced problems with the Ateso and then the Bagweri. I do not think dividing it into new districts without maybe resolving fundamental problems is the answer. So, I feel that the Ministry of Local Government should look at the fundamental problems prevailing in the areas and solve those problems.

Lastly, when I read the report, the whole report is silent about CHOGM. As much as the ministry is not going to implement any project around CHOGM, I believe that they are going to oversee some of the activities like the beautification of the city. Where is that? I do not see it in the report. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know this is the last day according to the Budget Act and this report has been contributed to by 14 Members of Parliament apart from the chairperson and the minister of the government. So I suggest that we hear from the minister because the other important one, which is coming immediately, is social services where also you will be interested and therefore I will pick those who have not been able to contribute to say something on the Social Services report. So I call upon the Minister of Public Service and the Minister of Local Government - do you have any comment to make? Then we shall get a break and come back to receive a report on Social Services. 

1.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Mbaguta Ssezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. First of all, I want to thank you for helping me to pick the names because I have been finding it difficult to know the honourable members’ constituencies and their names. So as I respond, some of the Members have written their constituencies instead of their names.

I thank the chair of our committee for presenting our budget statement and the observations made. A number of issues have been raised mainly on pension and I will respond to some of those concerns relating to pension. Then there are issues that relate to the issues of salary and salary structures and restructuring. 

I would like to say that the concerns that have been raised by honourable members reflect the issue of the transparency system regarding pensions. I want to confirm that we have in place a transparent system of assessing pension and ensuring that the pensioners get their benefits. I would also like to confirm that through the demand side, we have been able to reflect the number of pensioners that have been paid this financial year. The 900 persons that were reflected in the papers and in different fora have taken close to Shs 15 billion. We shall continue to advertise those names, save for the money they are going to receive because we must also be able to protect our pensioners and our senior citizens. 

There has been an issue regarding the local government pension and I would like to confirm that the Shs 200 billion that was allocated for pension arrears, the Shs 17.5 billion is part of that amount of money. To operationalise the local government, Shs 17.5 billion - what the minister has done is to write to the local governments to advise them to update the information that we received in 2001. You may be aware that some of the local governments may have paid and – (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I wish to thank the Minister. The committee through the chairperson has reported to this House today that last year Shs 5 billion that was approved by this Parliament for local government pensions was not paid. I would like to find out from the Minister why this money was not paid because I am sure this process also seeks to bring to account all Cabinet ministers.

Secondly, I do not know whether it is possible to produce a schedule per district of monies that will be going to specific districts from this year’s budget in as far as pensions for local government is concerned so that we as Members of Parliament are in the know as to how much money is going to the districts vis-à-vis how much is outstanding in the respective districts. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think you are saying that after we have passed the budget - it is not now but after this we will get the information.

MR AMURIAT: But there is an amount of money that has been budgeted; on what basis is that money budgeted for? I am sure there should be a basis under which that money is budgeted.

THE SPEAKER: No, just deal with the budget; approve it and then that is when you can have a break down. 

MS MBAGUTA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In response to what you have brought, I have already indicated that the Ministry of Public Service received the submissions from Local Government to the tune of Shs 17.5 billion and the local governments are known by their numbers but as we speak today, some of the local governments took upon paying the pensioners’ arrears. We have issued out a circular to request the local governments to update their numbers of persons to be paid so that those who have paid can be considered in offsetting the other pensioners that have not been paid. We need that information as a matter of urgency for us to be able to move. I want to lay on the Table the circular calling on local governments to bring us the information. 

There was an issue raised by honourable members regarding the allocation of the pension and I thought that the chairperson of the committee did present on how the Shs 200 billion is going to be allocated. Once the budget is approved, we as a ministry will take the budget line per sector as presented to us and we shall pay those categories in that sector as provided for. 

There was an issue on compensation of salaries for local governments and I would like to say that the wage bill is managed by our ministry and as a Ministry of Public Service we would like to confirm that the Local Government wage bill has been raised from Shs 37 percent to 60 percent because it had been agreed that the filling of the structures will be in a phased approach. With that provision we are hoping in a phased approach that we shall reach 100 percent of the local government structures. 

There was an issue raised still on pensions and arrears and I would like to say that the teachers’ pension is for teachers and the moment their figure is reflected as teachers, we have to pay them. I want to agree that the teachers are in categories of primary school teachers, secondary school teachers and tertiary institutions’ teachers. I would like to say that the primary school teachers form the bulk of the teachers and on occasion they do not retire because they join the service a little bit earlier. The secondary and the tertiary school teachers tend to retire a little bit earlier than the primary school teachers because the primary teachers join the service at the age of 18 years. As the applications come in for retirement, all the teachers are considered against that amount of money. The teachers are 132,000 and it is a percentage of that which may be retiring. So, the criterion is there and we shall follow that criterion.

I think one honourable member thanked government - and we want to thank her too - that government provided Shs 15 billion. As evidence that we follow the allocation per sector, I would like to present that the Shs 51 billion was given as follows:

1. In the civil service we paid 374 pensioners with Shs 3.810 billion. 

2. For the teachers, we had 354 and we paid Shs 3.61 billion also. 

3. Revalidation - this is old pension people - we paid 3,116 of them an amount close to Shs 21.8 billion. 

4. For the East African Community, which we commonly call in our ministry as remnants of the general service of the East African community, we paid 470 pensioners Shs 10 billion. 

5. Widows and orphans; we paid 1,486 of them and paid out Shs 7.430 billion. 

6. We paid 415 veterans of the Ministry of Defence and the payments were Shs 5 billion.

This gives us a total of 6,214 pensioners worth Shs 51,870 billon. I thought that we should account for that money in the same way we paid it because we did report here that we had received Shs 51 billion. When we get the arrears, we shall pay it out too. 

I would like also to provide information and confirm that some of the former workers of the East African Airways have been paid their pensions; the general East African community was paid long ago. 

Mr Speaker, according to our records, Shs 68 billion was paid to these former workers in the period between 2001 and 2006. What we are remaining with is to pay the remaining number of the former East African Airways employees, which we intend to do as soon as we get funds for that purpose.  

There was an issue that was raised in relation to severance packages paid following the restructuring of line ministries for example what was done to local governments. I want to say that severance packages are subject to submissions from the CAO upon approval by the chief executives of ministries. We actually paid some of it and I think it is shown in the report. However, I want to admit that there are pending cases, which have not been answered. The CAOs are called upon to submit the responses to the queries and as soon we get this sorted out we shall immediately pay those people who have not been paid. It is important to note that we actually shall only pay those who have been confirmed as bona fide public officers. 

The other reason why queries have been raised is partly that some documentation along these lines has actually not been availed, particularly evidence that a relevant district service commission appointed them and confirmed them in the service to be pensionable. So, once those queries are answered, we definitely shall start executing payments.

There was an issue raised on the consultation regarding pension. In reference to this I want to say that we are reforming the pension scheme because we realised that the non-contributory fund is not affordable; non-contributory is not easy. Allow me to inform this House that we have already submitted a prepared paper; we have agreed with the Ministry of Finance on this and/or narrowed down our differences and very soon we shall be going to Cabinet to have the principles of this reform passed.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members will recall that the Public Service Commission Bill and the Public Service Act were tabled here, and the issues of payroll and pensions, which we are reforming using an integrated personnel system, will be in reference to these.  

We also shall review the structures of local government in relation to CAOs and other posts in the next two years because recruitment has just taken place; the structures must stabilise before we revisit them.

There has been an issue regarding the title of CAO and before my colleague adds anything, I want to say that we have agreed to review that title, but reviewing the title of the CAO may not be possible because a district is defined as a district. The districts of Uganda are not graded. If they were graded, actually the CAOs’ positions would be graded. We cannot do that because all districts of Uganda are equal and so the chief executives must be equal and with the same requirement.

MR WOPUWA: I want to give my minister information that it is not true that the districts of Uganda are not graded. For example, we have district models one, two and three; so they are graded.

MS MBAGUTA: I want to appreciate the information from my chairman. However, the grading of districts in terms of organisational structure is not the same as grading them in terms of the names. I want to inform this House that the districts of Uganda are all defined as districts; that is the point I am making. It is true that organisational structures can have models: one, two and so on, however, when it comes to the post of CAO, he remains a CAO because a district is a district. I thought that I should make clarification in reference to that area. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS MBAGUTA: There was an issue raised in relation to the retired Excellency, former President Lukongwa Binaisa. I have already highlighted the terms and conditions in reference to retired presidents. I have talked about the different things that they get. Possibly what I would like to confirm is that His Excellency, former President Lukongwa Binaisa is paid as a pensioner, his provision is under the recurrent expenditure in the pensions sector and benefits are always paid monthly and on the dot.

Let me say something about the issue of the Vice-President’s house or residence. Those of you who have been on our committee for some time from the Six Parliament through the Seventh Parliament to date know that the construction or purchase of the Vice-President’s residence has been one of our priorities but not funded. We are eager to purchase an official residence for the Vice-President but that can only be done if the funds are provided.  

Before I sit down, let me also respond to the issue of selective pay. I would like to confirm that government passed a pay policy, which we have started implementing and that policy provides an area of demand and supply. Where the demand is high but the supply is low in terms of implementation, you can consider paying that area of demand because in that area skills are very low so you can selectively pay them. Otherwise, in general terms, everybody is paid equally.  

Mr Speaker, I think I have responded to everything.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. (Applause)

1.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Let me take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members and also to thank the shadow ministers for the support they have given my ministry while we interacted with them.  

Many issues were raised about my ministry but most importantly the issue of funding; what everyone is talking about zeroes around funding. I want to inform the House that the ministry is aware of that problem but at the same time many people are also requesting for districts; municipalities and others for sub-counties and so on. I will tell you that I receive so many chits of informal requests of this kind, from this Floor. So, this becomes a question of a chicken and a neck. However, what I want to inform this House is that when you create a district, you must create funding for it; when you create a municipality, you must do the same. Similarly, when you create sub-counties, you must allocate funds to them.  

So, you must bear in mind that while you are asking for more funds for the districts, you are also asking for more districts. As hon. Otto put it, we actually have more than 40 formal requests for new districts in our ministry; we are stuck with them mainly because not only do we lack funds, but we also have realised that some of the districts may not be extremely very viable given the fact that now there is a move towards creating districts of 50,000 people or of 30,000 people.

However, I would like to say that my ministry is studying all those requests and those that will be most deserving - you know the process that eventually you will be the ones to approve these districts - we will go through Cabinet and after approval we will have no hesitation but to bring the requests here for your approval.

Mr Speaker, an issue was raised about graduated tax compensation. I am glad to report that we worked with the committee and have provided for Shs 25 billion in the Budget for that. However, you may also recall that on Tuesday I presented for first reading a Bill entitled the Local Government Act (Amendment) Bill, 2007, providing for service taxes for local governments. I expect to raise Shs 70 billion from these taxes. Therefore, what hon. Wopuwa and his committee are recommending that compensation should be up to their tune of Shs 80 billion, is definitely going to be handled when we start implementing that proposal. We are hopeful that with your corporation, we will see a bright future in raising more funds, which to us is more sustainable since it will be generated by the local governments themselves so it will strengthen their capacity.

On the issue of releasing money through CAOs to the town councils and other local governments, I want to say that we have had so many complaints from those local governments and as a result we have been trying to work hand in hand with the Ministry of Finance to sort that out. The problem that the Ministry of Finance was likely to face was that it would be very difficult for them to run all those so many accounts. However, with the new development of Electronic Transfer of Funds (ETF), they say that they are comfortable and that they will start working to see that those facilities can access their own funds.

On the accommodation of the CAOs, which Mrs Ssezi talked about saying that we should house the CAOs, I want to say that you know that the policy of government is that you are given a full package, which includes your housing allowance. Even you MPs are not housed. So they take their full package and cater for their own accommodation.

It was also said that we do not have regulations to guide local council courts. I am pleased to report that those regulations are now ready; we have already circulated them. In fact on Monday when I visited Makindye Division they were having training on how to use those guidelines.

On the issue of why the new district should share both -(Interruption)

MR OCHIENG: Thank you very much, Madam Minister for giving way. I want to get clarification about this issue of the regulations. I know that the Ministry of Local Government has been producing a lot of documents, many of them very vital and good but because of some interests in the number of districts - and I say this with authority because I sit on the Local Governments Accounts Committee - CAOs and officers from the districts having been get these documents from the ministry and just keeping them under their beds; quite a big number of them. Then the councillors go ahead to let budgets to be drawn for buying such books yet they are not given priority. 

I want clarification from the minister on whether something will be done in form of a follow up to make sure that these books and documents, which are very good considering the ones that I have seen, reach the local councils. 

Finally, you know that we are ex-officio members of these district councils but there has been little that the ministry has done in helping the local governments appreciate this fact. Many of these local governments have now resorted to stopping Members of Parliament from participating in their meetings. They do not want to inform them about council meetings and I think most of them feel that it is a sabotage to have Members of Parliament in their council meetings. I think the problem is basically the little guidance and appropriate ways, which the minister and the ministry has taken in handling this initiative for the betterment of this country –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: She was talking about regulations for local council courts. Do you not think they are going to be gazetted? They have to! It is not circulars; these are going to be gazetted. Are they not going to be gazetted?  

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Because you are talking about people hiding some of these documents - I suppose this is what you are saying - but these regulations are going to be gazetted and if they are gazetted then it is public knowledge to everybody, including those who will be administering the courts.

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, that is okay to you and I but the gazette as you know will not go beyond the lawyers’ chambers. Many people do have knowledge about these gazettes. For example, I saw the gazette for the first time when I came to this Parliament because I had a problem. I do not think anybody else in the countryside looks and even knows about these gazettes; I am sorry.

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that the ministry should get a vehicle and go to each of these courts and hand over -(Laugher)

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, we have a programme in the ministry of having those courts trained. So that will be one of the ways of having this information reach the people. But I also want to say that as Members of Parliament, it is incumbent upon us to take that kind of information to our councils; we are members of these councils by law and it is our right to participate in those council meetings. I do not anticipate any council to throw any Member of Parliament out of these meetings.

Secondly, in respect of the other issues -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. As much as any colleague is trying to labour to talk about how we can harmonise this position, allow me say this. First of all it is not possible for one to probably attend these local council meetings all the time because sometimes they carry them out without giving invitation to Members of Parliament. For example in my district, I have only received one invitation to attend these meetings. The second one is just on; I was invited through the phone and I think I will probably attend it. 

What I want to say is that we have a problem at local council levels. I do not know whether other districts are also affected in the same way, or it is in only in my district? I have noticed that when these local councillors are carrying out some duties, doing a radio talk show or signing out some documents, they refer to themselves as honourables. Sometimes I found that it created some problems in the sense that if a document goes out, it is honourable so and so. Some people have some confusion over that and I would like the honourable minister to help me. I do not know whether it is only in my district, to have this clarified as to how it should be applied. It confuses the public. I thank you.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Anywar -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you want to fight over this title? I think really leave this issue. Please, you are going to cause a lot of problems fighting over this. Please, leave it.

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, just to complete what hon. Ochieng raised, I think he was also referring to the financial regulations and so many other circulars that we give out. Some of the CAOs do not implement what they are supposed to implement. I think where Members get specific issues in respect to CAOs not functioning very well; you should not hesitate but inform our offices. Some of you have approached me personally in my office and we have tried to solve some problems. That is why partly we brought the CAOs back to the centre by Constitution. Previously, the centre did not have power over the CAOs and I think most of the things that happened then may not recur. So if you have any problems of mismanagement, of misbehaviour or incompetence, do not hesitate provided they are facts. But at the same time, let us move by facts. We should not just report CAOs simply because we do not like some individuals.

Irrespective of your question, hon. Anywar, you see with decentralisation - and our Constitution is very clear that power belongs to the people. With decentralisation, this is a national Parliament but we have various parliaments at local government level, therefore, I think power must go with many other things, including recognition and titles. Let us not give them “byoya bya nswa”. What is wrong with calling themselves honourables especially if they are doing some honourable work?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, leave this issue.  Please, leave this issue of titles for your own good.  

MR PEREZA AHABWE: Mr Speaker, it was good information because they are honourable councillors while we are honourable MPs.

MRS MWESIGYE: Indeed as they are in the council they are calling themselves “honourable councillors”.  Hon. Beatrice Anywar will be called “honourable Member of Parliament” so that is a distinction and I think the Speaker has guided and our rules are clear –(Interruptions)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on this matter as to whether the position that the honourable minister is advancing in the House is an official government position. I am seeking this guidance because I have got an experience from which I would like to draw. While touring the Teso sub-region, the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, mentioned to a big gathering of local councillors that they shall not refer to themselves as honourables. He even sought the indulgency of the Minister in charge of Lands, who is a lawyer –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amuriat, I am telling you leave it because you have no trademark on that title. You rather leave it. Please, leave it; it is not in your interest that you debate this issue.  

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of the new districts and the mother districts sharing liabilities and assets, the present law is very clear that the new district shares only the assets. We will have to study this and see whether or not what we are proposing is tenable and then we can deal with it.  

There was an issue on unfair release of funding or using an unfair formula to do so. I would like to report that we have already heard many complaints from many districts and as a result the Local Government Finance Commission has developed a new formula of guidelines. We have discussed them with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we are going to present them before Cabinet. Once they are approved we will bring them before Parliament so that we can have parity of treatment for all the districts.

The issue of chairpersons not being paid gratuity, if Members may recall, the central government has just of recent started paying salaries to the LC V chairmen. So that is another area, which we will study with the Ministry of Public Service, including the issue of allowances you have brought up but hoping that we raise more funds from the local government service taxes. So, we will study those and see whether or not we could standardise those allowances as well as provide for gratuity for the chairpersons.  

As for the role of the Ministry of Finance in the Prosperity-for-All programme at sub-county level, it is not true that the Ministry of Local Government is not involved in the coordination of the Prosperity-for-All programme. In fact government has a Cabinet sub-committee, which is chaired by the Vice-President and among the key ministries that are members of that sub-committee is the Ministry of Local Government. Under technical level, the Ministry of Local Government features extremely highly because as you will realise, the offices that are engines for this programme namely, the sub-county chiefs, are officers of local governments. So, we are indeed participating in that. Therefore, there is no harm that the Ministry of Finance is also participating in it. Eventually it is the one that knows where to get the finances from.  

Mr Speaker, on the issue of Maracha and Terego, there is a case in court. My ministry is waiting for that case to end. As we talk now there is an injunction so as soon as the case ends, for us we are ready to implement the court’s decision.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, I think we have a problem in the Ministry of Local Government. The Minister of Local Government, Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire, when he appeared before our committee and we raised that problem, said he had no problem and he was going to do the necessary requirements. But true if it is in court and is resolved by the ministry, the case can be withdrawn from court.

In addition to that, it is not wise to continue to have a problem when the problem can be resolved. Bududa and Manafwa had a similar case and it was resolved. We are living together peacefully with people of Manafwa but I think there is a problem because this minister’s information is different from the other minister’s information to the committee.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I consider myself an interested party in this matter because it is me who dragged hon. Kahinda Otafiire to court. It is on that basis that there is a standing court injunction and my basis of taking hon. Kahinda Otafiire to court was to seek legal redress to why one; he did not respect the results of the 21 councils from the two counties who had duly voted and submitted the result of their voting to him, which copy I have. 

Number two, as to whether the creation of a district was to bring services nearer to the people or not because the present place where the minister declared a headquarters from the extreme part of Terego County, is 56 miles. This is a known fact. Geographically, it is one third of Terego. If we are realistic we would have gone for an equidistant point, which will have landed very deep in Terego, but we opted and agreed on a border so those are the reasons. But if it is in the interests of the ministry, of course my case is still in court and I have not shown disinterest in it; I will continue to whichever level of justice it demands. Those are the reasons. I will not go into the details since the matter is before court but the rest will be adduced in that. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us leave the Maracha matter. Let us leave it. The advice I can give is that Terego is - despite the fact that the case is in court - the parties involved can sit and then negotiate and when they agree you can see what to do. But let us leave it at that.

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I would like to put the record on the Hansard right. There is no problem in the Ministry of Local Government. I only want to emphasise that the creation of a district is by Parliament. 

I agree with the issue of tax education and there are others, Kasese and Jinja who talked of creation of municipalities; we have done a study, we have a report now about Kasese and we are studying Jinja. As soon as we are ready and we find out that they conform to the guidelines in accordance with the law, then for us we shall only do the needful. (Applause)

The issue raised by hon. Anywar again - and maybe this is timely on Lamwo District - I should say that is one of the requests that we have in my ministry and as I said earlier we will process those that we can manage to handle and see how we move on. 

Mr Speaker, you made a very pertinent plea for Buhweju, and others, and I think we have their resolutions. We shall study them and see how to move on.

The important issue of demarcating boundaries, there are two types of boundaries, those between our country and other countries, and those between our districts. One of the ministers was proposing that we should never give out districts - I think it must be the shadow minister - before we demarcate the borders. But if Members realise, many of the districts that have been given out have been counties. We have not divided counties because that means when you have to demarcate the county it means you are changing a constituency and that becomes the role of the Electoral Commission. Therefore, there should not be a lot of bickering around the new districts that have been created because they have been mainly around the counties. However, we have a few complaints in the ministry - some of them he raised from this border of Bundibugyo and Toro and others, but we have been working with the Ministry of Lands to make sure that where there are disputes they are resolved. I remember I answered that question here on the Floor some time back and since that time we are actually in the field. So we hope that soon many of these disputes will be resolved.

HON. MEMBERS: Lastly?

MRS MWESIGYE: No. It is not last. Actually you asked me so many things unless you are comfortable that I have answered all of them —(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Yes. You have answered them. (Laughter)

MRS MWESIGYE: Okay. So, since I have answered all of them and they are comfortable with my answers, I would like to thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, mine is only to thank the chairman of the committee for the work well done and also to thank my colleagues for answering all the questions. 

The issue, which was brought out in the maiden speech of the MP for Oyam South about the Shs 3.5 billion equalisation grant, this one we are going to give. It is there and it will be given in full. 

The issue, which was raised by hon. Simon Oyet about graduated tax compensation has already been answered by the minister and we agree to the position of their readjustment of the budget within the ceiling that was given to us and so we agree to the Shs 25 billion, which is given to graduated tax compensation. 

The issue of Shs 17.5 billion that is going under the pensioners’ arrears is part of the Shs 200 billion, which has been given to the Ministry of Public Service and we agree to it.

So, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think what we need you to do for us in simple language is to give us the formula you use to allocate sums of money to different districts. His concern was that there was a district with a bigger population than another district but the district with a smaller population got more money in that item than the other. But maybe you can give us a circular to help us understand the explanation.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, actually hon. Otto did not need to stand up because with his height we can still see him even when he is seated. So, we shall provide this. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that we adopt the report on the Public Service and Local Governments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Now is a convenient time to suspend the proceedings for an hour. You can go and look at the Social Services report so that when we come back, it will be easy to go through it and see how to proceed. Today is the last day according to the Act, when we should have considered all the estimates by the committees. It is true under Article 22 that the Speaker can extend the budget proceedings, but it must be reasonable. Anyway, let us see how we proceed today and then I will decide what extension to make. The proceedings are suspended.

(The proceedings were suspended at 2.18 p.m., on resumption at 3.30 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are welcome. We have some visitors here but I am still getting their particulars. We have visitors in the gallery, they are members of Bukitale Foundation from Buliisa District; you are welcome to Parliament. (Applause) 

3.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr James Kubeketerya): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is the report of the Social Services Committee:

Introduction

The Committee on Social Services examined and discussed the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministries of Health and that of Education and Sports for the financial year 2007/2008, in accordance with Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

Methodology

The committee received policy statements presented by the ministries and raised questions on issues for the ministries to answer, to which they did; and the committee held meetings with sector ministers and technical officers indepth. This report covers the following Votes, Mr Speaker. 

·  Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports headquarters.

· Vote 134 - Education Service Commission
· Vote 136 - Makerere University 
· Vote 137 - Mbarara University of Science and Technology
· Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School
· Vote 139 - Kyambogo University
· Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute
· Vote 149 - Gulu University 

For the Ministry of Health, we had the following Votes:

· Vote 104 - Ministry of Health headquarters
· Vote 134 - Health Service Commission
· Vote 161 - Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital
· Vote 162 - Mulago National Referral Hospital
· Vote 163 to 173 - Regional Referral Hospitals which include Arua, Gulu, Fort Portal, Hoima, Jinja, Kabale, Masaka, Mbale, Soroti, Lira and Mbarara.

Under the Ministry of Education and Sports, priority areas and budget resource allocation for the financial year 2006/2007 - this was of course in the previous year. When you look at that table, the overall provision for the Education and Sports sector in this financial year 2007/2008 is Shs 67.08 billion and this represents 16.8 percent of the national Budget. This allocation is higher than that of the last financial year of 2006/2007, which was Shs 720.11 billion. 

The breakdown of the sub-sector share of the Education and Sports Sector Budget for 2007/2008 as provided to the Committee by the Ministry is as follows:

· The primary service sector of this financial year is 61.07 percent, compared to 63.36 percent from the previous financial year.

· Secondary education was at 20.41 percent last financial year and is currently at 22.41 percent, indicating an increase.

· BTVET is at 3.75 percent compared to 3.62 percent in the last financial year.

·Tertiary is at 10.90 percent compared to 9.82 percent in the last financial year.

·And others are at 1.87 percent compared to 1.79 percent in the last financial year.

I request that you fill in the total for the financial year 2007/2008 in that last column as 100 percent. Mr Speaker, this table indicated that the allocation to primary education would decline in this financial year while the budget share to other sectors will be increased relatively in support of new policy initiatives, for example, the Universal Post-Primary Education. According to the Ministry of Education and Sports, the committee was informed that the ministry had the following achievements in the last financial year:

·That they submitted the amended Education Bill, which is already with us, which proposes new measures such as compelling all school-going children to attend and keep in school until they complete primary school education. 

·Operationalisation of UPPET.

·That 38 out of 491 seed secondary schools have been constructed, each with a classroom block and administration block (Annex 1).

·The Gulu Comprehensive School for the Traumatised Children was built, and fully equipped and operationalised.

·The establishment of a public University in Eastern Uganda, which is Busitema University. This one is due to open its gates in October this year.

The policy issues, observations and recommendations under the primary sector:

On school feeding, the committee was informed that the government policy on school feeding is that parents who cannot afford to pay are allowed to make arrangements with the school management, provided that the pupils whose parents cannot afford money should provide food. 

The committee recommends that the policy should be as follows:

i) Those parents who agree and are able to pay are free to do so. 
ii) Those who cannot pay should provide food to children to carry to school.
iii) This policy should clearly be communicated to all stakeholders expeditiously.

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me. Are you suggesting that in one school we should have people having hot meals while others have mawolu or bikajjo? (Laughter) 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. That, according to the committee, is a short-term recommendation where government has been saying that you have no right to chase a student or a pupil who has not brought money for food; the child should be kept in school. So, we are saying that temporarily, we should have that. However, this policy should clearly be communicated to all stakeholders expeditiously. In a way, we are saying that the Ministry of Education and Sports agreed that they must have a document - a study like they say these days - and we have this matter resolved once and for all. But temporarily, government says that we should not chase away somebody who has not brought money for food because government is paying for that child in school. That is how the committee looked at it, but the minister will shed more light on that.

Drop out rates and completion of primary schools:
The committee observed that the poor quality and high pupil drop out rates at primary school level are a major bottleneck in the implementation of the Universal Primary Education. The projected estimate of enrolment for 2007 by the ministry is 7,463,712 pupils. On average, the P.6 - P.7 retention rate is 56 percent, meaning that out of the total number of pupils in primary six, only 56 proceed to primary seven. In this matter, the committee recommends that government should expeditiously carry out a diagnostic study to establish the causes of the poor quality of education in most UPE schools and a high drop out rate.

The committee observes that: 

· The findings will help Parliament to recommend measures in the enforcement of compulsory UPE, once the law is passed. 
 
· The Ministry of Education and Sports should establish a continuous monitoring and school inspection mechanism. 

· The Ministry of Education and Sports should lead a national campaign to ensure that all children stay in school.

Mr Speaker, the committee was concerned that there are declining co-curricular activities in primary schools. However, the Ministry of Education and Sports informed the committee that the UPE funds, which are disbursed to districts, have a component of the co-curricular activities like scouting and girl guides, among others, but these funds are diverted by the districts and the schools. 

The committee recommends that the ministry should put in place a mechanism to ensure that funds earmarked for co-curricular activities under UPE are spent on that particular item. I would like to add that the PS told us that he has already given instructions to schools that when it comes to issues like girl guides and boy scouts - because this issue had been neglected by the schools - that a percentage should be retained for such activities because we discovered that the Uganda Scouting and Girl Guides Association was urging the committee that this is the only way we can have proper discipline in school, where we could also have dissemination of information regarding HIV/AIDS and others. So, we concurred with the Ministry of Education and Sports on this matter. 

This is on the secondary sub-sector and according to their policy and priorities; the ministry will address the following priorities in the financial year 2007/2008:

· The construction and completion of the 66 seed secondary schools. The list is attached in Annex II, using government funds and a loan from the African Development Bank under the ADB funded project.

· Recruitment and posting of teachers to fill the increased teacher gap in secondary schools arising out of the increased enrolment under the Universal Secondary Education. Here, emphasis should be on mathematics and science teachers.

· The following traditional schools are to be rehabilitated under the ADB-3 project and some of them are: Masaba Senior Secondary School, Kabalega SSS, Mpanga SSS, Kigezi College Butobere, Lango College Lira, and Kololo SSS. 

Observations

The committee appreciated government’s commitment to the implementation of the Universal Secondary Education in order to fulfil one of the presidential manifestos or the NRM undertakings. The first year of implementation of 2006/2007 saw a total of 155,176 students, of which 89,546 were male and 65,630 female, who enrolled in USE schools. Refer to Annex III, a copy of which we shall deposit within the Parliamentary Library, Mr Speaker. 

It was a remarkable achievement to have students with the eligible aggregate mark of 4 to 28 enter into the USE programme. However, the committee noted with concern that there has been a delay in the construction of the seed schools, which may affect the progress of the programme, when the current S1 students progress to S2. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the construction and furnishing of these schools should be completed by December 2007, to enable the successful progress of the programme. 

The committee further recommends that the minister make a statement on the progress of this at the end of November this year. 

Mr Speaker, the committee noted that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not provided funds for the secondary sub-sector, which has a deficit of Shs 8 billion meant to cater for S1 and S2. The committee reports that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development refused to attend a meeting, when summoned. These are details but eventually, when we met in the budget committee, our concerns were raised and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said that since this is a government mandate of providing Universal Secondary Education, the Shs 8 billion will be found. 

The committee recommends that government treats this as a priority area and funds be secured to enable USE students currently in S1 to proceed to S2 without interruption.

The committee expresses displeasure with the Ministry of Finance for failing to honour the committee’s invitation. When we called finance to come and clarify, they did not even send us another person and that was the displeasure expressed by our committee.

Teacher recruitment:
The committee appreciates the efforts by the Ministry of Education and Sports during the last financial year to recruit and deploy teachers to serving secondary schools under UPPET. 

The committee observed that many of the teachers who were recruited and posted did not take up the appointment by not reporting to the schools. Further, some of those who took up the appointments have not accessed the payroll.

Recommendations

i) The committee recommends that the ministry should immediately cancel appointments of those teachers who have not reported and re-advertise those positions.

ii) Those who took up the appointment should access the payroll since their salary had been budgeted for.

iii) Teacher advertisement for recruitment should continue to be school specific. 

In this one we meant that there are some teachers who access the shortlist but when they tell him to go to say Manafwa, he will say, “I prefer to go to Kololo S.S”. So we found it fitting that as the Education Service Commission advertises, they should say, “We are advertising these vacancies in such schools”. That way if you go for interviews, you know where you are going and you should not disappoint the ministry.

Business, Technical, Vocation, Education and Training (BTVET)

The objective of this programme is to provide individuals with appropriate skills and knowledge towards self-employment and income generation. BTVET is also under the Universal Post Primary Education and Training, and it enrols P.7 leavers in community polytechnics. The committee observed that this sub-sector has a funding gap of Shs1.5 billion. Mr Speaker, this money is required if BTVET is to enroll P.7 leavers for the 2008 academic year. 

Recommendation

The committee strongly recommends to government that this is an important sub-sector both in the formal and informal sectors and funds should be secured to at least ensure the continuity of UPPET programmes as it is with USE. 

Enrolment in health training institutions:
The committee noted with concern that there are some faith based health-training institutions supported by government who discriminate students on the basis of faith during recruitment of students.

Recommendation

The committee urges government to follow up this matter and rectify this anomaly. Mr Speaker, it was said that in these health institutions, some of them could be Moslem based, Catholic or Protestant; some of these health institutions would like applicants to come with baptism certificates. The committee found this very irregular and we urge the ministry to take this up.

Higher Education

This sub-sector in the ministry supervises, coordinates, guides admission, training and teaching at all institutions of higher learning. The committee noted with concern the funding gaps existing in all public universities as reflected in each universities policy statement. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should study the recommendations of the various probe committees and have them implemented so as to provide a lasting solution. These reports include: the 2007 Kamuntu Report on Kyambogo University, the Ssezi Report on salary enhancement in public universities, and the Public Universities Visitation Committee Report. 

These reports have taken long and remember when there was a problem in Makerere, our committee presented its report here but it was not discussed. We are waiting for the minister’s report after she has looked at the Ssezi Report.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that government update Parliament on the progress of implementation of these reports by November 2007. We are giving that deadline because sometime back we gave the minister of education about 30 days, but she has not reported; she was saying the Kamuntu and Ssezi reports were not ready.

Busitema University

During the financial year 2006/07, the Committee on Social Services recommended to government that Busitema University should open this financial year 2007/08 as the fifth public university. The university is opening this financial year in October and students have been admitted on both government and private sponsorship. 

The committee wishes to thank government for this very important development. The university will have constituent colleges in Nagongera, Arapai, Jinja, Mbale, Pallisa and Kaliro. However, the university is beginning with only two campuses of Busitema and Nagongera. Busitema University will start with the following academic programmes: Bachelor of Agricultural Engineering, Bachelor of Agricultural Mechanisation and Irrigation Engineering and Bachelor of Science Education. According to the university, these initial academic programmes require heavy and costly investment. The university has been allocated Shs 2.4 billion out of Shs 5.5 billion that was budgeted for. 

The committee recommends that the university should be supported by all stakeholders and that it should explore alternative financing mechanisms to address the funding gap. The university should also ensure that other future courses offered are relevant and applicable to the country and address the critical human resource shortages in key areas like petroleum engineering and mining engineering. 

In the financial year 2007/08, the university should be given a separate vote in the treasury to avoid getting its funding through the Ministry of Education and Sports headquarters’ vote. 

Gulu University

Gulu University has a student enrolment of 2,574 of which 665 are under government sponsorship and 1,909 are under private programmes scheme. According to the Ministry of Education and Sports Policy Statement, one of the challenges the university faces is inadequate funding to acquire the 742 hectares of land, which is earmarked for the university. However, the administration of Gulu University informed the committee that the local government has at last given the university the land title for the 742 hectares of land. This was officially handed over to the university by the local government of Gulu district. Despite the continued growth of the university, the MTEF ceiling by government has remained the same in the last three years. The wage bill has been inadequately funded.

Kyambogo University

The university has continued to grapple with the problem of inadequate wage bill since the merger of the three institutions of ITEK, UPK and UNISE. The wage bill for the university is Shs 11.76 billion. The Government of Uganda provision is Shs9.8 billion, while Shs0.750 billion is the contribution by the university. This leaves a funding gap of Shs 1.2 billion created by the process of integration of staff into Kyambogo University.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that government should provide additional funding to the wage bill for smooth running of the university. The Kamuntu Report on Kyambogo University should be studied and implemented. Kyambogo University is the only university with specialised training of people with disabilities in this country.

The university in its submission to the committee noted that the number of students with disabilities has increased and there is still inadequacy of disability friendly facilities due to the poor funding. This is something, which was raised by several honourable members of the disabled constituency. There is a belief that several ministries have not adhered to the disability law that we passed; that when they budget, 10 percent of the budget of a given sector should cater for disability, like accessibility, having reading materials for example in institutions and even in hospitals where you have disabled women going to maternity wards. This has not been done and I have always had complaints from the disability movement. 

The committee recommends that due to the uniqueness of Kyambogo University, in terms of disability education, the university should be given priority especially in those specialised programmes and the Ministry of Education and Sports should have affirmative support programmes for the Department of Special Needs Education at Kyambogo University.

Uganda Management Institute

Government funding to the institute has stagnated at Shs 400 million for the last seven years. This amount is not even adequate to enable Uganda Management Institute pay wages. So, the funds from the programmes run by the institute are used to fund the recurrent activities and hence, the institute cannot undertake infrastructure development as is happening in other universities. 

The committee recommends that UMI development budget should be factored in the future sector MTEF to assist the institution in its development projects. Meanwhile, management should also consider using its Appropriation-in-Aid to finance the development budget. 

Mbarara University

The major concern of the committee about Mbarara University is that it is losing focus. It has gradually introduced arts courses and yet the original mission was to be a sciences-oriented university. This loss of focus should be brought to the attention of the university authorities so that it is corrected in order to enable the university become a centre of excellence in science and technology education. 

Mr Speaker, the committee is saying this because I am told that there is already Development Studies in the university and yet it is called Mbarara University of Science and Technology. That was the concern of the committee. 

The committee urges government to reconsider the programmes at the university and thereafter advise the university accordingly. Furthermore, the university has continued to build and develop at its current location, yet it is expected to prepare to move to the new site at Kihumuro. The total development budget as per the Master Plan at the proposed university site is estimated at US $70 million. The first phase would cost about US $25 million. 

The committee recommends that since the university already has a master plan for the permanent home, all its efforts should henceforth be geared to developing the new site. 

Mbarara University has a development budget deficit of Shs 2.87 billion. The university had budgeted for Shs 4.6 billion and government will pay only Shs 500 million. Of this, Shs 1.2 billion is expected from Appropriation-in-Aid. 

Makerere University

The university reported in its policy statement that it would start the new financial year 2007/08 with a budget deficit of Shs 48 billion. This arose due to salary enhancements. The total budget estimates for Makerere University for the financial year 2007/08 is Shs 118 billion (recurrent) and Shs 13 billion for development. Government provision is Shs 34.8 billion and the university expects to collect Shs 49 billion from Appropriation-in-Aid. 

In view of the above, Mr Speaker, the university will experience operational problems if ways and means of closing this funding gap are not well established. 

The committee recommends that the university’s funding gap problem should be harmonised with all the stakeholders for the smooth running of the university, and the report of the Visitation Committee on Makerere University should be availed to Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to add here that, as we shall be reading the figures, according to corrigenda No.2, there has been Shs 3 billion, which has been reallocated from Vote 013 for enhancement of salaries of public universities. We shall be getting those figures when we go to the figures. That is the good news regarding salary enhancement for university lecturers and staff. 

Makerere University Business School

The committee appreciated the Cabinet decision that has resolved a long-standing conflict between Makerere University and MUBS. The committee wishes to report that the hon. Minister of Education and Sports will at an appropriate time address Parliament on this subject. For now the position of government is that MUBS is not a university but a tertiary institution affiliated to Makerere University and the process of implementing the Cabinet decision is ongoing.

The major problem facing this business school is lack of a library. The MUBS library is estimated to cost Shs 10 billion. We were told that last financial year, government contributed Shs 500 million and this financial year government has promised to contribute another Shs 1 billion. From Appropriation-in-Aid, MUBS has also committed Shs 500 million for this cause. According to the school administration, we were told that they are going to have this project in many phases so as to complete the library. 

Sports  Sector

The budget of the sports sub-sector has been raised from Shs 467 million in the financial year 2006/07 to Shs 1.2 billion in the financial year 2007/08. The Committee on Social Services has over the years recommended for increased budget allocation to sports. Furthermore, the Ministry of Education and Sports has now established a department for sports, with a commissioner.

Recommendation

The government should come up with a comprehensive plan for sustainable funding of the sports sector in this country. 

Secondly, there should be a deliberate policy to honour sports heroes in this country. Mr Speaker, the committee found it lacking that whenever sports heroes in Uganda excel, it is only well wishers who will always recognise them. We are saying that we should have a policy to encourage sportsmen and sportswomen in this country. 

Education Service Commission

In the financial year 2007/08, we were told that the Commission plans to recruit personnel for all posts declared by the Ministry of Education and Sports, confirm those in service, validate, regularise and formalise appointments of all personnel in the education service. The commission has a current budget deficit of Shs 400 million to enable it carry out the above activities.

The committee recommends that government should as a matter of priority avail these funds to the Commission so that more teacher recruitment of UPPET is done. 

Furthermore, the committee recommends that the Education Service Commission should conduct interviews on a regional basis other than summoning all applicants or teachers to Kampala for interviews of which some of them do not have a levelled play ground. And I would like to report that the commission agreed that in order to ease this, they would be having interviews at regional levels to enable even teachers from rural areas to access the interviews.

National Council for Higher Education

Mr Speaker, the mandate of National Council for Higher Education within the education and sports sector is to regulate higher education and ensure that quality and relevant education is delivered in this sub-sector. The council is, therefore, key to ensuring and sustaining quality in tertiary and higher education.  

However, the committee was told that there is limited funding to the council and this one has crippled the implementation of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, as amended, to its full capacity. As a result, most activities remain undone and unfinished by the council. So the council is really grappling with lack of funds; they do not have a clear budget line which can enable them regulate standards of the upcoming and existing universities.

The Education Standards Agency

The Education Standards Agency is responsible for monitoring, supervising and ensuring quality in the teaching and learning process. It replaced the former inspectorate department in the Ministry of Education and Sports.  

However, the committee observed that the Education Standards Agency has inadequate funding; making it difficult to inspect all schools every term as expected and there is also weak linkage between the district inspectors of schools and the central inspectorate, which grossly affects the quality of the inspection provision at the districts and the feedback to the Education Standards Agency.

The committee recommends to the Ministry of Education and Sports and an intra-allocation of funds to the Education Standards Agency to be considered.  The Members were concerned here that the reason we have a lot of drop outs and low grades at say primary and even secondary level is that we have had limited inspection. That is why we recommend to the Budget Committee a re-allocation of Shs 300 million on top of what the Education Standards Agency had to enable them ensure that they do the inspection and implementation in order to check the deteriorating standard of education.

Mr Speaker, these are the budget proposals for financial year 2007/08. I beg that this House do approve a total of Shs 254,836,922 billion of which Shs 167,248,659 billion is for recurrent expenditure and Shs 87,588,263 billion is for development expenditure (including donor funding) as the total budget required for the Ministry of Education and Sports Headquarters, Education Service Commission, Makerere University, Makerere University Business school, Gulu University, Kyambogo University, Mbarara University of Science and Technology and Uganda Management Institute for the financial year 2007/008 as follows:

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports headquarters is Shs 93 billion –(Interruption)- No, I told you that there is a corrigenda given from the Ministry of Finance and the other Shs 3 billion to cater for the enhancement of salaries of university lecturers that is why that money has been re-allocated from this Vote. So instead of 96 it is Shs 93,794,749,000. Then for development expenditure it remains Shs 71, 428, 30,000.

Vote 132 - Education Service Commission remains at Shs 2,823,168,000. Then for development it is Shs 52,535,000.

Vote 136 - Makerere University has moved from Shs 35,513,591. It is now Shs 37,159,196,000 that is for recurrent expenditure; and then for development expenditure it remains at Shs 13,131,518,000.  

Vote 137 - Mbarara University of Science and Technology changes to Shs 6,939,831,000 and development expenditure remains at Shs 927,532,000.  

Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School now moves from that figure to Shs 5,387,290,000. The development expenditure remains at Shs 1 billion.  

Vote 139 - Kyambogo University moves from Shs 14 billion to Shs 15,399,773,000 for recurrent then for development it remains at Shs 222,648,000.  

Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute remains at Shs 409,237,000; it does not have development expenditure like we have already mentioned. 

Vote 149 - Gulu University moves from that figure to Shs 5,137,769,000 and development is at Shs 828,000,000.

Mr Speaker, the total has not changed, it is just the re-allocation. So it is a total of Shs 167,248,659,000 for recurrent expenditure; then for development expenditure the total remains Shs 87,588,263 million. I beg to move.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure to find out whether it is not your feeling that it will be prudent for the House to debate different parts of this report differently? I am raising this because I recognise how important it is that the committee has been charged with the task of reporting to this House. So, I foresee a situation where the debate might take a trend where Members will mix up issues and so if we debated one sector at a time, we would probably be able to get straight answers to the questions raised. I seek to be guided.

THE SPEAKER: Having taken into account the people who are going to debate this report, I do not foresee any confusion arising. Each one of you will definitely raise issues of his interest; it is one report.    

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that wise ruling. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you summarise, please?

MR KUBEKETERYA: On page 11, Mr Speaker, we have a table for the budget performance and it has the Ministry of Health budget performance for the wage, non-wage et cetera – I am just referring you to that page and I should not waste a lot of time on it. 

Page 12, the non-wage budget performance for FY 2006/07 is there in the report.  

Page 13, this is the domestic budget performance for FY 2006/07 and the explanation is there. 

Priority programmes and budget resources for this financial year, 2007/08:
Mr Speaker, the overall budget for the Health sector for this financial year is as per table 4 and of course there are several of those figures in terms of percentage and donors. I am sure Members are noting. However, we should add that it should be observed that some of the Shs 147,820,000,000 by donors to the Ministry of Health is spent at the district level. And as you look at some tables, as you progress you may find that the figures are less but this is catered for and that is what hon. Wopuwa was saying that some other figures are not reflected here.  

Key under-funded/unfunded priorities:
The under-funded and unfunded are presented in the table and of course here I will be forced to read them. 

Salary top-up for all government health workers: Mr Speaker the funding available is zero; the funding required is Shs 33,940,000,000 so the funding gap still remains at Shs 33,940,000,000. On this one, it is just a projection by the ministry and there has been an outcry that when several health workers are enrolled or admitted or employed, they leave for further studies and most of the health centre IVs in this country are not operational. So, according to Ministry of Health, there is need for government to have an initiative to retain our human resource. Most of them are the ones that fly to South Africa, London and when Ugandans fly there, they are treated by Ugandans and they wonder why they had gone there when they have Ugandans here. 

So, the ministry told the committee that this is the gap required to retain the workers in order for us to have efficiency. And they say that even if this one is phased out in let say two financial years, it would do us well. So, this is something that Members should consider seriously, and I think I need to add even if it is not written here that the ministry had told the committee that if the entire budget for the Ministry of Health is put at Shs 680,000, 000,000 we could stop complaining of shortages of drugs et cetera. That is what the committee was informed though we did not capture it here.

i) Funding gap of the Private Not for Profit (PNFP) health sub-sector. The funding available is Shs 17,740,000,000 and the funding required is 29,000,000,000. So we have a gap of 11,260,000,000. The PNFP are hospitals like Nsambya and Kibuli, to mention but a few.

ii) Primary Health Care (PHC) Drugs. The funds available are Shs 113,000,000,000 and the funding required is Shs 278,900,000,000. So there is a funding gap of Shs 165,900,000,000.

iii) The health infrastructure at different levels especially primary health care: the funding available is Shs 38,100,000,000 and the funding required is Shs 53,000,000,000. So there is a funding gap of Shs 24,470,000,000.

iv) Equipping health facilities with basic diagnostic and procedural equipment, and maintenance of infrastructure: the funding available is Shs 8,600,000,000 and funding required is Shs 33,070,000,000. The funding gap is Shs 24,470,000,000.

v) Health promotion and education for primary health care activities, including village health teams, the funding available is Shs 2,400,000,000 and the funding required is Shs 16,000,000,000.  There is a gap of 13,600,000,000.

vi) UNEPI (Immunisation) operations. The funding available is Shs 100,000,000 and the funding required is Shs 2,300,000,000. There is a gap of Shs 2,200,000,000.

vii) Ministry of Health headquarters departments. The funding available is Shs 2,270,000,000 and the funding required is Shs 7,340,000,000. There is a gap of Shs5, 070,000,000.

So, the total funding available for the above is Shs 182,210,000,000; the funding required is Shs 453,550,000,000 and the gap is Shs 271,340,000,000. Mr Speaker that is in as far as the funding gap of the Ministry of Health is concerned.   

The key priorities of the Ministry of Health this financial year are: 
i) Improving maternal and child health. Maternal and childhood illness still constitute the biggest proportion of the national disease burden. According to the recent data, maternal mortality ratio has reduced from 505 in 2000 to 435 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births in 2006. The under five and infant mortality rates have reduced from 152 and 88 in 2000 to 137 and 76 deaths per 1,000 live births respectively. 

ii) Total elimination of Malaria - to add to this, as long as the ministry is talking of that it is important to know that the allocation to Malaria programme this financial year is only Shs 750,000,000. This is not enough and in this regard the committee would like to urge the Ministry of Health to intra-allocate more funds to Malaria control.

iii) Immunisation. The sector will strengthen immunisation services; expand outreach centres and active surveillance.

iv) Prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS. The target of the sector is to increase the number of people on ARVs to at least 1,000 per month up from 600 and increase treatment of opportunistic diseases.

v) Essential medicines and supplies. The sub-sector will improve the availability of essential medicines and health supplies at all levels of the health systems so that patients who attend the health facilities get appropriate treatment.

vi) Social health insurance. In line with the NRM manifesto, the Health Insurance Scheme is planned to commence next financial year from 1st July 2007. The Health Insurance Bill has been finalised and presented to Parliament this year.

Observations and recommendations:
Mr Speaker, I have to read the observations and recommendations.  Concerning the Malaria Control Programme, the committee observed that despite the endorsement of DDT for indoor residual spraying by NEMA and World Health Organisation, the implementation of the programme has failed to kick off. The committee was informed that subject to putting in place several requirements, the planned use of DDT is to start in January 2008, starting with the high epidemic prone areas of Kabale, Kanungu and Rukungiri and the high infection districts of Apac, Lira, Kitgum, Pader, Gulu, Amuru and Pallisa. The committee urges the Ministry of Health to expedite the process and ensure that internal residual spraying with DDT starts by early next year.

The Health Insurance Scheme

The committee recommends that sensitisation of Members of Parliament and other members of the public should be done to empower Members of Parliament to effectively and sustainably mobilise communities for health programmes.  

Draft policy on disability, rehabilitation of health care and assistive devices:  
The committee observed that the draft policy on disability, rehabilitative health care and Assistive Devices was developed during the previous financial year 2006/2007 and has not yet been finalised for its implementation. 

The committee was further informed that due to the budgetary constraints, funds to carry out the final necessary consultative meetings were received late in June 2007. However, drafting of this policy is in progress and will be finalised this financial year.  

Mr Speaker, we still have a lot of complaints from people with disabilities arising from the lack of a clear policy on how to treat them in terms of maternal healthcare. The committee recommends that government expedite the process of the Disability Policy in as far as the Ministry of Health is concerned.

Drug shortage in government health facilities

The committee noted that whereas drugs, reproductive health and human resources were key priorities for the last financial year, there is persistent lack of drugs in government health facilities especially at lower health centres and hospitals, which benefit the majority of the poor.  

In view of this, the committee recommended last year that the drug budget be increased in the financial year 2007/2008. The committee was informed that the current national drug budget short fall is Shs 167.7 billion calculated as per capita drug expenditure of US $5.5. That is according to international standards including non-communicable diseases like cancer, hypertension and diabetes.  

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should have a supplementary budget for funding of this sector.  

People with disabilities’ structures

The committee observed that local governments appear not to take into account PWDs needs during construction of new and existing structures despite the Ministry of Health guidelines and regulations for the construction of the buildings that take into account the needs of PWDs.  The committee was informed that the Ministry of Works was responsible for the implementation of the stated guidelines in construction of structures that consider the needs of PWDs.

Recommendation

The Ministry of Health should collaborate with the Ministry of Works and district engineers on this matter for it to be solved once and for all.

Immunisation

Although the ministry has listed immunisation as one of the priority areas for this year, the committee noted that the immunisation programme has a shortfall of Shs 2.2 billion. Out of a budget of Shs 2.3 billion, only Shs 0.1 billion has been provided. The committee recommends that more funds be allocated to immunisation.  

Private, not-for-profit hospitals

The committee observed that despite government’s subvention to some NGO hospitals, they still levy very high charges to their patients. The committee was informed that the Ministry of Health is going to investigate the current level of funding of the NGOs hospitals against the user fee levels paid by the patients. 

The committee recommends that private hospitals or hospitals receiving Government of Uganda support reflect this in their service delivery.  

Also, the Ministry of Health is urged to undertake a study on this matter such that next financial year, Parliament should be informed specifically on the NGOs that have hiked their charges after receiving government subvention.

Mr Speaker, I would like to add that the committee has received several petitions. There is one from Nsambya Hospital, complaining that the Ministry of Finance is over taxing them and they were actually appealing to Parliament to assist them. As long as there are other NGOs charging higher rates, I am told URA is harassing some other service providers like Kibuli Hospital, among others.  

Butabika National Referral

The Management of Butabika National Referral Hospital informed the committee that they submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development a budget of Shs 7.4 billion for financial year 2007/2008. The MTEF provision, however, gave them Shs 3.2 billion hence leaving the hospital with a budget shortfall of Shs 4.2 billion.

Recommendation

Given the unique nature and operations of Butabika Hospital, the committee recommends to government that additional funding be sought for the hospital. The committee was further informed that Butabika Hospital is implementing the Health Sub-Sector Strategic Plan. I think this resolution was brought here, so I do not need to go into the details.  

Mulago National Referral Hospital

In as far as Mulago National Referral Hospital is concerned there are several departments under it:

The Uganda Heart Institute

During the committee visit to Mulago Hospital last financial year, it was noted that the Uganda Heart Institute lacks heart surgery equipment. The committee was informed that the Heart Institute is expected to benefit from the US $2 million grant from the Crown Prince of Arabia and Shs 2 billion, which will be re-allocated from the regional referral hospitals.  

On the development budget to the Uganda Heart Institute this financial year, the committee registers its appreciation to the Crown Prince of Arabia for this grant. The Uganda Heart Institute staff assured the committee that they will be ready in October 2007 to undertake open heart surgery.  

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Heart Institute be able to carry out open heart surgery without further delay by October this year. Therefore, honourable members, this matter seems to be at its final stages and I am sure we shall have the surgeries by October as Mulago Hospital came and assured us.

Appropriation-in-Aid

The committee wishes to inform this august House that after several recommendations by this Parliament, Mulago Hospital was cleared by the Ministry of Finance to spend the internally generated revenue at source. The committee urges Mulago Hospital to show how much is earned from Appropriation-in-Aid and how it is expended.  

Furthermore, Mulago Hospital should inform Parliament and the public on the cost structures of treatment in the hospital’s private wing. Note should be taken that the regional referral hospitals do not have this privilege yet there is Appropriation-in-Aid. The point is that Mulago Hospital should tell the public how much they charge as far as the private wing is concerned. The fee varies in that someone is told to pay Shs 2 million and another comes only to be told Shs 2.5 million. That is why the committee felt that the public should know.

The Uganda Cancer Institute

The committee noted with concern that there is neglect and lack of funding for the Uganda Cancer Institute. The committee considers this institute a very strategic institution for research, academic purposes and for the treatment of cancer in the country. The committee had recommended during the consideration of the MTEF in April that Uganda Cancer Institute be made independent and given adequate funding. The Budget Committee also recommended, during MTEF, that reallocation of Shs 7.7 billion to the Uganda Cancer Institute be made this financial year 2007/2008. 

However, the committee was informed that the Cancer Institute will only receive Shs 100 million for rehabilitation and Shs 1 billion out of the additional Shs 5 billion provision for drugs for Mulago National Referral Hospital. 

The committee recommends that the Cancer Institute be granted autonomy status and provided with adequate funding to regain its past glory as the leading cancer research institute in the region.

National Medical Stores

The committee noted with concern the uncoordinated procurement of drugs and sundries that has led to expiry of drugs worth billions of shillings. The details are in the report.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health establishes an institutional mechanism to effectively coordinate procurement of drugs and other health commodities. We are saying so because when we went to NMS, we were told that the donors, who are our development partners, sometimes bring in the same type of drugs and you may find that when you have so much of the same type, some may expire. Therefore, there was lack of coordination in as far as procurement is concerned. We are calling upon the Minister of Health to have a coordinated way of getting people who procure these drugs so that they can bring them in time to avoid wastage.

National Drug Authority

The committee observed that some of the key challenges facing the regulation of drug use include abuse by herbalists and porous borders resulting into smuggling of counterfeits into the country.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the development of a policy on traditional herbal medicines be completed and implemented. 

The committee also recommends that NDA and the Ministry of Health have consultations with all sectors like Ministry of Internal Affairs and Uganda Revenue Authority that monitor border points in order to establish a mechanism to curtail counterfeit drugs entering the country through porous borders.

Regional Referral Hospitals

Mr Speaker, there are 11 regional referral hospitals and the information is in the report. The committee noted that regional referral hospitals have very poor infrastructure with no basic equipment like X-rays and incubators, among others. Recurrent budgets of these hospitals cannot even meet the cost of public utilities like water and electricity. Furthermore, those that have private wings, which generate money, cannot be allowed to spend it at source. It should also be noted that the development funds to the referral hospitals are controlled by the Ministry of Health headquarters. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that these structures be rehabilitated in this financial year and that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allow these hospitals to spend the internally generated funds at source. The details are in the report.

The medical superintendents of regional referral hospitals informed the committee that they are serving under unclear terms of service and that their posts have never been regularised by the Ministry of Public Service. 

The committee recommends that development budget funds for regional referral hospitals be sent directly to the hospitals, as they are now self-accounting. 

We also recommend that appointments of medical superintendents of regional referral hospitals be regularised urgently. The Minister of Health should give a progress report to Parliament on this matter by December. Mr Speaker, the reason the committee is giving this deadline is that when we leave it open - so we are actually saying that by the end of this year the Ministry should give us a report on these complaints because there are superintendents who are just acting and they don’t know what they are called.

District health centres - rehabilitation and equipping health centres

These are mostly health centres IVs and the information is in the report. The committee urges the Ministry of Health to ensure that all health centre IVs become operational. The committee also recommends that medical doctors at health centre IVs who go for further training resign to allow the districts to replace them or the Ministry of Health headquarters should take up their wage bill. This should take effect this financial year.

The committee has observed that doctors who go for training never return to health centres or health centre IVs after post graduate training.

Health Service Commission

On accommodation of health personnel, the committee was informed that there is a serious crisis in the health sector regarding accommodation of personnel. Also, the housing allowance allocated to senior medical personnel is not commensurate with their responsibilities. In some areas, health workers do not have available decent accommodation. This has affected service delivery in the country. This is also not in line with what the Minister of Public Service was telling us because doctors are supposed to be on duty 24 hours.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health comes up with a comprehensive report on the housing problem in the sector so that government can consider providing possible solutions to the housing challenge and this can be the provision of houses to civil servants especially to the health workers.

Recruitment policy of health workers

The committee was informed that recruitment of health workers to operate the existing health units and their retention is a major problem affecting health service delivery especially in up country health centres.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the ministry considers recentralising the management of staff at districts as experience has shown that decentralisation has not improved health service delivery in many areas.

The committee further recommends - everybody is entitled to his own opinion - in the short term that the recruitment exercise of health workers in the new districts be handled by their mother districts, which have the capacity to speed up the exercise as new districts struggle to have district service commissions.

Brain drain of health professionals

The committee noted the increasing brain drain of health professionals from Uganda to countries offering higher wages despite government’s high-incurred costs in training of these professionals and the increasing shortage of health professionals in this country. 

The committee recommends that the Health Service Commission comes up with a comprehensive policy regarding health workers’ remuneration and retention to solve this problem.  

As I conclude, these are the budget proposals for the Ministry of Health, financial year 2007/2008.

I beg that this House do approve a total of Shs 291,635,012,900 of which Shs 105,838,963,000 is for recurrent expenditure and Shs 185,796,049,900 is for development expenditure, including donor funds. The total budget required for the Ministry of Health Headquarters, Mulago and Butabika National Referral Hospitals, Health Service Commission, Uganda Blood Transfusion Services and 11 Regional Referral Hospitals for this financial year 2007/2008 is as follows –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you do not need to read because eventually, we are going to repeat this. You can stop at this.

MR KUBEKETERYA: So, Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Well, who is the Shadow Minister of Education?  You can proceed.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION IN THE SHADOW CABINET (Ms Christine Bako): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament for acknowledging the presence of my office constitutionally. I am still in charge. I have a few remarks to make. In the first place, I am grateful to the Chairman of the Committee on Social Services - I will be brief.  

Universal Post-Primary Education and Training

Mr Speaker, this country has put more emphasis on Universal Secondary Education at the expense of BTVET, which is, the Business Technical and Veterinary Training. We have vocational education and training; we are having a funding gap of Shs 1.5 billion and we realise that they are still very high drop out rates. We think from the primary seven level onwards, given these high dropout rates, we would expect that this sub-sector in the Ministry of Education gets the attention it deserves. 

We are saying that the Shs 27,000 shillings per student per term is not adequate if you are to break that gap. The minimum we would suggest is Shs 100,000 per student. This would be able to provide 200 grams of posho per student per day and 200 grams of beans per student per day on the assumption that each of those items is sold at Shs 8,000 per kilogramme. 

We are looking at the delays in the fixed payments to the schools, which are actually impacting on the performance of these schools. Management has become a problem and we think if the ministry gave these funds timely to these schools they would be able to improve their management concerns in the schools.  

We are also concerned about the quality of teaching and learning at this level, particularly in the secondary sub-sector. We are realising that the education stand is having a problem to monitor the quality effectiveness and the efficiency of the teaching and learning process and we think there is need for urgent attention in that area and sub-sector.

Mr Speaker, there was a concern; yesterday we were talking about the recruitment into the Police Force and there was a statement in the media that the minister did not come up to deny about recruitment of teachers to teach political education in the secondary schools based on the loyalty to the NRM Government. We think and we believe as the Opposition that this is cognitive indoctrination and should not be allowed. I can pledge the support of the Opposition; we will follow this up and ensure that all the teachers who will be teaching political education are as neutral as they must be. 

Issues to do with Universal Primary Education - we realise with utmost pain the decay in school discipline. The concept of free education has led to parental neglect. Most of our parents now think it is the responsibility of the teachers and the headmasters to discipline their children and actually make them appreciate the importance of learning. We think as legislators that we should take it upon ourselves to ensure that once we are in our constituencies, we help our ministers in the Ministry of Education to let the parents know that they have a cardinal duty to play in the upbringing of their children let alone educating them. But we also get disheartened when we realise that resident district “consultants” take it upon themselves that when a teacher is trying to discipline a pupil, this teacher is beaten in front of the pupils. This is the highest level of indiscipline that you can portray to –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and the Shadow Minister for Education for giving me this opportunity. I want to inform you that the RDC of Pader actually - he is called Lt Santo Raporo - publicly caned a teacher and humiliated this teacher in front of the public. Up to now nothing has been done to him and we think this is a bad example.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I come from Pader and it is true in Agago County the RDC, Lt Okot Raporo caned the teacher in front of the pupils and because of political pressure he went and apologised in front of those very pupils. But the information I want to give is that Raporo does not come from Pader. So I do not want all the discredit -(Interjections)- yes, he does not come from there. He comes from Kitgum but he is the RDC of Pader –(Laughter)- I think for the record, we have to get it straight. 

MS BAKO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, given the magnitude of this problem and given the military background of these RDCs, we are scared that our education system one of these days is going to be heavily militarised and we pray it does not take place at all. 

We have a problem of absence of school utilities in primary schools in Arua District. At one time a teacher was forced to write on a chalkboard using fermented cassava. This is happening at a time when we should be taking the human resource development of this country very seriously. It is very unfortunate that this is still happening and we are still heavily embroiled in trying to budget not for the future of this country.

There is the concern of automatic promotion because of lack of space. In most primary schools, teachers and head teachers are forced at times to promote pupils to the next class given the next intake. This is getting into a very big problem and we are not able to assure –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has made a very serious observation and to us as a Parliament we are responsible for appropriating funds to make sure that our children in the country get service and value for money. The honourable member is saying that in some schools in the country, there is no chalk; that people are using cassava. I just want to seek clarification, is it an issue of the schools diverting money and failing to buy chalk, or is it an issue of the ministry failing to disburse funds or there is no chalk in the shops to buy even when the money has been released? We need to get clarification so that we can know when and how to intervene. I thank you.

MS BAKO: It is a multiplicity of problems and all those joined together just form a subset of the problem -(Interjections)- if you are denying that -(Interruption)

MR EPETAIT: Let me put the record straight. We had a very pathetic report from the Minister in charge of Primary Education who said that in his field monitoring he found such a situation and the argument that was given was that some money was reallocated at the district. There is a policy that Cabinet passed of a 10 percent FDS - flexibility in using those conditional grants. So, that particular school in Rakai District – the hon. Minister of State for Primary Education found the teacher actually red-handed with cassava. He was not eating it but was using it for advancing knowledge. (Laughter)  

MS BAKO: Thank you, honourable member and I would request that hon. Dombo - if you got in touch with the honourable minister Lokeris, you will get more than I am just saying. 

The recent head count in my district revealed some unfortunate incidences. In the appointments of the primary school teachers, some of the DEOs are so corrupt that it has become a pathetic sin that even teachers fake qualifications. Others go to the training institutes, fail some papers and they do not go back to re-sit these papers. Ultimately, they come out, fake a document that they are qualified and get access to the pay roll; get access to appointment letters that are duly signed and others even photocopied. I think the headcount exercise in these districts needs to be taken seriously and the ministry should do something about it. Possibly, we are having problems with UPE given the quality of teachers who are instructing our pupils.

There is the issue of “Education for All”. We as a country have a commitment to that but this is not realised in this country because of so many other problems. I will give you an example of Kalangala and Karamoja where there is a nomadic life system. These communities have requested for boarding schools for their children so that at the end of every term they can be able to join their parents wherever they are. Failure to provide boarding primary schools is making it impossible for these Ugandan children to have access to education, which is meant to be free, and for all. 

We are pertinently concerned about the high dropout rate especially among the girl children. I remember, I was not in this Parliament but there was a concern of trying to reduce the taxes on sanitary towels. Many times girls drop out of school because of the natural circumstances under which they find themselves. A packet of sanitary towels in this country costs a minimum of Shs 2,000. If you multiplied that by 12 months, a poor girl or a rich one needs a minimum of Shs 24,000 per year in order to be decent enough to study. But our parents cannot afford this. What is the status quo?

THE SPEAKER: I want to inform you that two days ago I visited the Faculty of Technology at Makerere under Dr Musaazi, who is working on these sanitary towels at that department. You can go and see. The cost is, I think, half or less than what you have said. They make them from papyrus and other papers. (Interjections) No, no, they are good. This is your institution. Tomorrow morning get an appointment with Dr Musaazi at the Faculty of Technology and you will see what is being done. 

MR OKECHO: I just want to pass a bit of information that the hon. Minister for Education knows very well how a company in this country called Cotton Products Uganda Ltd was so involved through Rockefeller Foundation, which is now funding this particular project in Makerere, was involved in the development of suitable sanitary towels for primary school girls. Dr Musaazi in Makerere has actually taken this up very seriously and he is doing a very good job about that particular project except that the capacity of Makerere is still small. However, we know that in due course it will pick up and all the girls will be able to procure adequate sanitary towels from there. Thank you very much.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, there are two things: one is this question of drop out of girls from school was presented two or three years ago after the UPE enrolment in P.1 was highly sounded as a success story, but very few ended up in P.7. I remember hon. Dorothy Hyuha was the Chairperson of the Social Services Committee then. Issues were raised but the ministry did not know the main cause of drop out and one of the reasons pursued was this sanitary thing they are talking about. That particular year, there was no budgetary provision for it but the following year the Committee on Social Services decided that there should be Shs 2 billion allocated to it. 

By now we should be getting positive reports on the impact or the effect of the procurement of sanitary towels for these little children. Today we are still looking around for the same reason to get more money for sanitary pads. I think there must be some better reasons to explain the drop out in primary schools. 

Two, I want to inform this House that while we spend a lot of time investigating the National Medical Stores, we must bear in mind that one of the problems, which we must look at, is that of the sub-standard medical products. I want to provide information that some of our local industries manufacture medical products, which are not certified, to be sold to our people and so they are bound to expose not only the ordinary people but even medical workers to health hazards. Therefore, unless the products from Makerere, which we are talking about, have been fully tested, it will be difficult for us to recommend them to be sold out to people. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: For your information, when I visited them I was told that there is a problem of these girls not putting on knickers –(Laughter)- and that when this was discovered, these people were forced to introduce a provision for that situation. This is according to Dr. Musaazi. I would like to suggest that our colleagues, especially female Members of Parliament, should go and visit that Department at Makerere. It is your department; go and see it so that you can advise us.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I want, at policy level, to seek guidance because this would help us for now and could provide information for the future - on why the Faculty of Technology of Makerere University, which ordinarily should have been involved in this research, was not consulted? Why was this research left to the hands of a private investor to do massive production aimed at commercialising a science innovation that had been discovered by the university faculty? 

I also want to find out from the minister: at what level is the Faculty of Technology going to operate. Is it only at the level of discovery or they are also going to commercialise and go into production? 

Lastly, can the minister tell us whether they have the capacity to do that and what government is doing to support them? I thank you.  

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving us the warm information. What I am wondering about is when these discoveries will ultimately project themselves into economies of scale to enable us supply our girls? If it is the shortage of knickers and the sanitary towels then let us find a solution because for example, on average, in Kampala the market price of sanitary pads is Shs 1,500 and Shs 2,200 in upcountry areas. I think that to a poor peasant girl, this is limiting enough for her to drop out of school. 

Tertiary Education

Mr Speaker, I want to say that financing university education has been more politicised than otherwise. The universities are blaming politicians for interfering with their planning because they would wish to set fees structures that can ultimately enable them meet their target goals in the planed activities. But political pronouncements usually come barring them from setting such fees structures, yet they will have planned according to the structures. So the cry is: can we give these public universities their independence so that we only scrutinise their planning vis-à-vis their fees that they are charging so that we are able to help one another in this case?

The other suggestion is that I would like to ask this country to take up university education very seriously because as you are aware, we have a comparative advantage in the region, which is going to federate soon, assuming we get there. The comparative advantage that we have over Kenya and the rest of East African countries is that of our rich human resource. So, if we do not take this seriously, what then shall we be trading? I am saying this because our entrepreneur levels we are still far. So, unless we take the human resource development seriously and harness this comparative advantage, we may not reap very much from the East African Federation. 

About the Ministry of Education donating Shs 500 million to the Mountains of the Moon University, which is a private university -(Interjection)- Mountains of the Moon University? Is it somewhere in the Rwenzori Region and –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: I am rising on a point of procedure that in a committee we sit and write reports together. When the matter of that university came up, we agreed that that donation by the ministry was okay. So, is it really procedurally right for the honourable member to begin lamenting on the same yet she is a member of the committee? 

Mr Speaker, before you rule, what I want to know is, to what extent does a honourable member of the same committee go? I am asking this because the way I see it she is going into details -(Interjection)- I know she is a shadow minister but we already agreed on that matter, even hon. Epetait can attest to that.

THE SPEAKER: She says she has changed her mind. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of clarification. The honourable member holding the portfolio of Shadow Minister of Education is privy to the information that she discussed at the sessional committee level, and that committee consists of not more than 30 Members of Parliament. I think it is proper that as legislators; as peoples’ representatives, we are informed on whatever happens in every sector of government. It is in our interest as an institution to know that because for example, I am just hearing it for the first time that there is a university called Mountains of the Moon to which government is making a contribution. It would be very interesting to us to know what exactly that university is all about and under what arrangement the said money was donated. This is very important because this is money from the taxpayers’ resources. 

I will prefer that, with due respect, Mr Speaker, the committee puts us in light of what this university is all about; what programmes it offers; and why it is preferentially treated because I know there are many private universities in this country, which government has never treated that way. For example, there is a private university in Jinja town, where I reside, but I do not think it gets such kind of subvention. So, under what circumstances are these universities being prioritised? I wish to know that. Thank you.

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your guidance. All I had wanted to say was actually said by the Opposition Chief Whip. But as the Education Shadow Minister, I demand that this money be shifted to the Education Service Commission –(Interruption)

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, shadow minister for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to report that as a committee, most Members felt that this money was not really supposed to go to Mountains of the Moon University, but when we were told that it is the only private university, which is offering a degree in horticulture farming – you may laugh but it is in horticulture farming and we are looking at trade, focusing on agro-industries and agriculture. We agree that the money be given to this university, let alone it being the only university in this part of the country; Mountains of the Moon University is the only private university, we do not have any other public university in the mid-west. So, Members felt and agreed that it was okay for it to get that money; that is why it was passed.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, we as Members of Parliament cannot object to the issue of Mountains of the Moon University. However, I want to rather ask government to put a specific and coherent policy in place so that it is easy for people to follow. Why it is being done like that? 

Secondly, that information on what was discussed about the Mountains of the Moon University is vital because it is missing in the report. It could have been very useful information but given what the Member has explained on what the committee agreed and it is a committee of this House, we shall support it. However, we continue to demand that the ministry puts in place a policy so that we are able to know how it is being administered. I thank you.

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, you would wonder why this very part of the donation was missing in the report of the committee if things were done transparently –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But is it illegal for Ministry of Education, for once, to make a decision to donate to a private institution? If it is, don’t you think that the Auditor General will come up with a report querying this? Yes! How was it released? Maybe it was released because it was a proper payment. So, we can only wait for the Auditor-General to query it, if he has to.

MS BAKO: From this time on, until the time the report of the Auditor-General comes, how many Ugandans will have had that information and to what extent shall we be having transparency? -(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Shadow Minister, you do not need to worry about the Auditor-General’s report. In our committee of COSASE, we have had to catch even those who stole money in 1997 and they have returned that money to the public coffers. So, do not worry -(Laughter)- there is even a case where hon. Dombo, the Chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources has just identified something relating to a secret company called Amber House Limited, which government is paying yet it is not registered anywhere. We are looking for them - (Laughter)- so when it comes to matters of accountability, you should not worry; it will come - (Laughter)

MS BAKO: Thank you very much, hon. Odit, and I can assure you that I am not worried now that I have your concern but for the purposes of getting our records straight, I demand that that money be shifted to the Education Service Commission. 

The other issue that I would like to comment on relates to public universities, which have big crises of academic staff. Some of the faculties in these universities are getting to have courses at post graduate level yet they do not have enough trained manpower. We are having scenarios where –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But try to speed up so that others can also contribute.

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, I am actually on the last point. I was saying that some of the faculties in public universities are trying to have masters’ programmes yet they do not have enough manpower. You find a faculty that has a few doctors trying to go on to have a masters’ programme and in that case you find that the postgraduate students are the ones teaching fellow students; this is a problem. We cannot ascertain the quality at this point in time and now because of the poor facilitation of these academic staff, they are more interested in doing consultancy work in their offices than paying attention to students in terms of supervision. This is giving us a long time of getting out of the training system. So, if we looked into that we would be able to harmonise a few things. 

Let me briefly say something about the sports sector. I can see that we are allocating Shs 1.2 billion to the sports department. This is a substantial increment compared to the past but looking at sports in general, you realise that it is an expensive sub-sector within the Ministry of Education. So I would advise that we get into private-public partnership with private companies for sports development in this country. For example, we have so many companies here that may be able to finance some of the sports activities when there is a private partnership with the ministry. I will give you an example of BAT, which has a brand called “Sportsman”. Why not levy tax on this very brand, however small it is, so that you can get some money from it? See how sports are financed in the Western world. For example, Barclays Bank finances the famous Premier League. So, why don’t you have this kind of initiative here so that instead of trying to strain the hand of government, the private sector can come to our aid and support the sports sub-sector? Mr Speaker, I would wish to go on but I will stop here.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, hon. Epatait -(Laughter)- You know that we have two Shadow Ministers on this report.

5.20
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH IN THE SHADOW CABINET (Dr Francis Epetait): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that my report will be rather brief. For the record, I want to say that the overall development goal of the Ministry of Health still remains as the attainment of a good standard of health by all the people in Uganda in order to promote a health and productive life. But in order to achieve such a goal, there is need for us to have good policies and strategies, to have a focused budget and fiscal discipline, and a highly motivated and committed human resource at all levels of health service delivery. We also need to have a well-distributed health infrastructure.

The procurement and distribution chain for drugs and other medical supplies also have to be very efficient if we have to achieve such a goal. 

I want to say that for reasons, which are both internal and external to the Ministry of Health, it is sad to note that there is still little hope for all the people of Uganda to attain a good standard of health.

First, we wish to commend multi-lateral and bilateral partners who have extended support to the health sector. We further recognise and applaud Civil Society Organisations and Religious institutions that have made significant contributions to the health sector in our country. However, we note with concern, the injudicious utilisation of the much-needed financial support in the sector.

Mr Speaker, the reported cases of impropriety in the sector could best be described as a total abuse of the people’s mandate. It is worth to commend the efforts of the Inspector-General of Government (IGG) for unearthing overzealous individuals and to commend the Ogola Commission for exposing the abuse of Global Fund for HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria by those entrusted to mange this well-intentioned resource. 

Whereas health is not everything, everything is nothing without health. Therefore, it is important to bear in mind that the poverty levels that we are grappling with have their bearing in the poor health throughout the country. The limited MTEF ceiling given to the sector is tantamount to knowingly administering any particular drug at an under dose to a patient hoping that he will recover. I think the patient will not recover. It is not surprising, therefore, that communicable and non-communicable diseases are on the increase and that drug stock outs at health facilities is a common story all over the country.  

According to a sample study carried out in the FY 2005/06, 73 percent of the health facilities in Uganda experienced the drug stock outs. There are so many under-funded priorities in the sector and Mr Speaker, I have a bit of constraint to harmonise the figures that have been reported by my chairman of the committee of the under-funded priorities, because what we are suggesting to allocate to the Ministry of Health is even much less than 50 percent of the funding gap. Already that is stated in the ministerial policy statement. If I could even refer to page 9 of our ministerial policy statement from where I derived my figures, I saw a bit of discrepancy with the table reported by the under-funded priorities in the committee report.

For medicines and health supplies alone, we were informed in the policy statement that we have a funding gap of Shs 166 billion.  Human resource for health that includes recruitment, NGO’s salary compensation and hardship allowance are a total of Shs 28.8 billion.  Health infrastructure including Primary Health Care development, new district headquarters accommodation, hospital rehabilitation a funding gap of Shs 185 billion.

Health promotion, disease prevention have funding gap of Shs 9.5 billion. Emergency obstetric care for maternal health has a funding gap of Shs 7.5 billion totalling to Shs 396.8 billion. 

Mr Speaker, the Opposition is legitimately passionate and concerned about how Ugandans will run away from the problem of drug stock outs at health facilities; how the health workers in this country will get a deserving and motivating health package; how we shall address the problem of overcrowding in both in-patient and out-patient departments. How we shall stop the advantaged officials in this country from moving up and about in search of health care from other countries only actually to meet fellow Ugandans there to take care of them. (Applause) 

In order for us to attain the Millennium Development Goals I think there is need for government to change its attitude towards the health sector and make a firm - there is no compromise about health. If somebody needs a certain dosage of a drug, you have to provide it for such a person to recover. But attempting to give health a peanut is like – I had already described that, the patient will never recover. We, therefore, propose that the budgetary ceilings for the health sector in this country be revised upwards. If anything we are operating at below 30 percent. We need to have it tripled in order to address the existing funding gap in the sector.

Mr Speaker, it has already been reported here that the development budget, the Shs 6 billion allocated for development budget – as a development budget for Regional Referral Hospitals is also going to be managed at the centre. I think the one who has a boil knows best how painful it is. We propose that such development budgets be remitted directly to the various referral hospitals so that they address the key issues that are really affecting them.  And in any case, once that money is remitted I think the problems will be fixed on time rather than having the budget managed at the centre.

We further demand that the prosecution of individuals and firms suspected of impropriety should be expeditiously done in a bid to recover the lost public funds. There is reported understaffing in all health facilities in this country. No wonder there is even overcrowding in various departments. A health facility, which has a staffing level of 50 percent, would count itself lucky. So we demand that the staff ceilings that have been slapped on the Ministry of Health be lifted. We also demand that the morale, actually the morale of health workers all over the country has gone down and this is partly attributed to the package that they receive. It is worse with private hospitals because the package that the health workers get at the public health facilities is quite different from what they receive at private hospitals. I think there is need for government to standardise the package of workers in PNFPS and also in public health facilities after all those workers in the PNFPS are treating fellow Ugandans. They are really bridging the gap.  

We also propose that government reconsiders setting up some motivating incentives to enable health workers to acquire personal transport under the hire purchase scheme for that matter, especially in the hard-to-reach areas because some doctors fail to go to certain places citing logistical impediments as a reason, leave alone the inadequacy of housing. I think even the ministerial policy statement and the committee report have attested to that. There is need for us to look into the housing for health workers especially in the hard to reach areas.

The general outcry of declining standards and attitudes of health workers in the recent past - many nurses are reported to be very rude to their patients and I have emphasised the question, that is, in the recent past, probably that rudeness is as a result of poor motivation. It has also been reported that the decline in standards in the health sector is attributed to the transfer of the training institutions from the Ministry of Health to Ministry of Education. Many officials have demanded that in order to enhance professional supervision and monitoring at training level, those training institutions should be taken back to the Ministry of Health. In fact that question does not stop on the health alone. It even touched on Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry. Recently when we had a workshop in Entebbe the demand arose about declining standards of hoteliers because the training institute was transferred to the Ministry of Education, Agriculture, name them. I think there is need for us to review this.

In procurement, we propose that the procurement of all drugs and medical supplies in the country should be coordinated by the Ministry of Health as a measure to avoid over procurement of anyone item and possible dumping of drugs and supplies to this country. This has already been mentioned. We noted with grave concern the volumes of expired drugs worth billions of shillings at the National Medical Stores in Entebbe. The argument that NMS gave was that third party programmes also procure in a parallel manner. You find another programme procuring a similar item that is already in stock procured by NMS. So there is over-stocking of supplies, which actually are even forgotten there, to the extent that they expire while there are shortages in the rural health facilities. We need coordination at the ministry level. In fact, the procurement should be made in conformity with the overall strategic plan of the ministry to avoid overzealous procurement.

I promised that I would be brief. Finally, during the submissions and testimonies given by various stakeholders in the health sector, it was reported that many health facilities in the country are beleaguered with legal suits over land disputes with their neighbours. I think this is not a good thing. Indeed even some schools are in courts of law over land disputes. We got a number of government institutions being entangled in court arbitrations over land disputes. We would like to propose that government takes up this matter seriously and reconsiders having all government land surveyed. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I beg that given the time pressure that we are faced with, at an appropriate time we will have a thorough debate on the health sector touching on a number of programmes and epidemics that we are faced with. For now, I beg to stop here.

5.35
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I will be very brief, as usual. I would like to thank the committee chairperson and the members for work well done and for making a number of pertinent recommendations as they scrutinised the policy statements of both ministries. I have a few issues arising from the report. 

On page 3, the committee clearly says on school feeding: “The committee recommends that the policy should be as follows: 
i) Those parents who agree and are able to pay be free to do so. 
ii) Those who cannot pay should provide food to children to carry to school.”

They continue to say that this policy should be communicated comprehensively. While I agree that this is the right approach, we need to look at the other issue of orphans who may not even have homes or parents to give them the food to pay in kind. What should the provision be? I think the committee or this Parliament should look at issues of the traditional school gardens. Perhaps this can subsidise this other category of children without parents.

On page 5, the committee gives a recommendation - this is on teacher recruitment. I agree with the recommendation but I feel it is light. We are suffering a lot, especially people from rural constituencies. When adverts for recruiting teachers are up, every unemployed teacher will apply to get on the payroll. The secret is, I apply and get on the payroll, I am posted to Kamwenge or Kitgum but I do not go, I stay here for one year, manoeuvre my –(Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, hon. Tumwebaze, for giving way. I give this information as a professional teacher who taught for ten years. Each year I would apply when the adverts came, I kept on applying until I was not taken up. I was taken up just as I was coming to Parliament as a Member of Parliament. So this is a very serious issue that the Ministry of Education should take up. Thank you very much.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you for the information but the point I was developing is more or less related but quite different. I am talking about teachers who deliberately refuse to report for duty to areas where they were posted to because they fear the area or because it is either remote or underdeveloped. Go to my schools in Kamwenge, you will find two qualified teachers yet on the payroll the ministry deployed teachers there. They stay around, manoeuvre their way and finally they get transferred. The only requirement from the ministry for them to be transferred is that you get a release letter from the head teacher. 

Mr Speaker, I appeal to the ministry to be very serious and come out categorically to give guidelines on transfers. If I am sent to a school in Pader, I should go. If I do not, they should not only cancel my appointment but I should also be blacklisted, never to be recruited in the service for a number of times. This puts the rural schools at a very big disadvantage and yet they are expected to be judged at the same standards when it comes to examinations.

Another concern is on the observation made on Mbarara University. I am proud to be an old student of Mbarara University. The fact that it is changing focus to arts and other areas is not only a problem in Mbarara University. There is this idea of diversification, even when it is not necessary, for institutions to get money. Up to now I have never known - maybe it is because I am not an accountant - the difference between Bachelor of Commerce and Bachelor of Business Administration. I think there is need for the ministry to guard against this useless duplication of courses for the sake of charging school fees.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker –(Interjections)- I am a member of the committee but I would like to give new information. I thank the members of the committee for compiling the report and the chairman of the committee for presenting it. The new information I would like to give is in connection with research in institutions. Research institutions can get their novel findings and these findings can be patented. These institutions should liaise with industries because research institutions are not production units.

The second piece of information is in connection with the crisis in the certification of nurses and midwives. This has created some problems in the Ministry of Health and in the Ministry of Education. I think that it is time the two ministries came together and cleared this. Certification should not be mixed with professional registration, and this is what is going on at the moment in the two ministries. This is imparting on the morale of nurses and midwives. Certification is an academic exercise; professional registration is done by professional bodies.  

The other issue is in connection with the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. The committee reported that the ministry in charge of the East African Community has discussed with the Ministry of Education and Sports, and the ministry agreed to write a Cabinet paper on the teaching of Swahili in primary schools. This has not been captured, but I considered it very important. The people of East Africa are actually in favour of the East African confederation and I think that this will be very useful to Uganda. The teaching of Swahili should be moved not only to primary schools but to secondary schools as well. Thank you very much.

5.44
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to comment on the report of the Committee on Social Services. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members for the report well made. My concern –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, for the last one and a half years we have been in a multi-party dispensation. My honourable member, hon. Reagan Okumu, has crossed and is seated comfortably conversing with the ministers on that side. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: It is not in order to cross the Floor of the House.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to reflect on the law but with due respect to your ruling, our Rules of Procedure are very clear; I would rather that the Opposition Chief Whip had referred to the rules themselves and he would have got a solution to what he was referring to. The Rules of Procedure prevent a Member from crossing the Floor unnecessarily and it is clearly stated.  

THE SPEAKER: This is what I said. It is out of order to cross the Floor. If you want to talk to somebody here, you should go out.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, my concern is on page 3 of the report, about the school dropouts, especially those in the primary section. I am worried that the pupils we have in primary schools may not make it to secondary level under the Universal Secondary Education programme. Among the many reasons that have been given is the problem with teachers who defile these pupils and there is nothing said or done about them. This happens most especially when they reach P.5, P.6 and P.7. Due to fear of harassment by the teachers, most of these girls tend to shy away from the schools and they drop out. I would like the ministry to put punitive measures in place for these teachers who defile our pupils and make them fail to complete school.  

There is yet another issue that makes it hard for teachers to concentrate on studies. There is a case where a Grade III teacher is appointed in a school and he goes and upgrades and attains a diploma. However, on coming back to teach he earns the same salary as what he used to get when he still had a certificate. I wish to say that this is a de-motivating factor and as many teachers get out of these schools, the pupils also find it very disgusting to go to school when the teachers are not there.  

It is the same situation for the teachers who are in hard-to-reach schools, most especially in lake, mountainous, and of course war-torn areas. The pupils will go to school and they will not find teachers because the teachers cannot go there yet they have attained the same qualifications with those who are enjoying life in towns - (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank my honourable colleague for giving way. I would like to bring it to your notice that two weeks ago I travelled to my constituency and I went to Okili Primary School in Amida sub-county; I was told that in these schools teachers report at 10.00 a.m. and they leave at 3.00 p.m. The reason is that they stay seven miles away from the school. They stay in Kitgum Town and have to go all the way to Okili to teach and rush back.  

I also went to Orom and I found that in some schools there are only two teachers. In one particular school, I found only one female teacher. The problem that my sister is relating to is that once there are few teachers and they are not paid according to their grades, they will seek work elsewhere. Therefore, the minister should take note of this. Thank you.

MR OCHIENG: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. This issue of hard-to-reach areas is being referred to now and again and we are getting no solution. I am happy that the minister is here and also the team from the ministry is here. I think that it is in order for us to know now whether this programme will be implemented or not. As far as I am concerned, I have written five letters consecutively every financial year and I get the obvious answer: “We are going to do this; we are going to do that”.  

I come from a disadvantaged area and what my sister -(Interruption)- I did not want to mention this because you had suggested that those who did not speak in the other one would be the ones to begin, that we would move along that line. The truth of the matter is that I have tried to talk; I have enough primary schools in my constituency but in many of them you will find only one qualified teacher, who is the headmaster. To make matters worse that headmaster is supposed to attend several seminars at the district. Every week in the voucher book –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What will the difference be with your contribution? Have you not really contributed? I will take it that you have contributed. (Laughter)

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Finally, my contribution focuses on page 4, where the chairperson of the committee talked about the completion of the seed schools. It is good for these schools to be completed so that the students can enjoy the services provided by the ministry. However, under USE you will remember that some schools that were picked are private and in specific sub-counties. I wish to report that some of the schools, which were picked to benefit under USE, have not yet fully received all their monies. Those that received only got money for the first term and part of the second term but not all the money has been remitted. I do not know what the ministry thinks about these schools. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity.

5.53
MR HARUUNA SSALABAYA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will talk about UPE, USE and the bonna bagagawale programme. 

I thank His Excellency the President and chairman of the NRM for his leadership, especially in the introduction and implementation of USE. The national issue today is bonna bagagawale – reducing poverty and hunger. The UPE and USE programmes have brought very many future Ugandan leaders on board. 

Allow me to use your Chair and the entire House to advocate for the subject of agriculture to be made compulsory in schools. This subject employs over 80 percent of Uganda’s population. The Ministry of Education and Sports should emphasise agriculture to be practically done in schools, since most of the schools have at least an acre of unused land that they can turn into school gardens, which can be used to teach the principles and practices of agriculture. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, there is an issue of games and sports, and music and drama competitions in schools. Only about 50 children out of the entire school engage in the games. Emphasis should be put on agricultural competitions and exhibitions. Schools should go on visits and discussions to agricultural institutions like Kawanda, Kabanyoro and Kamwenge. Agriculture, unlike games, sports and music, should be made compulsory in the entire school population. 

Schools’ premises are collective centres for the youth at play, for women meetings and clubs, and religious worshippers in churches and mosques. The community can improve the learning of agriculture from their schools and children can have practical gardens at their schools. (Applause) Thank you very much.

5.56
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I am a bit surprised with recommendation No. 3 at the top of page 5. The policy of teachers’ advertisements being school-specific is killing education in rural areas and promoting education in urban areas. If you were to advertise vacancies for some rural schools, for example Namkora Secondary School, nobody from here would apply to go and teach there! The ministry should review this policy and if possible abandon it completely. 

The syllabus is the same everywhere, whether in primary or secondary school, therefore teachers should be recruited and posted where their jobs exist. I have a secondary school in my constituency called St Janan Luwum Memorial College. It is a big school with about 1,000 students and there are over 20 vacancies for teachers, but the government has only posted seven out of the over 20 required. At the same time, the government does not allow parents to be charged a little more money so that the school can recruit other teachers. This is just like the government saying that we want the children to be educated but do not give them education.  

The policy is killing education. The Ministry of Education and Sports should seriously review the Education Policy so that the quality of education being received in Kampala District, for example, is the same as the one in Kitgum District. (Applause) Otherwise, we are creating a very big problem for our future generation. 

Secondly, there are districts in this country that are described as difficult-to-go-to and difficult-to-stay districts. Unless the government goes out of its way and deliberately does something, some districts will remain behind forever. I wonder whether the government would like to consider hardship allowance for teachers who are teaching in difficult-to-stay or difficult-to-go-to districts. 

The same applies to the medical sector; the medical doctors would like to stay in Kampala since there is more money here than anywhere else. Even the teachers would like to stay here because they are able to teach in several schools and get more money. Why don’t we compensate the teachers who are suffering out there in the difficult districts? Why don’t we compensate the medical officers who are in Kotido, Kamwenge and Kisoro who do not get the kind of money that their colleagues with the same qualifications in Kampala are getting? Unless we make deliberate policies to give equal quality education and medical services to our people, the country will head for danger. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.01
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the chairperson of the committee for this report. We all know that Shimoni was one of the best UPE schools, which used to accommodate more than 3,000 children. It had quality education with highly experienced teachers. Shimoni Demonstration School and Shimoni TTC were demolished for a five-star hotel for CHOGM (Laughter) It is so absurd that up to now no structure has been put up in the space that used to accommodate Shimoni. The government should carry out further investigations and explain to this Parliament and Ugandans why such demolitions were carried out when they are not ready for the hotel. 

There are also many hotels that have been constructed or refurbished using taxpayer’s money. I am asking the government to come and explain to this Parliament how the taxpayers will benefit from these hotels after CHOGM -(Interruption)

MS NAMUYANGU: I thank my dear sister for giving way. I am seeking clarification from hon. Nampijja, the woman. How are hotels linked to what we are debating? We are talking about education and health, and I know very well that hotels are under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. So, how are hotels linked to what we are discussing?

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Shimoni Demonstration School was demolished. As a school, Shimoni is under social services. It was demolished to give way for a five-star hotel, which is not there. This is what is worrying us as concerned Ugandans. 

Secondly, I would like to know how far the ministry has reached with the planned loan scheme for poor students who would pay back after getting employment. We know very well that the government has no command of the employment sector. As we speak, so many parastatals were sold off. The youth and fresh graduates that are coming from the universities are just loitering on the streets of Kampala searching for jobs. The ministry should explain that as well.

Thirdly, the government should also come out very clearly to tell this House about the ten-year education sector programme in which it intends to scrap students’ welfare in all government-aided universities. 

I also get perplexed to hear the chairperson recommending the use of DDT for indoor residual spraying. A whole committee to recommend the use of DTT! You should have carried out further investigations before you recommended the use of DDT. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is time, wind up please.

MS NAMPIJJA: Let me finish, Mr Speaker. The committee should know that not every fever is Malaria. I remember in 1949 in Europe a child swallowed DDT and she died instantly. Not every fever is Malaria; 65 percent of mosquitoes do not carry Malaria parasites -(Interruption)

MR ANOKBONGGO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to deceive this august House that DDT kills instantly?

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate?

MS NAMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I am telling you from the research I have carried out; a child died in 1949 –(Laughter) She died instantly after swallowing DDT. We shall not allow this government to subject Ugandans to toxicity related to DDT. Never ever cross to Lubaga South, I am telling you. (Laughter) This DDT is so dangerous; it causes genetic defects like impotence –(Laughter)- and it causes brain damage. Once used, DDT will affect our fish exports. Europeans are so sensitive to DTT and to Ugandan products. If they find out that Ugandan products contain traces of DDT, they will definitely reject our products. So, I do not recommend DDT to be subjected to Ugandans; never, never! 

THE SPEAKER: Given the kind of interest you have displayed in this report, after we have finished the Finance Bill appropriation, we might need to have a full day to debate this matter.

6.08
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to contribute on the area of health. First of all, I want to note with appreciation the improvement in the infrastructure of the health facilities in the area where I come from. However, there are areas of concern that I would wish to bring to the Floor of the House for reconsideration by the relevant committee. 

One of these areas is the chronic shortage of drugs in dispensaries while at the same time we have drugs at the Uganda Medical Stores expiring. The issue here is that medical centres in the field are supposed to be buying these drugs but they do not have enough money. On the other hand, the government store is also buying the same drugs. In this case, it is like borrowing from Peter to pay Paul. Out there people are dying because of lack of drugs and here drugs are expiring. There is need to refer this issue to the committee for rationalisation. 

Secondly, I will use a quotation by medical workers which says “prevention is better than cure”; much of what we have seen in these policy papers concerns curative issues and there is very little on preventive issues. I want to give an example. In rural areas, very many people do not have pit latrines; they go to bushes, and this may cause Dysentery -(Interjection)- I wish you could give me one more minute; thank you. 

There are situations in government where if an issue is of public concern or if neglect is likely to affect other people, use of force becomes necessary. In my view every home should be compelled to have a pit latrine because if they do not have it, the use of the bush will affect the neighbours. So, there is room and relevance in applying minimum force to urge people to have pit latrines.

Finally, I also want to suggest that the only way in which you can retain professionals who are posted up there is to make it known to them that they are serving for a limited amount of time and after that they will have to be withdrawn and go either for upgrading or work with their friends in hospitals. The justification here is that as a professional, you must be in constant touch with others for self-renewal and learning. 

Mr Speaker, these issues, few as they are, are very important and should be referred back to the committee for practical implementation. I thank you. (Applause)

6.13
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): I want to thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also wish to thank the committee for a good report. 

On page 3 of the report the committee rightly observes that UPE suffers from poor quality and there are high pupil drop out rates nationwide. It is true that this government programme is so lacking in standards, teacher training, decent classrooms, scholastic materials, and even in remuneration of teachers. It is my position that government should not have introduced USE without addressing the inadequacies in UPE. It appears as if the USE programme is more of a populist programme than a substantive one.

We welcome the position that Cabinet has taken on Makerere University Business School, that it is not a university but a constituent college of Makerere University. There are still daunting questions; the committee needs to investigate the politics behind Makerere University Business School and Makerere University. A clear question is: what is the fate of students who have enrolled for courses in MUBS that are not accredited by Makerere University? Why should a handful of individuals bring untold suffering and disorganisation to thousands of innocent students in that public facility?

We note that government intervention in terms of sports funding is still very inadequate. We would like to call upon government to triple its sports budget. We would also like to request that these funds are released on time. Very often our national teams – rugby, basketball, football - are invited abroad and they cannot even raise funds for tickets and individuals like Michael Ezra come in to help. I would like to request government to release funds for sports timely. 

I want to comment on the issue of Mulago National Referral Hospital. Mr Speaker, we would like to call upon government to equip our hospital to handle even acute cases. The amount of money that the government spends on seeking medical treatment for the men and women in the National Resistance Movement can be translated to acquiring the essential equipment that Mulago Hospital badly needs –(Interjection)- just take note, you will respond. 

Mr Speaker, I beg that I be given just one more minute. Prominent citizens have died in foreign hospitals. If you are nationalistic, we must investigate how countries like South Africa and even our neighbours in Kenya have been able to build and equip hospitals to which we fly to and from whenever there are acute cases that we cannot handle in Mulago. 

Lastly, during the Vote-on-Account I raised a pertinent matter that the Minister of Finance promised to review and come up with a position on -(Interruption) 

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I stand up on a point of order because hon. Mabikke is misleading this House and this country and giving the impression that the NRM government is interested in NRM members only. The NRM government is here to serve all Ugandans. (Applause) I could quote examples even in this House where government money has been given to individuals, to leaders, even those who do not belong to NRM but are Ugandans. Is he in order to mislead this House and insinuate that NRM is sectarian whereas it caters for all Ugandans? I can give examples.

THE SPEAKER: No. The position is that he lacked those facts. The facts he had may have shown that but now that you have given the facts; that is the position. 

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, could I substantiate on that particular one?

THE SPEAKER: No. She was going to name people who are not NRM and I do not want that. You lacked the facts. It is a fact and I know that there are other people who are not NRM members who have benefited. As a Speaker, I know.

MR MABIKKE: Overall, the National Resistance Movement leaders have benefited from medical treatment abroad more than us. I would not like to get into that. I want to summarise. 

Mr Speaker, during -(Interruption) 

MR SPEAKER: Your time is up, hon. Mabikke. (Laughter) Honourable members as I told you, I have committed myself that after we have finished the appropriation and the Finance Bill, this matter of education and health will come back for a fully-fledged event.

6.21
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to appreciate the committee’s work. The recommendation that the committee carries out a diagnostic study expeditiously to establish causes of poor quality of education in most UPE schools is welcome. 

I want to start by saying that for the first time in the history of education in Uganda, primary schools are receiving money in the hands of school managers. I have not only been a teacher but an inspector of schools in the past. I know that before the policy was changed, monies went to education officers who decided what they wanted to buy, be it chalk, balls or whatever. Now the question we ought to ask ourselves is: how come that when money is now going directly to the hands of the school managers, the quality of education is going down? Where are we to look? 

I want to interest honourable members in doing just a causal survey in our constituencies - what time do the children go to school in rural schools? When do they reach there? In 2005, the Minister of State for Primary Education then, hon. Nyombi Thembo, and I went to Apac District because Apac had the worst performing school in PLE that year. Certainly, what we discovered makes me say that the bigger part of the problem is within the communities or the homes where the children come from. 

We know from records that only 2.5 percent of the children were in school before UPE. Now they have come to about seven percent and yet they are dropping out. Could it be that those very parents who were not sending their children to school are the same people who are allowing the children to drop out before P.7? Maybe as we go and talk in our constituencies, we ought to do mass sensitization in the communities so that they appreciate education.

Mr Speaker, I want to talk about the Education Standards Agency (ESA). Without school inspection, you can be very sure that a lot of ills will take place in schools. I really want to appeal to the Ministry of Education and Sports that this is a very important arm of the ministry and of the education system. They really ought to be facilitated and enabled to do their work effectively -(Interruption)

MR OKECHO: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Speaker, even if there is inspection and so on in schools, most of us who represent the rural constituencies have got a problem with the head teachers. Many of them are not even found in schools when the inspectors go there. I am requesting that the Ministry of Education builds some accommodation for the head teachers of these schools so that at least the inspection in the schools can be effectively done. She is actually referring to failures of the Education Standards Agency to perform its duties because they do not find people there. Thank you very much.

MS LAGADA: Thank you for that my colleague. I want to make one or two comments on health. 

First of all, in the list of the districts that are considered high Malaria areas, I see Apac, Gulu, Amuru, which neighbour Oyam and Lira and yet Oyam is not mentioned for the early spraying of DDT. My district is a high Malaria infection area. The number of people who are dying from Malaria is quite high. Why are people fighting DDT? I would like my district to be Malaria free. I also know that when I was young and we had to deal with cotton, our cotton was sprayed with DDT and we never died. I am here to tell the story that I did not die from the DDT sprayed on cotton. I would rather that we stayed alive than people keep on dying of Malaria.

Mr Speaker, the last concern before I sit down is the question of the National Drug Authority and their work. Amongst the areas where people really abuse drugs in this country are these mushrooming drug shops and clinics. In the villages, people have faith in the word “clinic”. Instead of going to government health centres and hospitals, they go to clinics. The people who are in these clinics are not necessarily qualified. The district health inspectors or the persons who are supposed to inspect the drugs are even bribed by people who are operating illegally and they continue operating. When the patient is about to die, that is when they chase them to go to the main hospital. I think something ought to be done. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in view of my commitment that you go on to revisit this report after we have finished the appropriation and Finance Bill, I want to ask the Minister to respond briefly. 

6.28
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues, the Members of Parliament who have raised issues which require attention by the sector and given recommendations and guidance on where the focus should go.

We have so far had 18 responses and probably I will have to summarise a bit. I would also like to thank the chairperson and members of the committee for the detailed report, which covered quite a lot of the explanations that we gave as a sector in addition to the policy statement, which we circulated. 

I would like, as a general remark, to say that the NRM manifesto provides pledges for areas, which we are going to focus on, and we are focusing on improving the quality of learning and teaching under the UPE programme. We realise there are some identified gaps varying from one area to another. As a pledge in our manifesto, we made it very clear that during this term of office we will continue to make sure that the quality of education at that level is improved. 

I welcome your suggestion that probably we shall devote a day or two, or a whole week to talk about the details of this programme. 

Mr Speaker, UPE was a new initiative and there was a lot to sensitise people about. As we implement it, through the ten years many stakeholders have come on board and many questions have been raised at this level from the general public concerning this programme. People do not usually ask so many questions if they are not interested in supporting a programme. I thank Members for the support and I am sure that we shall continue improving on the programme. 

What I would like to emphasise in my general remarks is what my colleague, the shadow minister, stated here. Let us, Members of Parliament and representatives of the people, get down to the people we represent and sensitise them on issues pertaining to education. This is because education is something that should be the focus of each family. However, today if I took any of my colleagues on a ride on a school day, we would find a lot of irregularities even in the very constituencies where our colleagues come from. Children go late to school while some are in potato gardens and in the market. Indeed, all these are not really supporting education. Education is a fulltime programme, from 8.00 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. 

I would like to make another general observation. The other day I read in the papers that in a certain area, which I will not mention but I am sure my colleagues read that article, they are advocating for schools to be open on only two days because the rest of the time children are helping their families with market produce. So, what does one do? In another part of the country, some days have been set aside for prayers, meaning no classes at all. We know about all this and we are looking at the situation and analysing it to see how to sensitise the people about a full time programme from 8.00 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. I ask my colleagues to sensitise their communities further. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for giving me this opportunity. With all due respect to the minister, I think that it would be good for her to mention those districts so that we mount political pressure on their leaders. This is because for a district to be mentioned in a national newspaper that they were suggesting that children have classes for two days a week, we would want to have such districts on the Hansard and during coffee break to talk to the MPs and advise them on certain strategies. Please, mention the districts so that we can see how to network informally on that aspect. Thank you.

MS KAMYA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is on two brief points. As the minister explains how the UPE and USE programmes are taking place, I wish to get clarification. In Lubaga North there are 517 educational institutions from nursery to post secondary. Out of those, only 17 are government owned and the rest are privately owned. This means that government contributes only 0.034 percent to the education expectations of the people of Lubaga North yet they also pay taxes. 

The clarification I am seeking is whether the Minister is aware that 99 percent of the education in Lubaga North is provided for privately, that UPE and USE are not available and that private education is not an option. In many cases we hear that private education is an option but in this case and in the case of Kampala, it is not. I, therefore, seek clarification from the Minister on what government will do to equitably participate in the situation of Lubaga North in particular and Kampala in general. 

The other clarification I am seeking is on the information I got when an organisation I belong to called Lubaga North Development Association visited constituencies in Western Uganda. We found the people there highly developed, and I really want to congratulate them on the level of development we found. In particular, three associations and SACCOs that we visited told us that in their by-laws they do not allow their members to have their children in UPE schools. I was surprised. They go on to support this to the extent that they have school fees loans and force parents to pay for meals. 

I wondered whether government is giving different information to different people because in the central region, the information that we get is that if a teacher forces a parent to pay for lunch, they will have the President to deal with. In another part of the country, they are forcing parents to pay for lunch. This gives one the impression that there are two different kinds of information going to the people. I would like clarification from the Minister on whether she is aware of this. I am saying this in good faith because I was impressed by the level of development there. Thank you.

MR BIRAHWA MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the Minister. Whereas government has done its best to finance UPE and USE, it seems that the other stakeholders have relegated their responsibility to the centre. I think that is where the problem of quality and dualism in provision of lunch is coming from. A lot of the schools that government is funding have founding bodies as stakeholders, for instance the Catholic Church, the Anglican Church and Muslims. Don’t you think that if you gave more powers to these founding bodies and they owned these schools as you continued financing them, it would give them leverage to control and manage these schools? That is where the problem is. 

There is a difference between universal education and free education. The stakeholders’ responsibility has been relegated. I think that we need to scale down the politics in this programme so that we allow these stakeholders to run the schools. I am an interested party in this sector. 

Furthermore, I want to know if the Minister is comfortable with the suggestion that the Ministry of Education takes the lead in fighting the drop out rate in UPE. I do not think that is correct. It should be the Ministry of Local Government, which has structures down at the sub-county level, to force families, even if we talk of compulsory UPE. 

The last clarification is –(Interruption)- Mr Speaker, I thought these were very important issues. I have not been given a chance to contribute during the budget and I had very important issues in this sector. I thank you so much.

MS AOL OCAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank you, Minister. I have just a small clarification on these stakeholders and founding bodies. I heard a complaint on the ground that a lot of responsibility is being removed from founding bodies and the founding bodies are also called stakeholders. Are founding bodies really stakeholders or they are the owners of the schools? I need this clarification because this is a very contentious issue on the ground. Thank you.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, I appreciate further comments on these issues. Hon. Otto wants us to mention those districts, which are defaulting on the implementation of UPE and USE. We shall look up all this information and in the debate, which you have promised, we shall bring up the information. However, we have made some interventions and we are helping the local leaders in those districts to be able to pick up where they are defaulting.

I would like to inform hon. Kamya that the government policy of liberalisation is very clear. It is a macro-policy. In addition to that, we have a policy on privatisation. With these two macro-policies, the private sector is a partner in the programmes for development of this country. 

In education, as you can see, Members of Parliament have come up with high class modern facilities for education in this country. That is through the macro-policy, where those who are able and willing and have the capacity to render social services can do so. 

If I can also refer to the medical field, I can say here that I had all my children in a private missionary hospital. I think social services in this country have been very well managed by the private sector for those who can afford to do so. The fact that people are free to opt for what they want to do and where they want to spend their money or take their children to school is a very healthy development and it is going to make life very easy in this country.

She informed us about the western region where people are forced - I want to say that people make their by-laws but nobody is forced to take a child here or there. We were very open from the beginning of UPE and USE, in a democratic society like Uganda, to let the parents pick where they want to go. I am sure the forcing of children is not in public schools; it is in the liberalised schools, which I have referred to. I will still need to know the list of public schools where parents are forced because I do not think that is the pattern or the design we have in the implementation of this programme. However, we shall liaise further and we shall go there and see whether these are public schools or private schools.

The hon. Member for Bullisa talked about founding bodies and their responsibilities. He asked if they are stakeholders or founding bodies. I would like to refer him to the 1964 Education Act, which was repealed and replaced by the 1970 Education Act, which is due to be revised by this very Parliament. I have already done the first reading in this House. We shall now see how the management and governance of schools change as we develop the system.

I remember the school I went to was founded by the Catholic Church. I used to pass by one started by Moslems and another one started by Church of Uganda and I would walk to this other one, but I do not know whether we are going back to that. However, schools were integrated and I want to request that when we discuss the Bill, which I have already presented to this House, we cover that part in more detail. 

I think the same question will come up and I am covering it under the same answer for my colleague, the woman Member of Parliament for Gulu. We want to see why those founding bodies started those schools. They had objectives. Have those objectives changed now or are they still the same? We have to look at all these pertinent issues to be able to determine how much responsibility and ownership can continue in changed governance in the country. I think I will stop the general remarks there, but I would like to say that I appreciate the inputs by the colleagues. 

The Minister of Education representing the Opposition lined up quite a number of issues, many of which we have taken note of and I think that is a good way of analysing issues. Let me clarify on the one about cassava being used as chalk in classrooms. During the Seventh Parliament, I was Minister of State for Primary Education and I tried my best to circulate information, which was relevant to UPE. I am sure my colleague, the minister today, will do the same. 

In addition to whatever information and guidelines were given, even up to now we are issuing lists indicating monies received by each district, for the information of the Members. I believe some Members can remember seeing such lists in their pigeon-holes. The idea is to help you to know that money has gone to your district and, therefore, you go and pick it up from the CAO and find out how money is being released to the schools. I will continue giving that list for the information of the members. Normally, there is a column, which indicates monies released only after receiving accountability. When you realise your district has not accounted for that money, you might find cassava in such schools. I will continue to ask Members to monitor when these monies go to schools -(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much. Madam, it is true we get this information in our pigeon-holes, but I think the biggest problem in the ministry is the inspectorate department. I actually do not know whether it exists now. I know very well the ministry may be having standards for schools, but because that department is now at its weakest or it is non-existent, even if we get this information as Members of Parliament when they are not doing their work countrywide, the standards of education will completely collapse. 

In most cases, some of the schools do no expect them to arrive and do the inspection as required. At the time some of us went to school they would just arrive at any time; you would just see officials of the ministry and all the teachers and headmaster quaking. What is happening to this department? It is the only department that would save us from this cassava-turned-into-chalk education? I thank you very much.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much. I am happy to report that in the last financial year we provided a bigger budget line to the Directorate of Inspectorate of Schools of the Ministry of Education because as a sector, we realised that that is our weakest point. I am happy to report that in this financial year we are talking about something above Shs 1 billion. We are soliciting for money from our partners and we expect to see more inspectors in your districts. So when the Education Bill comes, in which I am proposing that we make it a full directorate so that it can get more facilities, kindly support it. 

We are also suggesting that the centre should link up with the inspectorate offices at the district level. This, we hope, will enable us to get a network that is going to provide the very inspection, which you are advising us to strengthen, with vital facilitation. 

However, if I may tell you, in the teaching profession every headmaster is an inspector and there is no school without a headmaster. So what we need to do now is again to look at the management levels in our districts and constituencies and make sure that these local school-based inspectors do their work. The head teacher is the one to see that classes begin at 8.00 a.m., but if he comes in at noon, then he cannot be an effective inspector. The head teacher is the one to see that lessons are planned. He is supposed to see that the assembly is conducted so that by 8.00 a.m. school programmes start and at that time every teacher is ready with his or her lesson plans, books marked and so on. By the time the district inspector comes, the school-based inspector should have done his or her work. In our effort to improve the quality of education at that level, that is where we are focusing. 

If I may take the opportunity to explain, we have what we call performance contracts, which many head teachers are opposing. This is because we are pointing out that they should have done this and that, though many of them think this is interfering with their conditions of service. What they have is a service contract and nobody is bothering them on that; now we are only talking about performance contracts. I think that this is viable. Even for us as Members of Parliament, record our attendance in the attendance book and at the end of each term each Member’s attendance is assessed. So until we come to performance levels at school, we still have a problem. However, I appreciate –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to wind up so that the Minster of Health can come in?

MRS BITAMAZIRE: I am winding up. I appreciate the comments which have been made. I am happy to say that we are putting in more money to see that this is done. 

Another controversial question was about sanitary pads. That is a very interesting issue in relation to girl-child education. However, I will remind Members, especially those who were here in the Seventh Parliament, that the President waived the tax on sanitary pads and it is in his manifesto. Any records of the budget would show that. This was towards that very objective. About the Makerere case, it has been substantiated so well. I want to say that this is a growing project where finally we might benefit. I understand those small packages are now costing only Shs 600, which I think is a big deduction. I call upon the MPs to support it.

Let me say something about the Mountains of the Moon University. I would like to call upon the Members to look at page 5 in our ministerial statement booklet. This page shows that this figure appears under Vote 013, vote line 282101. It is there. So, as Members said, if there is anything fraudulent, the Auditor-General and/or any other person will find that out. Otherwise, it is recorded under donations. 

I want to say that there are many other private universities to which we have donated lorries, buses and so on. I delivered a bus to IUIU, for example. We have donated to Nkumba University and so on. Anyway, the point to note here is that we extend a hand to a private university with a unique programme that moves in the right direction to get the right skills that we need in this country to expand our economy. So, this is already in our vote and I think we shall push it further.

Mr Speaker, I think I can leave it at that right now. Probably before I sit, let me respond to the issue of teacher recruitment. I want to say that we tried to do general recruitment, hon. Okello-Okello, but this did not work because when some teachers got on the payroll they did not move to their respective schools. So we are now trying to do school-based recruitment to see if there are people who would like to serve in certain areas. If that does not work, we are also going to consult you to find out how best to handle this. We agree with you that we need to have that worked on.

About accommodation, I want to say that for primary school teachers, we have already constructed over 1,500 houses. This project continues indefinitely. 

On the issue of Shimoni Demonstration Primary School and Shimoni Teacher Training College, I am happy to report that the teacher training college was relocated to Nyondo -(Laughter)- in eastern Uganda, where we temporarily accommodated it. It did not perish. The demonstration primary school is at Kitante and as I speak we are processing the acquisition of a plan to build it once again.

The questions, which followed that one, should be addressed to other ministers who are responsible for hotels and other facilities. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister of Education. 

6.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, allow me to thank all colleagues who contributed usefully to this debate. Almost every colleague who contributed touched on inadequate resources for the Ministry of Health. This is well appreciated but I think that every year that passes you should observe that there is always an improvement in this ministry’s funding.

On the question of regional referral hospitals being managed from the centre, I want to say that this financial year’s budget is the first budget to have regional referral hospitals being allocated development funds. As such, the regional referral hospitals have not had the capacity. We are, during the course of this financial year, going to assist these hospitals to develop their capacity so that the coming financial year 2008/2009 the development budget we recommend to Ministry of Finance goes directly to the hospitals.  

About the prosecution of people who misappropriated funds, I think the Government White Paper on the Ogola Commission Report is very clear on this and some action is being taken.  

On drug stock-outs, I have always shared with my colleague on the other side that it is really not true that the drug stock-outs in hospitals stand at 73 percent. It is actually the other way round. During 2006, it stood at 27 percent. The attitude – (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I did not get that percentage from the blue. I got it from the ministerial policy Statement and it is on page 8, item (ii) under medicines and health supplies:  “During the financial year 2005/2006 only 27 percent of health facilities sampled did not experience stock-outs of the key medicines”.  Only 27 percent did not experience stock-outs, meaning 73 percent experienced stock-outs. So, what are we talking about?

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, I would also like to request the minister to comment on the recommendation of the committee on page 21 of the report. After commenting on the recruitment policy of health workers, the committee went further to make a recommendation that: “...the ministry considers recentralising the management of staff at districts as experience has shown that decentralisation has not improved health service delivery in many areas.” Mr Minister, you know that this government –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If you are talking about recentralising, is it not a constitutional matter?

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to comment on that. It is a serious issue because you may ask us to adopt this report.

THE SPEAKER: You talk about the ministry but I am wondering whether it is not constitutional because if it is constitutional the recruitment has to be there. So you cannot say it is the ministry. I think we have to say that we revisit the constitutional change.  

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, this is a committee report and I know you are going to ask us –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, it could be a committee report but the committee report might not have addressed the issue as to whether it is constitutional or administrative. The ministry would be able to do it if it was administrative, but should it be constitutional, then we need another step.

MR YIGA: Okay, Mr Speaker. What the minister could assist us with now –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is good because even Prof. Kirya came to me with his commission and he talked about it. However, we cannot just say “the Ministry should change”.  You have to look at the legalities of changing. This is what I am saying.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, maybe since you have promised to give us one more day, we shall look at what the problems are generally. Otherwise, we are blaming decentralisation –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When that promised debate comes, do your research and assist the debate.

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I promise to go and check on this figure and then inform the House. On land disputes between our health facilities and the neighbours, the ministry and actually the government in general, is taking stock of all land belonging to it with a view to resolving this problem.  

I think the debate on DDT was resolved when NEMA and World Health Organisation pronounced themselves on whether we should use DDT for indoor residual spraying in the control of malaria. I do not see why we should resurrect this debate. We are going ahead as the Ministry of Health to implement it come next January.

Hon. Bucyanayandi was concerned about lack of latrines. Really, if we look at our history and how this used to be done, the local governments used to have by-laws and even in this era having by-laws and ordinances are not outlawed. I think what we should do as Members of Parliament is to go out and mobilise those councils out there to ensure that they have these by-laws in place and these by-laws can be enforced. 

It is very disgusting to note that in the 2007 years after Jesus left this world and ascended to the heavens, we still have people who do not have latrines and we still have people who do not know that they should wash their hands with soap before they eat. So, this is health education should not be left to the health sector alone. It should be the responsibility of every leader, including Members of Parliament, to mobilise people on good health -(Interruption) 

MR OCHIENG: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  When we talk about the matters of pit latrines, I am sorry to bother a number of people here, but there are areas where you cannot think of a pit latrine, basing on the factors of nature. In places where some of us live, of course apart from me because I can afford to do something that cannot be easily done, you find that the soil texture is sandy and if you go beyond three feet deep, the sand starts collapsing. The public has failed not because they cannot but because they cannot afford. This thing is basically a preserve of the sanitation area under the Ministry of Health. I think the minister should also help such areas. They should assist them because building a pit latrine in such areas is so expensive that the communities cannot afford.  

Secondly, there is this element of DDT and the reports that mentioned the epidemic-prone areas. In the area where I come from, we have just got a health centre. Many of my people used to get treatment from Kenya. When they were carrying out this assessment, all their records were on the other side of the country. I think they are missing here simply because those records were not available on the Ugandan side. How do we get to inform the ministry that we are worse than some of these areas that they have indicated? Thank you. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Patrick Ochieng for allowing me to give him this information. Encouraging our people to use toilets is part of behavioural nature. You can have toilets constructed but if the people have never appreciated that it is important and in their interest to use toilets, your toilets will remain a white elephant even if they are constructed by the Ministry of Health. 

I want to inform my colleague that during the colonial days, the colonialists undertook to force the people of Busoga region, where the honourable member comes from, to construct pit latrines. As of now, if you went to Busoga, pit latrines are referred to as by-laws, meaning that they were only constructed there because people were forced to do so. They would securely lock the toilets and only avail them for inspection. The toilets would be as clean as they were on construction. (Laughter) So, it is a matter of behavioural change. Our people should really appreciate that it is important and it is for their own sake that they construct pit latrines. I do not think that government will really have the capacity, amidst all these problems that require resources, to go and construct pit latrines in every homestead. I thank you.

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, hon. Wadri, for that very useful information. Nevertheless, I will visit hon. Ochieng’s constituency once again, because I went there to open a very beautiful health centre III. I will visit this place again with our health educators to see what we can do for that area. 

The issue of the national referral hospital -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you trying to give an impression that you can assist him in the request he has made; that you will go to an area in a district or in a sub-county and start constructing toilets for the population? (Laughter)

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Speaker, I did not mean that we are going to construct latrines for the people in his constituency. We are going there for health education and to further appreciate the problem he has raised on the Floor. 

Hon. Mabikke was concerned about Mulago Hospital and equipment. We are moving, as you have seen from the report, but if we get more resources we shall definitely continue to equip the national referral hospital. We are also thinking along the lines of – well, this will be for the future – having a general hospital in each of the five divisions of Kampala so that we can be able to de-congest Mulago Hospital. If we do not do this, then Mulago Hospital will not be a real national referral hospital, which it is supposed to be.

Hon. Lagada, I am very sorry to say that Oyam District is still reflected under Apac District on our map. The map is here with me. 

About the mushrooming drug shops and drug – (Interruption)

MR ODIT: Honourable minister, the data that I wanted to supply to hon. Lagada - unfortunately she has escaped - is that a scientific workshop was organised at the International Conference Centre by the Malaria control scientists and the shocking news was that Apac District leads in the whole world in receiving mosquito bites. By the end of the year, each individual would have received 1.5 million mosquito bites. The only unfortunate thing, which did not satisfy us, was that the older people have now developed a special immunity to Malaria from the bites, but the target now is the little ones. So, we really insisted that Apac District should not have even been compared to any other district. It should have been target No. 1, if this is what the scientists discovered. So, I think that is perfectly in order. 

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much for that intervention. This now reminds me of hon. Ochieng’s question about when we will go to Bugiri to spray DDT. The districts that have been mentioned in this report are where we shall start, but definitely this will be rolled on to other districts. The reasons why we are starting with these districts are very clear: epidemic-prone and high affectivity. 

On the issue of the drug inspectors that are bribed, of course this is corruption and you know that corruption is still here with us. It should be the responsibility of everybody and I think that someone will soon come up here with a law on whistle-blowers. We need a law so that people can come out in the open and really tell us who is doing what. 

I want to thank hon. Byenkya because she does not mind her name being mentioned. She came to me last week and told me about a health worker in Mulago hospital who was supposed to give a DPT vaccine and instead gave a Measles vaccine. So, these are some of the issues that we would want to be informed about. We want to know about the attitudes of health workers and the non-professionalism of some of them so that we can be able to handle them.  

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, I need clarification.

THE SPEAKER: No, that clarification will be sought in another debate.

DR NDUHUURA: That is all I was able to capture. Once again I would like to thank colleagues for their contributions. As you have promised, Mr Speaker, if you give us an opportunity to address more of the issues that will be raised by colleagues, we shall be at hand to do the needful. Thank you.

7.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Omwony Ojwok): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have only three brief but significant points to bring out in form of information and clarification from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The first one is on page 4 of the report, where a gap was identified in the Universal Secondary Education (USE) budget of Shs 8 billon. We do recognise that this gap is there. It was partially done on purpose because of budget pressures. However, we are aware of the fact that this Shs 8 billion will be required in the third quarter of this year. The Ministry of Finance is definitely aware and is making provisions to ensure that in that third quarter, the money is made available. 

On page 6, Busitema University, the committee is correct in recommending that we work to separate the vote of Busitema University, to make it become a vote of its own. The Ministry of Finance agrees with that. However, our difficulty is that in order to fulfil this task, the ministry has to make arrangements to ensure that relevant personnel in the accounts department and the audit department are available, and that other facilities like the safes are provided for, and indeed whether there is an appointed accounting officer and so on.  

The Ministry of Finance has just concluded a verification exercise in relation to the same but it was not possible at this particular moment to provide for that separation because the report is being awaited. Therefore, we can assure you that when the report comes, and in line with the financial arrangements, the Ministry of Finance will make that separation at the earliest opportunity. 

The third issue is on page 10, and this regards the vote for Makerere University Business School. I would like to draw your attention to the fact that when the committee prepared its report, corrigendum No.2 was not yet properly clarified. In that corrigendum, provision is made on page 2 for an adjustment of the budget programme 01, item 211101, to be made upwards by Shs 4,425,421,000. Therefore, we would be coming to a total figure of Shs 2,624,740,421 and not the figure of Shs 2,620,315,000 as indicated. There is also an adjustment in the provision for programme 01 item 224002; there is a reduction by Shs 210,270,000. Therefore, the figure when adjusted appropriately will give us the total figure of Shs 5,378,275,000. Those figures are there –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the chairman gave us those figures. We are aware.

MR OMWONY OJWOK: We have shared this with the chairman and these adjustments will be handled appropriately. That is all, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that we adopt the report of the Social Services Committee on the health and education ministries.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much. Honourable members, according to the Budget Act, this should have been the last day for considering the estimates. Unfortunately, we have not been able to do so. There is one important report on Agriculture, which we have to discuss extensively and there are others, which have not been put in, to enable us complete the debate on a motion to resolve ourselves into a Committee of Supply and then we finish the estimates. 

I estimate that with a week’s extension, we will be able to deal with this matter. For this I am requesting you, honourable members, to allow me to use your time on Monday so that we start business at around 11.00 a.m. so that the report on Agriculture is presented, we have a debate and then we complete the four reports, which we had agreed to debate extensively. If we have time, the others will be laid on the Table. After that we shall continue with limited debate on the motion to resolve ourselves into a Committee of Supply. If we finish this on Tuesday, we will be able to get into the Committee of Supply on Wednesday and Thursday and complete the process to comply with the law, as was expected of us by 31st August. I hope you will bear with me with this simple request. 

There was an announcement which came in. It concerns a subject we have been discussing, and this is Cancer Support Uganda. They will conduct a cancer awareness presentation for all Members of Parliament. It will address various aspects of the disease, including early detection and possible treatment, counselling and preventive approaches among others. This function will be held tomorrow, Friday, 31 August 2007 at 10.00 a.m. in the Parliamentary Conference Hall. You are all requested to attend and benefit from the programme. 

With this we have come to the end of today’s business. I want to wish you a happy weekend. I will see you on Monday at 11.00 a.m. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 7.30 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 03 September 2007 at 11.00 a.m.)


