Wednesday, 30 August 2006

Parliament met at 10.29 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I just want to welcome you and thank you for turning up. I know yesterday we sat a bit late but please, let us put in time at least for the three days remaining so that we can clear this business and then we embark on other business. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: Apparently, the Minister of Finance is not here. So, we can go to another issue.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

THE SPEAKER: I see on the Order Paper that the owners of the questions are not here. Therefore, it does not arise.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO 
DISSOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE REVISED 
REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE 
ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2005-2006 ON THE BUDGETARY 
PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2006-2007.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL 
COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2006-2007.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we can then start with infrastructure, honourable chairperson.

10.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE: (Mr Nathan Byanyima): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I beg to report to this House the report of the committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Ministerial Policy Statements and Budgetary Estimates for the financial year 2006/2007. For the sake of saving time, I do not intend to read all the pages. I assume you could have got these reports about half an hour ago but in the interest of time, I will scan through but I will put my emphasis on the planned activities for this financial year. 

Mr Speaker, in accordance with the guidelines set by the budget committee to ease the budgetary review process, the committee wishes to report as follows:

We are reporting on Vote 16, Ministry of Works and Transport and Vote 12 on Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. On page 3, there are key planned programmes and activities for financial year 2005/2006 for the Ministry of Works and Transport but by then it was the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. So, when you find housing a sub-sector and communication, you know it is because of the last financial year. On page 3, those are planned activities: manual maintenance, mechanised maintenance and all that was done by the Ministry of Works. 

We continue on page 4 with all the planned activities under the Ministry of Works and Transport. Then we come to water and transport sub- sector and we specifically talk of inland water transport. Here, we want to stress the commissioning of Kalangala ship which I think was a very big achievement to the people of Kalangala and the Lake Victoria and we hope the same will be done to Lake Kyoga.

Mr Speaker, on the housing sub-sector, we developed Entebbe State House Complex; complete design and documentation work for the proposed Uganda National Road Authority and Ministry of Works and Transport headquarters; rehabilitate and construct Parliamentary Building, rehabilitate selected Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication upcountry stations and provide technical assistance to government departments and statutory bodies.  

Then we come to the communication sub-sector. This was now relocated into the Committee of Communication and ICT. On this one, we intend to stress the coordination of the implementation of national ICT policy framework and using Uganda Communication Commission to monitor the role or obligation of the three service providers and of course issue the new license under post duopoly regime. On this, the important issue is about communication that should be taken care of by the other Sessional Committee.

Then we come to the amount of money; the amount of funds appropriated by government in the last financial year. It was a total of Ugshs 168,746 billion that was appropriated to the ministry. Then, below, there is supplementary appropriations in the same financial year but on page 6, you find that Ugshs 139,401,726,872 was given to the Ministry of Works and Housing which was extremely good performance on the side of Finance. So, it is up to us as Parliament to see how much work was done with that amount of money since the money that was allocated to the ministry, was almost 94 per cent of the release. 

Mr Speaker, on page 6, sector achievements during the year. I need to go through what was done.  Road sub-sector: On road maintenance, under the routine road maintenance, the ministry maintained 10,538 kilometres, then under mechanised maintenance, it was 8,527 kilometres. We resealed 95 kilometres and 27 kilometres were strengthened. 

I wish to inform my colleagues that most of this work is at the end of this policy statement.  At the end, there are schedules of roads that are supposed to be done. For colleagues to help this committee, it is good to look at the schedules, especially, which are under your district so that at the end of the day, you can be able to inform us on the work that is supposed to be done and the work that is done at the end of the financial year. At the end of the day, we can be able to monitor this sector together.  

Mr Speaker, we continue on page 7, district and urban roads. Those are the number of kilometres that were rehabilitated. Then we go to transport planning. A number of activities were done. They conducted social economic impact assessment of rehabilitated and maintained district roads in eight districts; rehabilitated Lutoboka and Nakiwogo landing sites, national transport data base was updated and monitored the operations of Civil Aviation and Uganda Railways Corporation.  

Transport regulations: 

Those are the number of programmes that were undertaken in the transport regulations; seven Bilateral Air Services Agreements were reviewed, three regional programmes in East Africa, search and review, Civil Aviation safety oversight and drafting of Lake Victoria Water Transport Bill was coordinated; Vehicle axle road control operations carried out in the following stations: Mbarara, Iganga, Busia and Mbale. Two mobile way bridges and two vans were procured. Over 8,000 Public Service vehicles and 150 inland water transport vessels inspected and licensed and conducted road safety awareness campaigns in the country.

For East African Civil Aviation Academy, Soroti, only 13 students enrolled for training and 33 students completed training and they maintained training tools and equipment. Mr speaker, this is one of the institutions that we have in the country that trains pilots and engineers but it is really in a bad state; and you can see the number of students in the school and yet as a country like Uganda should be proud of this institution.  

Mr Speaker, we move on page 9 on housing sub-sector. This is when the housing sub-sector was under the Ministry of Works. Human settlement: commenced; procurement process of consultancy services to review the housing policy; two hundred and thirty two condominium plans were prepared; Rehabilitation of Namuwongo Road and 127 properties were sold under the pool housing scheme.  

Mr Speaker, we go the parastatals. The Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication had mainly five parastatals that is civil aviation - you can see the figures below. The passenger traffic has gone by 12.7 per cent, which to the committee is still very low; domestic passenger traffic declined by 10.6 from 40,000 since 1993. This could have happened as a result of a better road from Kampala to Arua. So, I think people have opted to move on road rather than air because of the inconvenience they go through at the airport and the time it takes from Kampala to the airport and the security checks and the rest of it.  

Mr Speaker, airline activity grew by 8.7 per cent compared to the previous year from 16,703 flights to 18,161 flights. Four operators were attracted to the airport and nine frequencies a week to the route network. Over flights grew by 36.5 per cent.

Uganda Railway Cooperation: Mr Speaker, as a country, we need to attach a lot of importance to railway transport. Uganda being a land locked country, we need to give railway transport priority. As you all know, Uganda Government together with Kenya have had a concession. So, the concession/agreement of URC between Uganda Government and the Rift Valley Railways was signed about two months ago.  

Thirty-three kilometres of critical spots along Kampala-Malaba main railway were repaired. The Northern line from Tororo to Gulu was re-opened but it is not operational. Kampala goodshed upgraded, railway siding to BIDCO oil refinery at Jinja was constructed. Thirty-three wagons converted from covert to open containers or wagons.  

Mr Speaker, the Uganda Communication Commission is no longer in this particular sector; you can see what they did.  The same applies to Uganda Posts Limited. I wish to move to the on-going activities and programmes for the last financial year. 

The list of the roads are there for you to see and I want you to take note of the roads on page 11. You will see a number of roads deferred to financial year 2006/2007. As a committee, we found that on the money that had been voted by this Parliament, the Ministry of Works got almost 94 per cent, but there are a number of roads that have been deferred to this financial year. The list is quite a long one both on page 11 and page 12.  

Mr Speaker, I intend to concentrate on the planned proposed activities and programmes for this financial year.  

Road sub-sector:

Under the routine maintenance, the ministry intends to carry out the following activities: 10,569 kilometres for manual maintenance and 9,491 kilometres for mechanised maintenance. Under periodic maintenance, the ministry intends to carry out the following activities- the kilometres are there for you to see- Under the national road network monitoring, the ministry intends to carryout the following activities: 10,569 kilometres for road condition survey, the same number for traffic counts and 2,654 kilometres for road roughness surveys.  

Under this road survey, the committee is of the view that in order to add on the number of kilometres on the national grid, the roads leading to Members’ constituencies and to the boarders with other countries should take a priority and it should be this House to ensure that more roads at least each county or each constituency has a road on the national network that leads to the constituency so that at the end of the day it is easy to access the constituencies or county headquarters.  

Under the road development vision, the ministry intends to work on the following road projects: complete upgrading Kafu-Masindi Road to bitumen standard, carry out phase two of Kampala urban interface of trunk roads that is Clock Tower, Shoprite, Entebbe Road, Jinja Road and Wampewo Avenue round about. The work is really going on.  

Complete feasibility study of upgrading Muyemba–Namalu Road that is to Moroto; complete feasibility study for upgrading Masaka – Bukakata Road to bitumen standard, complete a detailed design for four landing sites on Lake Kyoga and Lake Victoria, improve ferry services on Kalolo and Nganda ferry landing sites, strengthening of Kampala-Entebbe Road; regravel Kapchorwa-Suam Road; regravel Katine - Kaberamaido and Dokolo-Ochero Road spots using labour based; regravel Tororo-Busia-Majanji Road (use labour based).  

Under the bridges maintenance division, the ministry intends to carry out the following activities: Design five bridges namely, Ndunguto, Girik, Birara and Kinyamatembe; complete design and tender documents for 22 bridges - the details are in the policy statement; construct bridges in Rugazi in Mbarara, Kyabahaya in Bushenyi, Nkusi in Hoima, Rushango in Kamwenge, Pawor-Lobedegi in Pamitu and then we have 21 bridges and drainage structures in North Western Uganda. This is as a result of the loan this Parliament approved to have 21 bridges done in North Western Uganda.

The ministry also intends to rehabilitate the following bridges: Nchwera Bridge on Katunguru-Ishaka Road, Kaabong Bridge on Kaabong-Kapedo Road, Ekyambu Bridge on Ibanda-Kabaguma Road. The ministry is to maintain 12 bridges and drainage structures.  

Under road agency formation unit that is RFU, the following are planned activities for the financial year: The list is quite a long one you can look at it. But I would want to make a comment about Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana-Kyanika Road which is 98 kilometres. As a committee, we were perturbed because the Seventh Parliament approved to the tune of about Ugshs 71 billion to tarmac that road from ADB. But we were told that the figures that were brought in by the – of course was requested basing on the report they had from the consultants. 

So, the government secured a loan to the tune of Ugshs 71 billion but only to get three bidders who bidded for this road quoting more than twice as much as the figure of Ugshs 71 billion. We were told of all the problems that they have met as a ministry, but for us as a committee and Parliament, we request this government to expeditiously ensure that this roadwork starts at the earliest opportune time.

Another concern is about Soroti-Lira Road: These two are important roads that would make slightly the lives of the people in the North and South fairly accessible. These are two roads that actually feature prominently in this policy statement and we hope all of us will pattern together to ensure that these roads are done at the earliest opportunity.

Mr Speaker, I go on page 16, under the district urban and community access road, the ministry intends to carry out the following planned activities- they are quite many, you can read for yourselves. Page 17, transport sub-sector, the same issues are raised but I can say the most important one here is to implement 10 per cent of East African trade and transport facilitation project.  This is where the three countries are partnering together to ensure that the roads passing through the region are all done; and the Kisoro one is one of them; Soroti is one of them plus Kampala-Masaka-Mbarara and Katuna Road. So, those are important roads that need to have focus in this financial year.

Then, we have preparation of Government of Uganda position paper for national transport master plan and greater Kampala. This plan will enable the government to look at Kampala as a town not as a suburb because when you look at the boda–bodas, the matatus, and the buses in town, we have a long way to go. So, this plan should be available so that at least government can undertake a big project of this magnitude.

Mr Speaker, transport regulation; we need to review and conclude Bilateral Air Services Agreements, coordinate implementation of international and regional progammes, especially, East Africa and COMESA; coordinate air transport facilitation activities and supervise performance of Civil Aviation. On this, we need to be together because as Parliament, we do not have enough funds to monitor most of these activities. But I think each Member of Parliament looking at the roads and most of the programmes mentioned here, we should be able to continue. 

Mr Speaker, yesterday as you rightly said, the sessional committees will continue running. So, the moment we continue going through these projects and programmes, we shall be able to move a step forward.

Mr Speaker, on transport licensing board, this board is supposed to inspect and license public service vehicles in the country, inspect and license inland transport vessels, grant licenses to omni bus operators, monitor bus operators, update data bank for public service vehicles and inland water transport, conduct board meetings and operationalise regional licensing offices. 

Transport Licensing Board (TLB) is supposed to be operating in our regions, but most of the vehicles and even boats on our lakes are not licensed because we have not fully established the regional offices in our country.

National road safety council:

Mr Speaker, this is a body under this ministry that is supposed to carry out campaign awareness for road safety. But as we talk, no work has been done sufficiently because of lack of funds and you can see the roles they are supposed to play.  

East African Civil Aviation Academy, Soroti
The enrollment as I said earlier is very low and we hope that while we are preparing for CHOGM, we would look at Soroti as one of the areas to invest in to help this government.

Mr Speaker, I want to state some few observations the committee made while meeting with the minister and the technical staff of the ministry of works and transport. The ministry is new in the structure following location of sub-sectors of Housing and Communication to the new ministries of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and Information, Communication and Technology respectively. The two ministries of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and Works and Transport are uncertain of their mandates in regard to the building function. 

Having been a chairperson of this committee before, we used to maintain that housing sub-sector was marginalised in the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication. So, we felt relief that housing had moved to the home of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, but to our surprise, among the schedule of work that the Ministry of Works has that element of housing. So, we found it extremely unfair to again have part of housing under the Ministry of Works and Transport, then another part in the other Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

The 93 per cent budget release made for last financial year is reasonable enough for the Ministry of Works to deliver. However, many projects have been deferred. The ministry has a lot of planned activities for this financial year. The committee expresses fears of not delivering the planned activities. 

Mr Speaker, some areas and districts in the country are economically viable, but in accessible, landlocked, with no outlets to boost economic relations with neighbouring districts. This should be a priority because if we are to go for “bona bagaggawale”, we must open up all the districts, all the counties and all sub-counties so that our people can be able to market their produce.  

The ministry is to embark on projects in and around Kampala in preparation for the CHOGM. However, there exists imbalances in budgetary allocations to regions to facelift the existing and develop the new infrastructure. On this one, we would want that this country should take advantage, while we are using our own funds. But this preparation for CHOGM would help this country to cure the ills that have been in this country, especially in the town.  

Mr Speaker, many ongoing projects exist in bad terrains, yet contracts are awarded to amateur contractors thereby delivering low standard outputs. Local contractor capacity to handle such projects is still very low. The good example is Kibuye-Busega and then Nakulabye on the Hoima Road by Zimwe Company where he has disappointed all Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, impact of utility service provided on roads has greatly hampered their lifespan. After the road has been well done, you see the other water utility service, the power and the telephone digging our roads. So, we are saying that before a road is done, there must be a provision for those utility services to avoid breaking into the roads. Works on some road projects have stalled for periods. In other cases slow pace of works have been noted.  

Mr Speaker, weigh bridges have been noted to be non-functional and yet in order to preserve our roads, we must restrain these big trucks from being overloaded, especially when we are talking of the lorries coming from Mombasa which carry more than the actual axle load. But we see most of the weigh bridges like in Mbarara, Iganga and Busia, vehicles pass but we do not see any action being taken so that most of the drivers can be restrained from carrying overweight.

Some of the presidential pledges made in respect of physical infrastructures are not reflected anywhere in the ministerial policy statement.  

Recommendations:

The building function should not be separated from the housing function; both should be housed in one ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.  

The ministry should commit itself on projects, which are easily achievable rather than planning for so many and spreading thinly.  

Planned activities for this financial year should ideally match the ministry’s capacity to handle.  

Renovate and develop new road network that will help link economically viable areas to markets.  

Existing infrastructure such as Soroti, Gulu and Kasese airfields should be face lifted to provide aviation services to CHOGM delegates. 

Facilities such as control towers, run-away lights and mats, among others, should be installed.  Because we have heard that some of these visitors’ planes will be landing in Nairobi and Mwanza. So, we feel that we should take advantage of this opportunity and improve on Soroti, Kasese and Gulu.

Contracts for roads should be awarded to competent contractors with proven experience in road construction and maintenance. The ministry should endeavour to uplift local contractor capacity so as to enhance service delivery. The Engineers Registration Board should be mandated to vet and ensure contract capacity.  

Mr Speaker, the ministry should acquire land titles for all land reserves to avoid encroachment and compensation related costs and expenses.  

Government should come up with strategic master plan to free or decongest the city from boda-boda and omni-bus operators. Such operators should be relocated to business terminals outside the city or in the suburb or periphery areas. 

The ministry should work out policy objectives and programmes to help districts to manage their road equipment.

Regional licensing boards should be established to help in collecting revenue because most of the revenue is uncollected in upcountry stations.  

Health services are presently overstrained. Government should work out possibilities of introducing new ones as well as boosting existing services. This, I mean like one of Kayunga, Amoluta, Amuru, Rhino Camp, Kamuli, Bugondo, Kumi, Magoro, Rwampanga and Namasale.

Landing sites on all water bodies should be renovated and open to enable access to economically viable islands, especially like Bokasa landing sites; it is inaccessible although we have got a new ship for Kalangala.

Mr Speaker, I move to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, which is a new ministry in the cabinet structure and the committee only reports on the programmes and activities of Lands and Housing sub-sectors as earlier planned in their former parent ministries. So, the list is on page 21.   Housing sub-sector should have been in either sector of Housing or Works, Housing and Communications. This is the work they were supposed to have done.

Uganda Land Commission is supposed to pay rates for three towns and municipal councils; conduct verification of government property in 15 districts; purchase land and compensation for ranches in Kabale, Mbarara, Kasese, which come to 16 hectares; hold eight commission board meetings. Four ranches totalling up to 2,773 hectares were compensated and 2,541 hectares of land were purchased.

The Land Commission was set up as the result of the Land Act to address the historical imbalances especially where people had chunks of land and they were not using them. But it is unfortunate that this commission is not facilitated; they do not have the money to do the work.

Below are the achievements of the sector during the last financial year. You can see all of them on page 23, 24 and also pending on-going activities and programmes for the last financial year.

So let us go to page 25 on new emerging policies and programmes: Urban development policy, national housing policy and the construction and maintenance policy for government buildings.  

Mr Speaker, the planned proposed activities and programmes for this financial year: Land Sub-sector. They are supposed to develop land policy; develop national land use policy; review and revise land related laws; recruit two technical staff in each of the 28 districts; orientation and training of new staff; carry out technical support in districts affected by restructuring; renovation of district land offices; provision of technical support to district land boards and training of district land boards; facilitate the appointment of new district land tribunal board members, especially in the new districts; procurement of specialised equipment for district land offices; capacity building for LC courts to handle land matters; recruit land tribunal staff; district land tribunals to handle land cases; monitor and evaluate decentralised land services; development of land information system; and many others.

Housing Sub-sector:

Draft the National Housing Policy and draft the Construction and Maintenance Policy for government buildings.

Urban Development Sub-sector:

You can see the mandate they have; the Uganda Land Commission, then the amount of funds requested by the sector totalling up to about Ugshs 49 billion, which will be – of course the exact figures will come into the Appropriation Bill.

Mr Speaker, I wish to dwell on Uganda Land Commission. While you can see those figures, Uganda Land Commission had requested for over two billion shillings in order for the figure to match with the increasing demand of people in Kibaale who are being compensated, especially the absentee landlords; and in Kasese, Ankole, Bunyoro and the Northern parts of the country. But this money as shown there cannot do for even one district, yet the commission was meant to cure the historical imbalances whereby people had big tracts of land and they should be paid so that they can lose interest and our peasants, the “bibanja” owners, can remain on the land.  

Observations:

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is a new ministry created in this financial year. It is to assume over activities and programmes of the housing and lands sub-sectors from the former ministries of Works, Housing and Communication and Water, Lands and Environment.  

The building function is housed with the Ministry of Works and Transport and this is feared to weaken the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.  Mr Speaker, I need to stress this one once more. The committee is of the view that the sub-sector of housing should entirely go under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.  

There seems to be double roles played by the Ministry of Works and Transport in regard to the housing and building functions. The committee expresses fears of double budgeting. Mr Speaker, Ugshs 800 million given by Housing Finance Company of Uganda Limited to aid the sale of pool houses in sensitising the public on condominium law is still being held by the Ministry of Finance and paralysing the work of the new ministry. The release of Ugshs 800 million would help Government of Uganda earn Uganda Ugshs 30 billion from the sale proceeds of the pool houses.
  
No resources have been budgeted for the urban development sector. Mr Speaker, the Minister of Urban Development has nothing in his office because he has no vote. Although it was created after the budget, something should be done or corrigenda should have been done to cater for this particular minister of state.
  
Uganda Land Commission is not adequately funded to carry out its duties. Most districts are not fully prepared to handle land matters. The border between Congo and Rwanda with Uganda is not yet surveyed. 

Some presidential lodges are in inhabitable conditions, especially the one of Luweero.  

District land records in the land registry have continued to remain with the ministry. There is need to review the Town and Country Planning Act, 1964. The land fund is not budgeted for, and of course the work they have is enormous. There is need to budget for renovation and face-lift of palaces of other traditional leaders because we have only one of Busoga in this policy statement.  

County and sub-county headquarters are in dilapidated conditions. Land boards and tribunals are non-existent in some districts. Posts of land officers were scrapped off in some districts. There is continued allocation of land to investors through Uganda Land Commission, district land offices and Uganda Investment Authority. The three do not help each other; the left hand does not know what the right hand is doing. Systematic demarcation of land has not involved some politicians.  

Government does not possess land titles for all road reserves.  Mr Speaker, on road reserves, I need to make it very clear that this government has not cared, especially this sector, to secure land titles for road reserves. Whenever a road is going to be done, we must pay handsomely to compensate the people. An example is Entebbe Road where it was compensated, but as we talk now, the buildings that were condemned, some highly placed people here have put up even more floors and they are almost in the middle of the road. The town and country planning board is not in place.

There are no trained physical planners in districts and town councils to guide planned development.

Recommendations:

Mr Speaker, the ministry’s budgetary proposals should be financed 100 per cent by government to enable it embark on its vision and mission objectives. Any other supplementary budgetary proposals should likewise be financed. We all know that land is a real property, and especially when you look at the wrangles in this country, they all zero on land. If we do not give land – we should look at Ministry of Lands as any other good ministry because all ministries should be equal.  But Lands has been marginalised and they have nothing to run that function.
  
The building function currently housed in Ministry of Works and Transport be transferred to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.  

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should release Ugshs 800 million as soon as possible to enable the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development dispose of the pool houses and conduct a sensitisation on the condominium law. The Uganda Land Commission must be adequately funded to carry out its duties. The ministry should budget to enhance district capacity to handle land related matters.  

All presidential lodges should be renovated to reasonable and habitable standards to match the honour and respect for His Excellency, the President.

A decentralised system of land record keeping be established to equip districts with land information. The centre should only remain with supervisory and monitory roles.  

Mr Speaker, a repeal Bill in respect of the Town and Country Planning Act, 1964 should be drafted by the government. This will help planning of cities, towns and municipalities to be done in accordance with modern development trends.  Government should have provision for the land fund to complete the compensation exercise in Kibaale, Kasese, Ankole and elsewhere in the country. 

Special budgetary provisions be made to renovate palaces of other traditional leaders to match their honour and respect in society.

Government should endeavour to acquire all land titles for road reserves in order to avoid their encroachment and resultant compensation. Land boards and tribunals be established and fully equipped to ease settling of land related matters. Districts be advised to recruit physical town planners to guide plan development.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I wish to request this august House to adopt this report and approve the ministerial budgetary estimates for this financial year, which has the following tunes:

Vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport, it is Ugshs 446,405,191,000, Vote 012, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is Ugshs 48,809,947,000, Land Commission, which has just recently got a vote on its own is Ugshs 965,112,000.

Mr Speaker, this particular vote as I said earlier has required over Ugshs 2 billion but they were given Ugshs 900 million and yet already people in Kibaale have been attacking the Minister of Housing and Urban Development.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report and thank everybody for listening to me. I thank you. 

11.15
THE SHADOW MINISTER, WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Mr Speaker and honourable members, we in the opposition would like to thank the government and particularly the Minister of Works and Transport for a well structured and thought out policy statement for this financial year. 

Permit me on behalf of the opposition also to thank our development partners who have played a significant role in financing infrastructure development in Uganda. I would like to mention IDA, EU, and ADB, DANIDA, JIKA, KFW, DFID, BADEA and NDF, those are abbreviations you will find the details in my report.

In the year 2005/2006 international donors contributed about 67.6 per cent of funds towards the ministry’s development expenditure; this year’s policy statement indicates a higher percentage.  

I will now go to the state of Uganda’s transport infrastructure. Analysis of the current state of transport in Uganda suggests that road transport is the dominant mode of transportation carrying over 90 per cent of passengers on freight as well as providing the only means of access to rural areas. 

Road Infrastructure:

The government has made substantial investments in road transport. During the period 2002/2003 to 2004/2005, total expenditure on national road improvements and developments amounted to $365.8 million. Nevertheless, the road network remains inadequate given that the growth of traffic exceeds the growth of roads and that insufficient maintenance is leading to deterioration of the state of existing roads. 

With respect to national roads, for example, 20 per cent is rated as good, 62 per cent as fair and 18 per cent as poor or bad. The government inadequate regulator capacity at both national and local levels are also contributing to the poor state of the road network. For example, according to a 1998 study insufficient enforcement of axial roads and traffic flow regulations allowed about 40 per cent of heavy vehicles to travel with roads exceeding the permitted limit. This has not greatly changed for the better.  

Rail infrastructure:

The country’s railway network, which originally had 1,241 kilometres long is now in abject poor condition, only about half of the system is in operational condition and about one sixth is used at the moment. The trucks locomotives and other equipment are old and in poor condition resulting in falling cargo voyage. The consequences of these are recorded in my statement; I will not read those in detail. 

The opposition observes that no meaningful growth of the economy can be realised without an efficient and cost friendly railway system. This is especially true for a landlocked country Uganda most of whose exports currently go by road.  Besides this, some of the traffic needs to be taken off the roads as this will relieve the road infrastructure of the high cargo bearing traffic applying the roads, which contributes to increased road maintenance costs. 

Although, the Ministry of Works and Transport has reported the concession of Uganda Railways Corporation, it is highly doubted by the opposition that the resultant commercialisation of railway services will not lead to services being suspended on the Western, Northern and Busoga lines. 

The opposition wishes to strongly recommend that government offers limited subsidies to ensure that the less financially attractive lines start offering services to the population. It should also urgently consider linking the Northern part of the country to the Southern Sudan capital of Juba, which is a priority of the opposition.  

Water transport infrastructure:

Inland water transport in Uganda is characterised by absolute and insecure vessels, poor landing facilities and incoherent oversights. With the exception of the construction of the five million dollar ship, the LV Kalangala, to operate on Lake Victoria between the Kalangala islands and Port bell and a few ferries for which the opposition congratulates government, inland water transport in Uganda is disfunctional. There is, therefore, a need for urgent measures to be taken and the opposition wishes to evoke the ministry to immediately implement the following four recommendations:

•	Procure insurance cover for LV Kalangala; it is reported in the policy statement that this vessel is moving in water without insurance cover and our past experience will speak for itself. In the event that this ship sinks, we shall be in a terrible problem.

•	Carry out comprehensive repair of the lake landing site infrastructures.

•	Provide more ferries, for example, Kayuga/Amorata route, Amuru Rhino Camp, Kamuli/Mulondo, Kumi/Kokoliyo, Rwampanga/Nasale/Bugongo. 

•	Improve enforcement of safety regulations.

Air transport:

I have a small detail, which I am not going to read, but I would like to mention that despite the strong growth of the sector, the airline sector suffers from the absence of a strong domestic airline, which would raise traffic volumes and help to make Entebbe Airport a major regional herb. Other challenges include the heavy burden of maintaining non-commercial services at regional airports and under funding of the Civil Aviation Authority.

The opposition encourages the Government of Uganda to support public private partnership to expedite the registration of a flag carrier for Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, do you intend to read this report – our understanding was that you are going to make a summary. But it seems now you are reading the report.

MR AMURIAT: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I would like to talk about the cost of transportation. Because of the very high prices of fuel, the cost of transport in the region is probably the highest. Studies carried out of 25 countries in Africa indicate that our prices are the 23rd highest in the world. So, you can see where we are coming from. From all observations, so far, it is only fair to describe the transport sector performance in Uganda as inadequate and requiring great attention from all stakeholders.

Permit me now, Sir, to raise a few policy issues: Cost effectiveness of road maintenance and construction. We in the opposition feel- and this is backed by statistics- that the cost of road construction in Uganda is the highest in the region. I will just give you an example and these are figures that are drawn both from Government of Uganda and the Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU). 

The Kabale/Kisoro/Bunagana/Kyanika Road, for example, is to be constructed at an astronomical $811,000 per kilometre. And yet, when you look at a road that is almost similarly complex, the Arusha/Nambanga Earth River Road, the cost of construction was $437,684. It is upon the House to see whether we are getting value for money.

Mr Speaker, the opposition is quite disturbed by this and we note that although there are strategies to mitigate these soaring costs, there still exist problems and we are worried in the opposition that Kabale/Kisoro/Bunagana/Kyanika Road is not being done because of this very reason. This scenario has manifested itself on many other roads. 

We in the opposition wish to propose the following: 

That a tax waiver on imported road construction material and equipment be made until such a time that the road network reaches a 60 per cent paved roads on national road network threshold; a tax waiver on all petroleum products used in road construction and maintenance; more project based insurance and technical specifications be well defined in tender documents. 

Our second proposal in policy change is something to do with the confusion that has existed between the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. And we have a long analysis of this situation and it is also backed by documents that I would be bringing to the House for scrutiny of Members.

But we in the opposition reject attempts to retain any components of the housing sector in the Ministry of Works and Transport without significantly changing the functions and formation of the ministry. 

Besides, we note that historically the housing department has always been housed in the ministry in charge of Housing. This was the case until 1998 when things changed. It is also known from the previous five ministerial policy statements and I wish the House to note this that the housing directorate under the Ministry of Works and Transport was starved financially and almost rendered disfunctional. It is only wise to let the Housing Ministry go in totality to the ministry in charge of housing because the components of this sector, which is human settlement and buildings are closely related and compliment each other. 

The opposition is therefore commanded by strong reasons to request this august House to reject the ministry’s proposal for funding the housing sector under it. These funds should instead be put to use by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to which all the personnel managing the housing sector should be moved by the Ministry of Public Service.

We also wish to propose that the Ministry of Works and Transport be renamed Ministry of Transport in order to clearly define its role and clarify ambiguities caused to this firm. 

On the road reserves, the chairman of the committee has ably noted, but we in the opposition view that there are serious failures on the part of government in as far as ensuring the observance of road reserves. We accordingly propose the following remedial measures:

Funds be secured to mark out and document all the national roads and railways inclusive of reserves; notice be given to property owners who could have encroached on the road reserves for them to abolish properties and leave the sites within six months; forceful demolition at owners expense be effected for non-compliant landlords; road construction equipment policy issue. 

We know that until recently, the government through the ministry has adopted a very clear policy on road equipment. Have a set of road equipment given to every district. With the soaring number of districts, the opposition gets worried and we believe there needs to be a switch in the policy on road equipment to districts.
 
This year, Mr Speaker, only Ugshs 1 billion is being put aside for road equipment to districts to be procured. This can only procure two pieces of grader equipment. We in the opposition, therefore, ask government to avoid ambiguities that heighten speculation at local levels, the result of which is stifling infrastructure development. Given the high cost of road equipment, we wish to advance a change in policy on equipment to encourage sharing of road equipment between districts.

Kampala City Council policy issue:

We all appreciate the way Kampala City Council is struggling with its road network; the construction and maintenance of road network. And because of this, we find that there is congestion and almost permanent potholes on the city network. To ensure long-term pro-active development and maintenance of roads in KCC, we in the opposition propose a major policy shift so that the central government takes over development and maintenance of major or key city roads. In order to reduce congestion in the city, a policy of restricted entry into the city should be explored and peripheral bus and taxi parks be developed as a matter of urgency.

Policy Issue 6: Development of alternate international airports.

We only have one international airport in Uganda and this causes problems when matters related to emergency landing - you know, if there is a problem with Entebbe, our aircrafts have to fly to Nairobi or to Dar-es-salaam. We believe that this needs to change and therefore, we in the opposition urge government to upgrade the following airfields to international standards:
Kasese Airfield for which we hail and support government position to cater for cargo links with DRC and South Africa; Gulu Airport to link Uganda with the Sudan, North and West Africa; Soroti Airfield to link the country to Kenya, Ethiopia and the Middle East. 

We also reject attempts by government to prioritise development of an international airport elsewhere when the above ready to upgrade airfields and many existing airdromes continue to be neglected.

Transport regulation:

We believe there is reluctance by the ministry to strengthen this department. The picture offered at the moment is very grim and this particular department we have stated in our statement needs to be strengthened. The opposition, therefore, wishes to propose the following policy considerations:

The government immediately fills up all the vacancies in the Ministry’s transport regulation department. Actually the transport regulation department is completely vacant according to the policy statement of this year.

The Government of Uganda deliberately retains and re-fences some percentage of funds of licensing fees in order to boost the road maintenance and safety function of roads.

The Government of Uganda strengthens the national roads safety council and a transport licensing board by merging them under a proposed road transport regulatory authority. This is what we propose. It needs to be established immediately and adequately funded. 

We would like to see the liberalisation of sale of speed governors. At the moment, there is a monopoly and motorists are really crying. These speed governors are expensive and something needs to be done by government.

On CHOGM, this is the eighth issue; we all know CHOGM is with us next year, but we feel we are not adequately prepared to host the heads of state and governments from the Commonwealth countries. We observe that there is an absence of a weather radar system in Entebbe International Airport, which causes ease in as far as navigation in poor weather is concerned. So, we implore government to provide with immediate effect this facility.

Negotiations that have taken place between the Government of Uganda and the Kenya and Tanzania Government for the use of Nairobi and Mwanza as parking and alternative landing airports disturbs us. We in the opposition would like to propose that Jinja and Soroti airfields facilities be uplifted to be able to handle excess air traffic. The explanation given by the ministry at the moment is that in Soroti, there is no night lighting. I think this is flimsy and the government needs to size up and immediately attend to these cases.

In conclusion, although the ministry is well intentioned and we in the opposition believe that its vision and mission statements are adequate, the ministry is still a very long way away from achieving either of the two. It is understood that the government views improved transport services as a central part of its strategy for creating a more favourable environment for private sector development. 

In the mid term however, Ministry of Works and Transport needs to concentrate on the big backlog of work requiring their agenda attention. This was spelt out in a statement made by our Minister of Finance on the Floor of the House. 

Mr Speaker, honourable members, I pray that you consider our proposed amendment on Vote 016, arising from the proposed transfer of the Housing sub-sector in its entirety to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

We also in the opposition would like to urge government to restore its commitment of growth on investment in the sector that used to stand at two million dollars per year. This has apparently been removed for unexplained reasons. We think this should be restored to be able to ensure that we do adequate work on our network. I thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members for this opportunity and your kind attention. I beg to move. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

11.38
THE SHADOW MINISTER, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Michael Mabikke): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for according me the opportunity to present a very short statement in response to a policy statement of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

The House is aware that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is a new ministry in the cabinet structure and in the financial year 2005/06, the housing sector was planned for and budgeted under the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication, while the urban inspectorate had its plans and budgets under the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. 

I want to thank the minister responsible for presenting this policy statement. But, unfortunately, I want to note that the policies contained therein cannot move the country in the direction most Ugandans aspire for. What Ugandans want is decent housing for all and planned and orderly urban development. 

It must be observed, therefore, from the onset that the mission and vision of the ministry need to be reviewed to reflect the growing challenges of poor housing and disorderly urban development throughout the country. And besides, the present ministry mission, vision and mandate are unfortunately broader than its budget allocations. 

I want to state that Ugandans live in two worlds; one world is of the affluent who are just a handful, live in an ultra modern homesteads with all provisions and facilities that you find in Europe and America. The other world forms the bulk of our population and these are the Ugandans that the National Census and Housing report of 2005 clearly reflected. Ninety two per cent homes in are Uganda without electricity, 85 per cent homes are using paraffin candles, 75 per cent living on earth floors and over 40 per cent with no access to safe drinking water, lacking in drainage and sanitation and most times having no waste disposal facilities like toilets. 

It is this world that we in the opposition want to lift out of these squalid living conditions. Our response raises the following six issues that require urgent attention and I will go through them very briefly. 

The focus mandate functions and structure of the ministry. The policy focus of the ministry does not promote a national strategy of modern housing and hygienic homestead development and even the urban development sub-sector lacks in providing a strategy on the construction of planned and orderly residential and commercial facilities.  

The mandate functions and structure of the new reorganised ministry is still uncertain as has been mentioned already and are still fused with those of the Ministry of Works and Transport, as it has been clearly pointed out by the chairman. Such a situation weakens the new ministry and also presents to us a problem of double budgeting. 

I want to give an example that the responsibility for the building component and even the maintenance of public buildings like Parliament, State House, state lodges still lie with the Ministry of Works and Transport. But being a new ministry, we recommend that we allow this ministry one financial year to put their departments in order and with hope that the next policy statement will provide a concrete national strategy on decent housing for all Ugandans and concrete steps for orderly urban development. 

Mr Speaker, we recommend that the building function and the maintenance of public buildings like Parliament, State House, state lodges and other government stadium be transferred from the Ministry of Works and Transports to the new Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

The committee appointed by the President to advise on the streamlining of the functions and structure of the new Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development must hasten its report at least by November this year.

Further more, that this ministry be facilitated to expedite the formulation of the construction and maintenance policy of government buildings.

Mr Speaker, the second issue we would like to raise is the issue of effective funding for the urban planning sub-sector. It is shocking to learn that no resources have been budgeted for the urban development sub-sector yet this is envisaged to grow into a full department with important roles such as the formulation of the urban development policy. 

We recommend that a vote for urban development sub-sector be established and that the ministry’s supplementary budget proposal if any to this effect be funded to enable it embark on its vision and mission objectives.

The third issue is that of standard enforcement. We have noted that the ministry mechanism for regulation, inspection, compliance and sanction has totally been eroded. It is also worth noting that there are no linkages between the ministry and urban authorities in the country in the enforcement of orderly and sustainable urban development and it is for this reason that the country is faced with fatal calamities such as collapsing buildings, buildings in the capital city without parking and other buildings in road reserves. 

We recommend strongly that the ministry sets up a stringent standards enforcement regime to regulate housing and urban development challenges and work hand in hand with all urban authorities in monitoring compliance.  

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the role of the private sector, we observe that most of the major projects in housing and urban development sub-sectors are privately initiated. Private capital in housing and urban development has however created untouchable developers insensitive to standards and regulations. Whereas private initiatives are welcome, they must be firmly regulated to ensure that they conform to national standards if you are to avoid such incidents like collapsing buildings as the case was in Bwebajja and buildings in road reserves as we all see the Karim Project here in Kampala.  

On housing projects, it is unclear why Naguru/ Nakawa housing projects are run under the Ministry of Local Government while the project for the new development of State House has also remained under the Ministry of Works and Transport. We recommend that Naguru and Nakawa housing projects and redevelopment of State House be transferred to the line ministry and funds availed to the same.

On national housing and urban development policies, the country urgently needs an orderly and sustainable housing and urban development master plan to cope with emerging challenges of a growing economy. It is shocking that the country has no meaningful policy framework to facilitate growth and housing and urban development sub-sectors. 

We recommend that all efforts be directed to the formulation and actualisation of the national housing policy and urban development policy. This is the only way to halt and control slum development in disorderly housing schemes, now an influx in most parts of the country. 

It is a national shame that a government, which should be aiming at encouraging the construction of decent and modern residential and commercial buildings through provision of affordable building materials has instead imposed excise duty on cement, a key ingredient in the construction industry.  

We would like to talk about the statutes and acts and laws that guide the ministry in the execution of its functions. We state in our position that the statutes are now outdated. The legal framework requires revision and enactment of new laws to facilitate developments and housing and urban development sub-sectors. 

In this regard, we recommend the urgent review of the town and Planning Act (Cap. 246) and the actualisation of the National Housing Law and the Building Control Act. Further more, we propose a programme to sensitise the general public on condominium law, which must be implemented. 

I must state that the smooth functioning of the housing and urban development sub-sectors will go along way in enabling pleasant, descent, sage and sustainable housing and urban development which our country men and women so deserve. It is our hope that the issues we have raised in response are examined and acted upon quickly by that party in government. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.49
MR PETER NYOMBI (Independent, Buruli County, Nakasongola): Mr Speaker, the report does recommend that land tribunals be established and fully equipped to ease settling of land related matters.  These land tribunals were established by the Land Act to handle land disputes. In my view, land tribunals have failed to function as tribunals.  

Land tribunals are supposed to comprise a quorum, including a chairperson and two members. The chairpersons is permanent, the members are not permanent. Whenever a land tribunal is sitting, the chairman will turn up but because the members of the land tribunal are not permanent, quite often land tribunals have failed to attend to cases and if a thorough analysis of the performance of land tribunals was carried out, it would be established that land tribunals have actually failed.  

Mr Speaker, the objective of setting up land tribunals may have been good but it is the structure that has failed because it involves a permanent and non-permanent members. My recommendation is that the Land Act be amended so that land tribunals become part of the magistrates’ courts but specialised in handling land matters because land tribunals have failed to handle these land matters.

My second comment is with regards to the land fund. The report recommends that the land fund be enhanced so that compensation is completed in Kibale, Kasese and Ankole districts. The imbalance in the ownership of land was not created by history only in the districts of Kibale, Kasese and Ankole.  The imbalance in the acquisition of land included the other districts one of them being the district that I represent. It is, therefore, my submission that other districts be included. In fact the definition of absentee landlords be redefined.  

My analysis in my constituency is that many of these absentee landlords are willing to dispose of this land. Many of them do not actually know where this land is located, they want to sell it but they do not know where this land is located. I would, therefore, recommend that these funds be extended to include districts like Nakasongola where you have the majority of people not having land. As I speak now – in fact I think today – there is a big meeting in one of the sub-counties where people are being evicted from the land.  

So, I recommend that the land fund be extended to include other districts. As a matter of fact, my family owns land in Bulemezi in Luwero district. In fact it was the first land we owned but we cannot settle on this land because there are squatters.  So, you can see that imbalance and we would be willing to get a payment for the land so that the squatters do acquire this land. Therefore, I do recommend that the land fund be enhanced to include other districts. Thank you. 

11.54
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I have some issues requiring clarification from either the committee or the minister. I will start with page 4 of the report.

I want to thank the committee chairman and also the shadow ministers for their presentations. On page 4, which is a continuation of page 3 on the key planned activities and programmes on the road sub-sector, there is a road named Kagamba-Rukungiri Road. This is a road connecting Ntungamo and Rukungiri. When you go to page 7 of the same report, on top of the page, among the achievements of the ministry, it says it upgraded 54.2 kilometres of Kagamba-Rukungiri Road to 100 per cent completion.  

When you go to page 15 of the same report among the proposed roads for completion is Kagamba-Rukungiri Road. This is a road, which goes to Kanungu, Ntungamo-Rukungiri-Kanungu Road. Since 1986 when NRM assumed power, Ntungamo-Ishasha via Kanungu has been among the main priority roads for this country. 

As far as I am concerned, that part between Ntungamo and Rukungiri is completed and actually when the President was there he even opened the road. When Dr Kiiza Besigye came, he also opened it and that is why he lost severely in that part of the region because we thought he should not have done that.  

The people of Kanungu whom I represent in this Parliament are concerned about the extension of the road to reach Ishasha on the border of the DRC.  The original name of the road was Ntungamo-Kagamba-Ishasha but now I see it being referred to as Kagamba-Rukungiri. Uganda does not end in Rukungiri and therefore it is a big concern in Kanungu.

So, we have two issues on that road: one, we want assurance from the government about when the remaining part of the road will be completed from Rukungiri to Ishasha. Two, we are concerned about the routing of that road because we are told - when the technocrats read the surveying - that the road will pass through the park and it will not pass through Kanungu district. The concern of the people is that we need to re-route that road so that it passes via Kanungu before it goes to Ishasha.  Therefore, I want a clarification from the ministry regarding that road.

Another clarification I want is on page 14 in the middle of the page. It says under the bridges maintenance division, first bullet, that the ministry intends to design five bridges in Ruguto, Birara and Kinyamahembe. This Birara, the third bridge, the one which connects Rujumbura and Kinkiizi. When I was campaigning, people came to me crying that they die everyday because of drowning. They told me I would have got more votes if there was a bridge because people keep dying. Actually we have estimated that we lose around three people in one of the sub-counties per month because of drowning, especially in the rainy seasons.

In 1988, hon. Nasasira John came and promised people that that bridge is going to be constructed.  Actually, when you ask people in Kanungu, the only name of a minister they know is Nasasira because he came and people were happy and we have been promised and promised by the ministry. 

I am a professional doctor; I am not an engineer. So, when you say you want to design the bridges, what does it mean in terms of works which will be there? Do we expect the bridge to be there or not? I want a clarification on what exactly I should tell people in Kinkiizi about what the ministry is going to do. Will they see a bridge or not? For those of you who have been to Kanungu, when you leave Rujumbura – Rukungiri, you must hold your rosary to cross to Kanungu because of that escarpment valley.  I want to invite you to come. It is a very big concern honourable minister and we want an assurance. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I had heard that it is a policy of the ministry that the central government would maintain and actually take over the inter district roads. Every road which connects a district to another, would be taken over by the ministry, which is the central government.  I want an assurance from the ministry that that is correct.  That being the case, I do not see some of these inter-district roads reflected in the ministry’s policy statement, as well as the committee report.

As I wind up, I would like to ask the Minister of Urban Development to explain this. I know the policy is coming for urbanisation but what is the government’s policy on the issue of urbanization?  Do you as government intend to pro-actively promote urbanisation, or do you want to leave it to just take its natural course? This is because that has implications in terms of development in this country.  Thank you very much.

12.00
MRS KAGENI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa):  Mr Speaker, I thank the committee for the report. I would like to get some clarification from the minister concerning some of these roads.  There is a road from Kamonkoli to Pallisa, a road from Tirinyi via Pallisa to Kumi and a road from Nabowa to Kachonga. These roads are in a very sorry state. However, I do not see any of them on the list of the roads meant for maintenance. 

On page 14, under bridges, there is a bridge on the road from Nabowa to Kachonga, which is in a terrible state yet I do not see it in this report.  Therefore, I do not know which year these roads will also be considered. I thought we were looking at all the roads under continuing activities, which means they were not considered in the last financial year. If they had been considered, they would be appearing under ongoing activities. This is another financial year and these roads are still missing in the minister’s programme.  I thank you.  

12.02
MS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to those who have expressed their appreciation to the committee for the good work done.  My concern is about the construction of roads more especially, in areas where we have a lot of congestion.  I do not see any provision put in place in the event of fire. We have congestion of people, vehicles and petrol stations. In case of a firebreak out, the facilities that are available in fire extinguishing do not really match with the overwhelming congestion.  

I would like to suggest that like in developed countries where those provisions exist, our streets should have pipe-extinguishing facilities. The country should also remember her responsibility of training people how to operate them.  Otherwise, we are in danger. 

12.04 
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have only two observations. I thank the ministry and the committee for the report. For a long time, since this country came into existence, issues of urban roads apart from Kampala have not been properly addressed. Last financial year, Fort Portal was brought on board and I hope that this fund will continue to roll. Some 7 kilometres of Fort Portal urban road is being addressed and as many of you know, the roads in urban areas are very tricky. 

 First of all, there is a quiet policy that they have to be tarmac. Every municipality is given about Ugshs 100 million in the budget provision, which is not even a quarter of a kilometre of tarmac.  I do not know how long it will take for the urban roads to be worked on. If the new policy of working progressively on these urban roads could roll out, it would be very good for our cities. I am not sure whether the component is included in this financial year. I wonder whether they will roll from Kabarole to other municipalities. If it continued, it would help urban roads to be worked on because this Ugshs 100 million component is not able to cover a reasonable part of these roads.

My second observation is on the sub county land committees. The sub counties should have land committees. The law also provided for divisions to have division land committees. As you know, planning for municipalities and other urban areas must be central.  Therefore, at some time I would like to request the sector minister and the committee to move an amendment to provide for the urban land committees to be put at the municipal level. Otherwise if each division has a separate land committee like the sub counties, it will cause confusion in the urban areas.  I thank you.

12.07
MS JANET OKORIMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido):  Mr Speaker I have a few comments to make.  For a long time, the roads in Karamoja have remained unattended to, especially the road from Kaabong to Kidepo National Park. Yet we all know that we harvest a lot from Kidepo National Park. I know that some of these roads have sort of remained a tourist attraction because of the many beautiful gullies that have formed on the roads, such that when the tourists move to Kidepo, they admire them. I do not know what the ministry thinks about it. I suggest that the ministry goes there on the spot, instead of just learning from other people, without knowing what is on the ground.

Secondly, I would like to know what happened to Dopeth bridge. This bridge is between Abim and Kotido, about 10 kilometres from Kotido town. When it rains, rivers in Karamoja continue flowing for two to three days nobody can cross from this part to the other. 

Recently, the hon. Minister for Northern Uganda Rehabilitation told us that on his way to Kotido, he could not cross Dopeth Bridge and yet he was just ten kilometers away from Kotido. He had to drive back, 500 kilometres away to access Kotido.  Therefore, we would like to hear the comment there.  Has the ministry failed in which case we shall need God to intervene?

My other concern is about Amuria in Moroto County, Otuke-Abim road. This is where business is booming, between the Teso businessmen and the Karimojong.  However, the road as it stands now is a no man’s land.  Amuria is not willing to work on it, just as Moroto County in Lira is not willing. Yet, this road is very important.  Why doesn’t the ministry think of bringing that road under central government so that it is worked on? We need to continue linking up Teso and Karamoja, despite the problems there.  

In addition, as we think of putting up security roads in Karamoja, this is one of the most important roads to consider.  You cannot think of putting up security roads around other places and yet this Amuria to Abim is impassable. We all know that cattle rustlers normally take advantages of spots where roads are bad. This is because they know that when vehicles reach such bad spots, they slow down and fulfil their mission. I wish the ministry took this serious. Thank you.

12.12
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I thank the ministry and the committee for the work and the report given.  As a Parliamentarian from Bunyoro, I must report to the House that we have been petitioned by the transporters in Hoima and Masindi because of the appalling situation of the 54 kilometres from Masindi to Hoima.  On Monday, I had to dodge the road and come through Kiboga. However, I am surprised that this is differed work, according to the report.  I hope the ministry will take it as an urgent matter so that this road is fixed.  

Secondly, is that the greater Bunyoro area? Whereas the report talks about the road from Busunju to Hoima, I would like to note that this road, since my primary school days, has featured in all budgets. This is the oldest oil discovery of the oil region, Bunyoro.  Unfortunately, we were told that this place was found not to be viable and therefore the road was stopped in Hoima and not in Butyaba as earlier planned.  Now that we know that there is oil in this region and that it is now viable, could we now extend the tarmac where the colonialist had initially intended it to go?  This road was supposed to go up to Butyaba and not just Hoima.

Secondly, as we plan to explore the oil from Bunyoro, we should know that it is in the rift valley area.  The colonialists had the intention of making the road from Butyaba through Waki, Kibilo, Tonya and along Lake Albert. Unfortunately, right now the Ministry of Energy is operating with concessions of Hardmann petroleum Uganda. The road is being built from down the rift valley up to the hill.  That does not provide transport network for the people along the lake who are still dying because they use boats daily.  

Could I request the ministry to make it a priority a road network which runs from Ntoroko on the lakeside, along the lake up to Butyaba?  That is the best way to plan for the community in a comprehensive manner, other than what is currently being done to fit into the short-term needs of the companies involved.  What we need is a comprehensive plan so that even if we are to have a pipe of these oil wells in future, all the oil wells are along the same rift valley line.  

All we need is a road network, which will help us travel easily, other than running from Kaiso to Hoima, Kibiro to Hoima, Butyaba to Hoima.  We need a lakeside road, which will help us plan better. This will save our community as well.

In addition, whereas we appreciate the work so far done from Kafu to Masindi, the road from Busunju to Hoima does not provide for the needs of the greater Bunyoro. That road only provides for the route coming to Kampala and leaves our people right from Kyenjojo, through Kibale, Kagadi, Hoima, Masindi to Kigumba un-provided for.  Yet, for us in Bunyoro, that should be the most important road, which links us to the other part of Bunyoro.  I wish this were put into the priority areas, apart from just connecting us to the Kampala high way.

Finally, I would like to talk about the issue of the supervision of central tenders.  There are road contracts, which are done by central government and the districts under local government do very little supervision. For example, roads are deceptively done, without even murram and the contractor goes ahead to claim his payment from the centre. 

 I request the ministry to improve their supervision, through the local governments so that if a tenderer has denied the schools and hospitals access – for instance, the last time the road from Wanseko to Butyaba was done, just as Hoima to Masindi, access to our schools and hospitals, even to some homes was denied. It is very important that there is a component of the local government supervision in the central government tenders.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.18
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): I thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I thank the committee for the balanced report.  However, I note with great concern that on page 13 of the report, Kitgum-Lira Border is deferred to 2006/2007.  To me, this is a serious concern. Kitgum district is one of the biggest districts in the country. It is also politically insecure, economically viable and it borders with our neighbours in the Sudan.  In my opinion, it should have been of concern to the minister, this financial year.  

Honourable members, I say all this because the road network leading to Kitgum district is very saddening.  If you went to Kitgum district, you would realise that the tarmac from Kampala only stops in Gulu. On the way to my constituency, I go through so much dust. It is the same even when you go through Lira to Kitgum. The road is full of potholes and covered in dust. This district should have been considered this financial year.  It has been deferred on page 13, but I would like it to be made a priority. It has been long overdue –(Interjections)- hon. Members, please bear with me. I am talking about something painful. When I invite you to my district, you will find it very saddening.  

Mr Speaker, even the committee made a comment about many programmes being in place. My worry is if all of them will be implemented. I appeal to the minister to take this as a priority so that we get a decent road.  

In the same vein, I am also concerned about Achwa Bridge that connects Gulu to Kitgum district, which is a very big problem. I heard my colleague from Kanungu raising the same concern. He said he has ever gone there and he knows it is a problem. I wish the House considered this bridge.  It is very narrow and not protected. I appeal to the minister to include Achwa Bridge among the ones listed for construction and rehabilitation.

I would also like to draw the attention of the House to page 10 where the Minister, under the achievements, highlighted the Northern line from Tororo to Gulu being re-opened.  I would like to say that probably in the statement, the line was reopened but not operational. We last saw a train some two years ago.  All our prospects of simsim and cotton were disappointed. With peace coming soon, we expect to speedily rehabilitate our Northern region economically. I appeal to the Minister to make it operational. Don’t just reopen it but make it operational up to Gulu and Pakwach. I thank you.

12.24
MR JOHN OGWANG (UPC, Kole County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I always feel very comfortable - could I come in front?  Thank you.  Good morning everybody. This is your home; please enjoy it because you are the people of this country.  It is your House; please use it. When you use it, use it for the benefit of all people in Uganda. Not me, not you, but everybody in Uganda.  

Now, I come with this in my hand, a report we got here. It is perfect and very good.  However, they are words because words are not very expensive. I use a lot of words and I do not pay for them. It does not cost me a thing but what matters is the content.  There are very many things that need to be done.  I am not going to talk about what happened 10 or 20 years ago because we all get the blame for it.  I blame you for it because you have been a Ugandan for many years.  This report only helps because for one thing - this is a new Parliament.  What this report implies is that we should all work together.  

This is a new system. It is a new phase. We did not have it. We only had one that lasted for 20 years.  Whatever one says, it goes but here you cannot do it because there are people like us at the back. We see what you are doing and we tell you, “No, that is not right,” “Yes, it is right.”  We give you support for that.  My support for this is only one, the report you presented is perfect, but there are some flaws in it.  

I would like to pick on one or two things observed regarding road works. The roads are very poor indeed.  I do not have to take you to Kole. I will only take you to Kampala here.  Kampala is in a mess with potholes everywhere.  A city should not look like this. Next year, we are going to host Heads of State from other countries. This is terrible.

Mr Speaker, another thing I did not like at all is that there are people like you, hon. Members who are very rich with plenty of money. I know you have the capacity of building any road anywhere. Then, there are people building big houses in road reserves. I do not know who gives you that permission.  Then we shift the blame to Boda Boda or taxi drivers. The roads need to be widened. We need more room because in 10 or 20 years’ time, the population is growing. 

My other concern is on page 30. This is a lot of money. You do not spend money just like that. If you must, it should be on something worthwhile. I know it is not our money; otherwise we would spend it sparingly. If you were to take it out of your own pockets, you would be very careful with it.  You created so many ministries. Why can’t they work? It is the State to blame. If one individual was responsible for a specific duty, that person could say, “Look, there is a mistake. Could we correct it?” However, when you have three, four, and five under one roof that is why a lot of money is being spent there. It would be a good idea if that money were put to good use. In this way, Ugandans would not be poor. We would be very rich and people would love their country. 

We are all blessed although many of us say we are poor. We are not poor. We are very rich. Look at me! (Laughter) We are very rich in all aspects. We have good climate, good food, fruits and many other things. The only problem is that we are not prepared to work. 

Even you hon. Members should grow fruits and get money. Why do we want somebody else to put money in our pockets or blame somebody else when we do not get it? There are all opportunities of making money, but not –(The bell sounded)- one minute, please.  This is my last point -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We give you one minute as you requested.

MR OGWANG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I first came this place was full. What has happened?  What we are discussing here is very important for our country and yet many of our colleagues are not here.  I suggest that their money is cut so that they learn. If they get little money, then they will be here to avoid the punishment. What we are talking about is very important. We need to progress. We need to develop. 

Finally, please do something about the houses built in the road. Thank you.

12.32
MS JUDITH AKELLO (FDC, Pader County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication.  I am concerned about what makes districts qualify. What kind of yardstick do you use to measure a district in order for it to qualify for roads and communication networks?  

Pader district is almost 7 years old now. However, we do not have even one metre of tarmac on our roads.  We do not have any up graded road networks either. Not even a single murram road network!  It is very difficult for me to go to my constituency. For instance, just over the weekend, I was there. I moved almost nowhere because the road was all muddy. It has defeated even my four wheel-drive.  I spent two days on the way and could not reach where I was going. Therefore, I really want to know the yardstick used in order to qualify some districts and not others. 

Secondly, I would like to say something small about Achwa Bridge, which my sister from Kitgum mentioned. This bridge has claimed so many lives. To the best of my knowledge, about 7 people have died because of this bridge. It is in a very sorry state. It is very difficult for people who go there for the first time to take courage to cross this bridge. Therefore, I urge the ministry to seriously consider this bridge to avoid losing more Ugandans. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have 5 more reports. As we heard, this was a comprehensive report by the committee. There were two statements from this side - [Indicating the Opposition side] - also comprehensive. What do I do? Let us have two from each side after which the ministers will respond.  

12.38
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this golden opportunity. My first concern is on page 28, about bullet 7 and 10 of the committee observations on the operations of district land registries.  The committee noted that District Land Records in the Land Registry have remained with the ministry and one of the reasons advanced is that districts are not prepared to handle land matters.  

I would like to seek clarification from the minister in regard to the District Registry of Kampala district.  We have a State-of-the-Art registry in Kampala City Council, which cost taxpayers a lot of money to establish. However, updating it has never been completed. I wonder why the records have not been transferred from the Central Registry to this District Registry, which is ready to execute those functions and obligations. Land titles are rotting on floor in the Land Registry, and yet we have this State-of-the-Art Land Registry, which is not being used. May we get a clarification on that particular matter from the Minister?

Finally, is the issue of the land bonanza in Kampala district.  I will specifically talk about Kampala Central. I do not know whether there is a land policy on this issue, whether it is just a matter of dishing out land to investors, or whether investors pay for this land that is dished out. I am specifically inquisitive on the issue of dishing out school lands. Why is this policy targeting Shimoni, Nakasero and Kitante schools? 

About the planned hotels constructions in preparation for CHOGM, are they up to the standards? Won’t they collapse and we experience an international calamity disaster if those hotels constructed for purposes of CHOGM collapse? For instance, in the case of Shimoni, we are made to understand that there is some Arab investor who will construct a five star hotel and yet construction has not started. I wonder whether the cement will be dry by the time we host CHOGM. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.   

12.42
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (Moroto County, UPC): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are very much aware that year in; year out mention has been made about tarmacking the road from Soroti to Lira. We have been following this with keen interest.  This year, it is mentioned again. In fact, this report has mentioned it four times, I think for emphasis.  I wonder what is happening. Why is it in different stages? Here we are told that this year the work is going to commence and in another page they are saying it will be completed. Are we going to see a realisation of the road, this year? 

Mention was also made of the road from Akia to Aloi. Aloi is my home. It is said work on this road was deferred from 2005/06 to this financial year.  I was there last weekend.  This road was worked on but the quality of the work is very poor. How do you grade a road and without putting murram and you boast of having done the work?  

This reminds me of hon. Okello-Okello’s contribution during the debate on the President’s State of Nation Address. He commented on the quality of both tarmac and other types of roads. I think if we are to see sustainable development in this country, we should insist on the quality work.

Mr Speaker, permit me to also talk about the road that connects Masindi to Apac and Lira. Those of us that come from that part of the country know how important that road is, yet no mention has been made of it.  The ferry released recently has not helped much because the water levels have dropped. Getting on to the ferry has become a nightmare -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I personally used that road when we went for the burial of the former President. I thought the road was good. Has it been washed away? 

MR OBUA-OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that Apac by its nature is very swampy. If you do not construct roads in such a way that they have off-shoots, then in no time they become impassable again. All these are matters for consideration.  I thank you, Sir.

12.46
MR HARUUNA SSALABAYA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I thank the committee for the well-detailed presentation. I have a few concerns to raise. You talked about Bugembe vehicle maintenance centre for district vehicles.  Last week, we had a council meeting and the district raised a concern that when district vehicles are taken to Bugembe for repairs, they stay there for too long. Most of the time spare parts are removed and replaced by worse ones.  The only good work at Bugembe is panel beating and spraying. The district administration therefore suggests decentralization of these repairs and maintenance. 

Another issue is about Mumyanzi, Zanyiro and Kiboga Road, which is about 40 kilometres.  This road is in a very heavy productive zone, with several types of crops and the area is –(Interruption)

JUDITH AKELLO:  Mr Speaker, is it in order for a Member to read before the House?  

THE SPEAKER:  I thought the Member was looking at the report -(Laughter)

MR SSALABAYA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am reading the report for my concern.  It has a reference.  This is a very productive zone and we have had promises from His Excellency, as well as from the Ministry of Works. Our duty is to ask the ministry to take over this road. The road from one district to another is always catered for by the central government.  

Regarding community roads, access roads and road grading, I suggest that the ministry avails each constituency with say a horsepower tractor with combined equipment like a plough, a trailer and pull grader. We could get such a combined machine at about Ugshs 80 million.  All the constituencies combined would use about Ugshs 17.2 billion, which is not a lot of money.   The government is able to get a lot of money for PMA, NAADS, UPE, USE other programmes and in the same way, I am sure donors who are friendly would take agriculture as a mother of all these other departments. 

 I urge the ministry to put this into consideration.  They always claim that they piloted some tractors in sub counties, but let us take it for constituencies. A constituency is manned by different people. These other expensive multi purpose tractors, which are taken far away could go ploughing, pulling and repair roads. Pull graders even use little fuel and easy to maintain.  We would only need to instruct workers so that they see how easy it is to implement.

My other concern is about mailo and public land.  The 1995 Constitution stated that when someone had been on a piece of land by that time for 12 years that person is there as a bonafide.  Yet, people have been there even beyond 1995 and they are being chased away.  There is a public outcry for the land.  We lawmakers should review that aspect.

Regarding ICT, my concern is on mobile phones and telephone masts. We have masts in Kiboga and Kiganda but most of the low areas in Kassanda constituency are not covered.  We request the relevant officers in MTN, CELTEL and others to give us some boosters so that we keep Kassanda abreast with the rest of the nation.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

12.52
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman representative, Mbarara): Thank you Mr Speaker.  I thank the chairperson for the report well presented as well as the committee. I have a few concerns and questions for the minister to help me understand.

I know we are planning for now, but we are also planning for the future.  Considering the size of all our roads in this country as compared to those of developed countries, I wonder whether we have a plan of ever getting our roads bigger than they are right now.  I know these roads were made in the pre-independence times and now we have very many roads after independence.  

When I go out, I admire the way the roads are made in cities of other countries. When you drive across the countryside, you are not scared of anybody having to bump into you as pass by each other. I wonder whether we have this programme or whether we shall keep the status quo as they were made in pre-independence times.  

On my way to Mbarara, I am very frightened because the road is narrow and accidents are a common sight, as a result of the size of these roads.  Do we have a plan of ever making these roads bigger?

In addition, I know land belongs to the people; the closeness of the buildings to the roads in the countryside is worrying. Sometimes I wonder whether they are waiting to be compensated.  Somebody intentionally builds so close to the road because he hopes that one day, he will be compensated when a road is being constructed. I do not know whether we as government could intervene and help people build some distance from the road to avoid unnecessary compensation from the government. 

Regarding the murram of our roads, I was a Member of the Local Governments Committee for a long time and we found it very expensive to simply put murram on the roads. The rain would wash it away and then we would go back to square one. I know it is very expensive to put tarmac but at one time we in the council felt it would be better to allocate that money to cover half the distance of that road so that it is tarmacked instead of just pouring murram. That way we would avoid spending money and the next season people ask where the road is. 

I would also like to talk about the roads that come from the centre for the districts, without the district having to be involved in the supervision. Ndaija-Kabale road was built in Mbarara District. This road was built by the centre and our hands were tied. We as a district did not have a lot of input into what was going on. We were told it was from the centre and all the supervision had to come from the centre. We felt this was not good for us as a district because we would have liked to be involved from the beginning until the end.

Mr Speaker, finally I am not an expert in the engineering world but I have always admired the tarmac I find in countries outside Uganda, including Europe and America. I do not know if that is specific for their weather and ours is also specific for our weather. I would like to be informed because I admire what I find outside and wonder what is wrong with our tarmac. Maybe this is what is typical for Africa and the other one is typical for Europe? Thank you very much.

12.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE, WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to register my thanks to the committee and to everybody who has contributed to this motion. This has shown that roads are the driving engine of economic growth. I particularly thank my colleague in the Opposition for we have worked together on this committee for a long time, except before I respond to his observations, I will seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, because when you look at the last page, he is a member of this committee and when they were interviewing us in the committee he attended religiously for two days. However, he ambushed me on the Floor with a different report and at the same time the responses given by the committee are the observations given by the committee. I think it is in response to what is contained in the policy statement of the Government and what my colleague has given is the Opposition’s position.

THE SPEAKER: I think we will attend to this issue. This is the first time this has happened but in future if the Opposition has any policy statement to make to the statement made by a government minister, they should submit these statements to the committee so that when the committee is deliberating, they take them into account. You never know they may buy the views of the Opposition and adopt them as part of their committee’s views. This will be done for the future but -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: That was my concern. It is now clear. On donor funds, it is true when you come to the development expenditure of the Ministry of Works, almost 100 percent is provided by donor development partners. He went ahead to say that 20 percent is in good condition, 18 percent is in poor condition and I think 60 something in a fair condition. My own opinion should be the other way round. About 62 percent of our roads are in good condition, 20 percent are in fair condition and when it comes to poor conditions - I am talking of tarmac roads, 18 percent are in a very sorry state.  (Mr Amuriat rose_) I will give you an opportunity later on.  

I agree with him when it comes to axle roads. The regulation enforcement of axle roads is really poor. We put regulations in place and the enforcement arm is partly in our ministry and partly with the Police, as well as the Judiciary. We encounter many problems whereby the road users, especially heavy trucks from the border, prefer shortcuts whenever they reach our weighbridges. When they go to court - I have a receipt and I have proof of this - a transporter pays a lot of money in form of fines and is given a receipt of only 10 percent on the amount paid. We are trying our best to address this situation. I have come in as a Minister and I am sure it will be contained.

The 50 percent operation of the railway infrastructure is true. The Gulu line is open but not operational and what we are waiting for is only cash to operationalise it. The Uganda Government together with the Government of China have solicited some funds and we are in the process of constructing a railway line from Gulu to Juba. We have already formed a team, which is going to meet our counterparts in Southern Sudan to start working out how we are going to implement this project. Very soon we shall embark on this one.

Surely the economy of this country cannot be left for the roads alone! These roads are very expensive to construct and they can only be relieved by the railway network. I buy your ideas on that but everything is already contained in our policy statement.  About concessioneering, we concessioned the Kampala-Malaba stretch together with Kenya Railways on the other side, to one concessionaire. The other lines are still under the Government of Uganda. This will not stop the Government from opening up the western line or operationalising the northern line and even constructing other lines. 

We did this because we want to increase the tonnage hold from the border to Kampala by using one concessionaire. In fact, this will remove the bottlenecks, which have been created by two operators that is, Kenya Railways and Uganda Railways. This time it will be loaded at Mombasa and the next stop will be Kampala instead of the borders. 

We have been changing the locomotives; the Kenya locomotives were not allowed to cross to Uganda and Uganda’s locomotives were not allowed to cross to Kenya. Therefore, whenever a train moved up to the border, it would stop for about three days to remove the locomotive, then the Kenya locomotive would be brought; yet Kenya Railways had a shortage of locomotives. This was bringing a lot of delays along the way. With one concessionaire all these delays will be removed.

Concerning water, I agree with you that some ferries are not in good condition. They need urgent repair but you know how small our resource envelope is. This is really a very big challenge for us and yet it requires a lot of money. I am happy that he actually thanked the Government for the Kalangala ship, which is a state-of-the-art ship, modern and comprehensively insured.  It is still on trial runs by the contractor who built the ship and that one is embedded in that contract agreement. Our Kalangala ship is comprehensively insured. I think there was an error in the policy statement because it is still under contractual obligations. The boat is on trial runs and therefore it should not have been mentioned here.  

About the airports, I would like to see all of them in fantastic condition. I wish we had about five international airports. This is my wish but it is very difficult to achieve, especially with the little money we have. The domestic passengers have been dropping of late and there are two reasons. The Comprehensive Peace Agreement in Southern Sudan is an issue. These Sudanese have been using our airport at Arua as domestic passengers. They board at Entebbe, disembark at Arua and then get vehicles to the other side. However, after the peace agreement, the planes take off from Entebbe direct to Juba. They have now become international passengers. Therefore, the number of passengers using this airport has dropped tremendously. 

Then, the Karuma-Arua road being upgraded to tarmac, I assure you that people prefer driving now because it is very comfortable. You take a little time. Why should you go through the hassle of going to Entebbe Airport? (Mr Amuriat rose_) 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, you have already stated that we are time barred. Allow me to respond to the issues raised by Members. Put your clarification on paper. I will answer you later on.  

The unit cost in the transport sector:

When I was still on the committee with my colleague, it is true I used to think that the unit cost was too high. The Ugandan one was the highest maybe in the region but after going in and making comparisons, I have found that considering that this country has not developed or built the internal construction capacity, we are depending solely on external contractors. The unit rate measures with other unit rates in the region. He gave an example of Namanga River because this is one of the roads I made reference to. When there is some controversy over the Kisoro-Kabale road, this Namanga earth river road, which is 237 kilometres, will be constructed at US $200 million given the rate of almost US $4,900 per kilometre. These are facts, which you can even download from the Ministry of Works’ website of Kenya. 

About tax waiving on road equipment, I agree with you especially when it comes to VAT. Although it is sometimes deferred, to me it is like an expense because once you get it from your pocket even if later on it is reimbursed, it has already lost value. Secondly, it has not done the job, which it was supposed to be doing. I agree with you and I think URA or the Ministry of Finance should look at this.

Waiving of taxes on petrol products sounds like a very good idea. As an individual I would support it but I do not know about the implementation. We are opening a Pandora Box whereby these contractors will start selling diesel on the streets of Kampala, which is very dangerous. For instance, we already have a problem with generators and that is why Government is moving very quickly to stop that.  

Regarding the confusion between Works and Housing, the President directed that the Ministry of Public Service should prepare a Cabinet memo to be discussed in the Cabinet to resolve this issue. I am sure they are about to produce that memo, because it is in advanced stages. Let us wait until it is discussed in the Cabinet.  

Road reserves:

It is your concern just as it is mine. I think it is the concern of everybody. It is disheartening that we politicians are the first culprits when it comes to building in road reserves. First and foremost, the land tenure system of this country needs not be emphasised. Everybody knows that. We have to look for the money and secure these reserves. My Ministry is trying to borrow from outside to see how we can secure our reserves and put enclosures all along. Whoever builds in that enclosure will be required to demolish his own structure at his own cost. That is what we are trying to do. I think this came from our history; everybody used to do whatever he wanted.  

City roads:

Some of the city roads belong to KCC and some few to the Ministry of Works. I think this was overlooked a long time ago, or neglected –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: On a personal note, I want to report that the Ministry of Works helped to fix the roads in my area, like Kalema Road, which had been a problem for 30 years. It belonged to KCC but they had never fixed it until the Ministry of Works came in. I thank the Ministry of Works.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank you, Mr Speaker for those compliments. It is true some of the roads belong to us, just as some belong to KCC. Sometimes we come out to help, construct a road and then hand it over to KCC. It is absurd that some of the roads that we constructed and handed over to KCC just a few months ago are not being maintained, especially the drainage system; and they have not put enforcement bylaws in place to punish those who park on pavements -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I do not participate in these debates, but if you take Namirembe Road, for example, which is I think under you, all the way to Pride Theatre or City Parents’ School, that road is a disgrace!  There is a big hole there yet ministers and officials of the ministry pass there, but it is not fixed and it is causing a lot of inconveniences; it is right in the centre.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the problem but I have to tell you that the road from Busega through Namirembe though it was worked upon by the Ministry of Works, belongs to KCC; it does not belong to the Ministry of Works. We only helped them and at the end handed it over to them. And actually, they are already failing to maintain it. But what we are trying to do is to repair some stretches of the roads, especially those, which inter-link with our roads. You take an example of Kibuye Queen’s Way, Mukwano road up to Nakawa that is a Kampala City Council road but we are taking it over because it connects the other side of Jinja road with Masaka Road. So that is in its final stages; we are taking it over and it will be fully rehabilitated.

There are other roads, which we are putting under consideration, which we want to take over like Wampewo, Mulago, and then Gayaza roundabout is also under consideration to be taken over. 

But under CHOGAM, there are so many roads, which are going to be worked upon in the city centre. Other works are going on like upgrading or remodelling the round about of Shoprite and Entebbe Road up to Kitgum House, those ones are going on now and there are so many other roads, which are going to be worked upon. But some will be returned to KCC for maintenance.

Then about transport regulations, I share your concern, especially the under-staffing of this department. But all this is brought about by the ceiling within the Ministry of Public Service, and what have you. But I understand they have considered it to be very urgent now - they are working upon it; I think we shall soon get staff in this department.

Then monopoly on speed governors: it is not true that there is a monopoly on the supply of speed governors. The only thing I can agree with you on is that there is a problem of smuggling in fake speed governors, which have started appearing on our market. 

Then also recently there was a shortage of speed governors, and my ministry gave permission to the dealers to continue receiving money until these governors are available so that they can be fixed, but I have now stopped that too. Reasons are that many people, especially the Police, abused this facility and they created their own companies and they started issuing the certificates of fitness so you see a bus moving with a sticker showing it is with an approved speed governor whereas inside there is no speed governor.  

So I have stopped that with immediate effect, and honourable members, I want to appeal to the politicians who own vehicles, especially those which fall under the statutory regulation of having speed governors - because they are the biggest obstacle, they are the biggest culprits, they do not want to fit governors in their vehicles and they are always demanding for extensions, but I will not tolerate that. If I am to be dismissed, let me be, but I will not tolerate this. As politicians, we must be exemplary. (Applause)

Another was the problem of PSV omnibuses. Mr Speaker, 90 percent of the omnibuses in this country come in as vans, not omnibuses and the statutory instrument says that only vehicles of 7 passengers and above should be fitted with speed governors. But when these omnibuses come into the country, they have got only two seats in front so they do not fall in that bracket. So after they are given plate numbers, they are taken to Katwe and there chairs are fitted instead of coming back for PSV licenses, then they are taken upcountry to Mbarara where they put bikuubo - I do not know how to call it - that blue line across. They just put the line and they start operating on our streets. We have got more than 20,000 omnibuses but only 8,000 have got PSV licenses. Therefore, my ministry is discussing this issue and within a week we want to bring all the vans that fall under that category to be fitted with speed governors; they will not get registration number plates before they are fitted with speed governors. If you want to use it as a van, you must write to the Minister for special permission and you have to indicate that you will be the only owner; if you are to sell it, you will still have to get permission from the Ministry to sell it.

Mr Speaker, I think we have to be tough on this. Only two week ago we lost more than 60 people on our roads and the problem was over speeding -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Point of clarification.

THE SPEAKER: No, since he has rejected the other one why should he accept yours? (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Then with regard to the radar system at Entebbe, I think they are talking about the whether radar, not the security radar. We need to differentiate between the two. Therefore, our skies are safe. It is only the weather radar that is not working, which should be looked at.

Then about Nairobi/Mwanza as a parking alternative, no, I think this is also not true. We have got only one airport, which has got landing facilities at night, and that is Entebbe International Airport. Even a small plane cannot land at Soroti at night. Therefore, we are looking at only this one because we do not have money for lighting facilities and landing, navigational aids at Soroti or Gulu. 

What do we do? Suppose a plane comes at night and there is an accident on the runaway, what will happen? It has to land somewhere and the nearest airports we have with landing facilities are in Nairobi, Mwanza and Kilimanjaro. The existing places are there to simply complement Entebbe Airport in case there is a problem and are not to be used as parking facilities.  

Mr Speaker, I want to inform this House that we are building a new apron at the old airport with 52,000 square meters to accommodate extra planes that are coming into this country. As I speak the contracts have already been given out and work has started at the old airport.  

Concerning the Kagamba-Rugungiri road appearing many times, we were supposed to complete it last year and we did. However, there are other works going on like drainage and compensation, which we call road furniture. They are not yet in place and that is why it has appeared.

Concerning the Rukungiri-Kanungu road being re-routed, I am not aware of this. I will consult my ministry and find out who did it because it is not in our policy statement.

Also concerning the Mbarara Bridge, which was promised by the minister in 1998, I do not have any facts on hand showing that it was promised. However, I will need to travel and look at this bridge myself. Since many people have complained about it, I think we will have to come in very fast.  

The take over of the central government inter-district government roads was also mentioned. I wish I could take over all the roads in Uganda and if I had money I would because I like to see beautiful roads and I want to see every part of Uganda connected with beautiful roads. However, when it comes to our resource envelope our hands are tied. That is why we are doing it in phases. It is already a very big problem for the districts to look after these roads especially after abolishing graduated tax. 

Hon. Kiryapawo, I think most of your roads are on the programme. For example there is the Tirinyi-Pallisa road, which I think is on our programme and I think construction has already started. Then we have the Kawolide-Pallisa road for which we are procuring works. By October 6th work on this road will have started.

Concerning the Masindi-Hoima road, the contractor is mobilising because the contract is already signed. The contract for the Kitgum-Lira road has also already been signed and the contractor is mobilising. He should actually be there in two weeks time if he has not already started.  

Hon. Ssentongo mentioned that fire extinguishers should be provided in congested places. I think that is a wonderful idea and my ministry should follow up on that and see how it can be implemented.  

Hon. Kigyagi, it is true that initially urban roads were not attracting any funding from development partners but now this has changed under the ten-year road development programme, which we call DUCARIP, that is, District Urban Community Access Road Investment Plan. All these roads have now come on board and we have started with Fort-Portal and are continuing. I am sure that in ten years we shall have very wonderful roads within our towns.

The hon. Member for Abimu District stated that Karamoja roads are not attended to and that the Kabongo-Kidepo road is full of gullies. I want to refer you to annex h(a)(6) - if you look at it you will find a list that includes your roads. They will be worked on.

There was another query concerning why the Amuria-Moroto county road is not taken over by the central government. My answer is the same. The resource envelope is too small but I wish I could get money and take over all these roads.  

There was also a complaint about the differed work on the Masindi-Hoima road. Honourable members, in the policy statement and in the committee’s report, they used the word “differed” but they should have used the words “spill over”. This is because concerning most of these roads as we have noticed, the money we got in the supplementary budget was more than the money we got at the beginning. Therefore, we got this money late and you can imagine how many roads were supposed to be tendered out. The tenders are going on and most of the roads have actually been contracted out. 

Concerning the Busunju-Hoima road to Butyaba, I think there will be a policy on oil roads. It is yet to come and I think we should wait for it. I am sure all these roads that you are talking about are likely to be captured. I will keep you informed whenever there is a new development.

The Kafu-Masindi road does not provide for greater Bunyoro but that is the beginning. When they come to Hoima, where do they go?  Most of our people end up in Kampala where there is a big market. Therefore, we must have a beginning and an end. I am sure that this road also caters for the greater Bunyoro and again if I had money, I would bring on board all these stretch roads in Kibaale, Hoima and Masindi.

Someone raised the point that roads constructed by the local government are shoddy. To some extent I agree with you. This is as a result of lack of supervision and also because we had a problem of tender boards awarding contracts to councillors and what have you. However, on the other hand you might find that even the specifications were to blame. You can imagine giving Shs 5 million for construction of a kilometre of murram road. What do you expect? That will only be enough for bush clearing. You cannot even start graveling. What I want to urge honourable members to do is seek clarification from the district engineers on what type of work is to be done on a particular section of the road.  

I think I have answered the query on the Kitgum-Lira road. I want to emphasize here that most of the roads in the Northern region are under the Joint Monitoring Committee (JMC). There are some roads, which we are packaging up and which are going to be funded by the donors and the Government of Uganda. These are going to be done immediately and I am sure within a few weeks I will have the full list and avail it to you. Actually I think we have some honourable members, especially from Northern Uganda who attend JMC and they are probably aware of this.

As for Ajua Bridge, I will visit that place, as I am about to go to the Northern region, and I will inform you accordingly.

The hon. Member for Kole complained about the potholes in Kampala and wondered what sort of city this is where people get permission to build in the roads? Well, those building in Kampala get permission from Kampala City Council. I am happy to note that we have an honourable member who used to be the city engineer there. Maybe he can expound on that.

About boda-bodas in the city, your concern is our concern. Imagine yourself driving and all of a sudden somebody cuts in in front of you. When you knock him, you are blamed for knocking somebody on a motorcycle yet he is carrying a passenger. Actually sometimes the one who dies first is the passenger. 

Recently I witnessed a white lady on a motorcycle. The driver turned around only for her to be knocked off the motorcycle; yet some of these people are visitors and tourists. We are in the process of gazetting places where these motorcycles should park outside the city centre and I need your support, honourable members because this is a hot issue that involves politics as some of our Members here own about 50 or 100 motorcycles on the streets of Kampala. I know it will be a very big problem, but I will need your support in order to implement this policy.

Hon. Lukwago says buildings are about to collapse because they are being built at a fast pace. You are a lawyer and you know I usually joke with lawyers that an engineer can become a lawyer, but it is hard for a lawyer to become an engineer. (Laughter) But if you do it under normal specifications – you see, we have got two types. Some people are using steel columns, which do not need time to dry while others are using concrete ones, which need time to dry. I am sure enough time is being given and I believe they will not collapse, at least under our supervision. As for those that are collapsing, my colleague the shadow minister knows why they collapse. It is in cases where everybody on the site becomes an engineer or an expert in building. They do not want to seek professional advice and that is a very big problem. You find even a lawyer like hon. Lukwago standing at his site directing the builders to put two layers of cement or concrete - that kind of stuff.  

The hon. Member for Kassanda mentioned the Bugembe repairs. I will look into it. He was also talking about government taking over the Nyanzi-Kiboga road. Well, the problem is still money. 

Hon. Boona, I am also fascinated by the infrastructure outside the country. When I travel I see flyovers going around and I wish we could get there. If I may inform you, hon. Boona, we beg almost 100 percent of the money we use for the development of our roads from our partners and the amount of money they give us can only construct the type of the roads we have at present. We have the plan to make our roads wider of course. For instance, we are surveying the Kampala-Entebbe road to make it a dual carriage road under BADEA. You can imagine that even the study is being funded by BADEA! We are also looking at Kampala-Jinja road. 

Furthermore, we are trying to attract investors to come and construct what they call toll roads. When a contractor builds such a road, he puts the toll and it is then concessionaired to him. He collects money for a period of about 30 or 40 years and then he hands over the road. If he wants to continue, he can always do so. We are trying to attract such people to come to this country.

All the beautiful roads you see especially in South Africa are toll roads; they are not government roads. When you see a single lane of road in South Africa, that is a government road, but when you see flyovers, those are toll lanes. I think we need our Members to travel there and see how beautiful those roads are. In Uganda we are about to see two flyovers and about six bridges within one year. You will also enjoy those ones like on the Northern Bypass.  

Mr Speaker, we have a problem of murram. This country does not have murram as not every soil you see is murram. When most people see red soil with stones in it they think it is murram. That is why we have laboratories to test the soil. As I talk now roads are becoming more expensive to construct because we do not have murram. We are remaining with a few cubic meters of good murram in Pallisa, but in other places there is none. 

It is for this reason that we are using what we call mechanical stabilisation, that is, crushed stones in the base for most of our roads, especially the tarmac ones. We would have preferred to use cheaper materials like lime mixed with soil and what have you, but that is the reason. Stones are more available now than the murram that we used to have. It is a very big problem, which is compounded by the land tenure system where you have to pay somebody before you scoop murram from his land.

Mr Speaker, I think I have answered all the queries that were raised. I want to thank honourable members for the interest in the – excuse me, there are some notes here –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We shall require you some time again in another debate on the policy statement of your ministry, but for this purpose, you have answered the queries.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

1.44
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence. There is a very important issue that I raised in our response and this is to do with funding to the ministry. We reliably learnt from Ministry of Finance officials that there was a commitment by government to increase the amount of money allocated to the Ministry of Works and Transport at the rate of US $2 million per year. This happened for about three years but incidentally this has not been effected this financial year. I would like to find out from the Government Minister of Works and Transport whether there is an understanding that this money should not come to the ministry any longer. 

Furthermore, hon. Kiyonga who I assume is representing the Leader of Government Business, why has that money not been given to the Ministry of Works this financial year as per commitment of the Government?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think this can be resolved here. I want to advise honourable members that although we set up different sessional committees, anybody with an interest in a committee to which he does not belong is free to attend the proceedings of that committee and even participate by making an input. 

Concerning this issue that you have raised, I wish you had attended the meetings of that sessional committee. You would have been able to ask the technical staff of the ministries who attended about this question. You would also have been able to call upon the Ministry of Finance to come and answer this question. However for now, the minister in charge of this sector did not get the money and he cannot give us an assurance that this money will come. 

As I have said, this is not the end of discussing policies and workings of ministries. I think I have said this many times before: next month this matter can be followed up by the committee not only in respect of matters of this committee but any committee will be free to sit and review issues that have been raised and summon whoever they want for an answer. As for your question, it cannot be answered at this time. 

1.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Dr Kasirivu Atwooki): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the chairman of the committee and the committee members for the decisions, observations and recommendations contained in the report. I also want to thank the Opposition for the concerns that they have raised regarding the Ministry of Lands and Urban Development. 

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is a new one and it was created after the budgeting process had been concluded. That is why issues like those concerning the sub-sector of urban development have not been catered for in the Budget but have been raised in the report. The Ministry is taking seriously the observations and recommendations of the committee and I would say that two weeks ago, the political leadership of the ministry and the senior staff had a retreat to harmonise our thinking and plan a way forward on how to handle the new ministry. 

However, there are issues that have been raised by Members that I would want to highlight and I am sure we shall interface with Members as we try to rebuild the ministry. Mr Speaker, I sympathise with hon. Nyombi from Nakasongola on the issue of the land fund and I would urge him to give us a lot of support so that we can campaign for more resources so that Nakasongola goes on board. Naturally Nakasongola is in the same line with Kibaale and it cannot be denied its rights to having all these matters rectified. 

Hon. Lukwago raised a matter about the records –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You want the record to carry what you said?

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Speaker, what I said is on record and anybody can read the records of the Hansard as they are very clear. We shall see what to do next. 

Hon. Lukwago raised the issue of the land records for Kampala District or Kampala City Council. They are well kept in the ministry and they were about to be moved to the City Council when the programme of computerisation got into gear. Many staff members are now being trained in this new programme so that as they move the records to Kampala City they can become conversant with how to deal with the new system. The new system is actually putting the records into good shape. Hon. Lukwago emphasized that the records could be on the floor but there is a lot of improvement that is now taking place. 

Mr Speaker, there is no land bonanza in Kampala and I want to put this in its proper perspective. There is what we call change of land use and to the best of my knowledge Shimoni, which is affected, is to be relocated to a new site. When the new site is ready the school will move. In the meantime, it is where it is. We have explained and we shall continue explaining that change of land use is nothing new. 

Hon. Lukwago will recall that at one time Kampala Parents’ School was on Namirembe road but it shifted to its present site. There were some parents who had resisted but now they have seen the truth and the light and have shifted their children to the new site. That is what will happen when the new site is all set for Shimoni.  

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the hotels, certainly when the hotels are ready - and we are not saying that the hotels are for CHOGM only but when CHOGM has concluded, the hotels will remain. What we should know is that Uganda is one of the countries in the region with the highest hotel rates. When we have more hotels here, we expect the rates to go lower and that means we shall attract tourists to come and enjoy their stay in these hotels. The same applies to Ugandans who want to spend their weekends in hotels. 

My brother from Kassanda raised the issue of bona fide occupants. The Constitution protects people who have been on a particular piece of land for 12 years or more, that is from 1995 to 1983. I urge Members to sensitise the people so that they are not chased unfairly. If someone goes against the Constitution, you as the representative of the people should be there to intervene. I would want to end here and request my brother for Urban Development to make a few highlights. As I said, this is a new ministry so we intend to interface with Members of this House quite regularly as we put things in order. I thank you. 

Mr Speaker if I may add, it is this very Parliament that made an amendment to the Land Act to make sure that the Land Tribunals are housed in the Judiciary. Therefore, any issue arising should be handled by the sessional committee responsible for the Judiciary and by the Minister of Justice. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Minister.

1.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Mr Speaker, I will also make comments on behalf of the Housing sector. I thank the committee for a well-researched report and I also thank the shadow ministers for the very good points they raised. I will definitely take them into account.

I want to say despite the ruling the hon. Speaker gave earlier on, that I wish the shadow minister had given me a copy of what he read to the House so that I could internalise it and answer from a more informed point of view, maybe next time. It is true that the Ministry of Urban Development was not budgeted for as my colleague has stated; we have contacted the Ministry of Finance and they have promised to give us a supplementary to make the department functional. So, very soon we shall be in business. 

It is not government policy to let urbanisation take a haphazard trend. That is the reason the Ministry of Urban Development was created. The Government is taking serious steps to address urbanisation, which is estimated at 15 percent, but growing at a rate of five percent per annum. The population cannot be left to migrate to un-planned areas and so the creation of this ministry was timely. 

The Cabinet has already asked me to write a policy paper on urban development and I have already made a library-researched draft, which is waiting to be evidence-based. Because of the problem of money, we have not yet gone to the ground but very soon we shall be there and start contacting honourable colleagues for their input.

The urban road fund is a very welcome idea and I will definitely lobby for it. In addition I will also lobby for a compensation fund so that we can compensate landowners and create new roads in towns. 

The Town and Country Planning Act is being revised and very soon I will be tabling it in Cabinet and thereafter it will come here for discussion. Before the end of September I will also have appointed a town and country planning board. Consultations are in progress.

On the Housing sector, we welcome the recommendation that the building function be housed in the same ministry with the housing function as they go hand in hand. We are liberal in our ministry so whether it goes to Works or remains in Housing, doesn’t matter. 

I think those are the only comments I had to make on issues raised on the Floor. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, when the report was presented ,the prayer –(Interruption)

MR KALIBA: Correction, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Correction?

MR KALIBA: Yes. On page 13, the distance on Fort Portal Municipal roads has been quoted as seven kilometres yet it is actually 11.8 kilometres. I think the Minister is in agreement with this. I think this is a very serious issue. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The question is that we adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We have two reports remaining namely, legal and defence. I understand the Chairperson of the Defence Committee has a problem otherwise we would have loved to have it presented this afternoon. Should we hear the defence report today and then the legal one maybe tomorrow? This is because I do not see us dealing with two reports this afternoon.

DR KIYONGA: On our side, Mr Speaker, we are prepared for either option.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

2.00
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE (Mr Erias Lukwago): Honourable Speaker, I request that we start with the legal committee report because tomorrow I might not be around –(Laughter)- and being a minister I am obliged to make a response. I humbly request that since we were scheduled to present ours yesterday and we were put off again that we should be given priority. I humbly pray, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can’t hon. Kawanga help you present your report by assignment? This is because I see a problem, please. Thank you. Let us have a break of an hour and come back at 3 p.m. prompt. 

(The House was suspended at 2.00 p.m.)

 (On resumption at 3.11 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2006/07

THE SPEAKER: As you realised in the morning, there were two items that we skipped because those concerned were not there. The minister who was to lay papers on the Table is here and so is the minister to answer questions. However, the owners of the questions are not here so we shall not be able to deal with those questions until the owners appear, maybe tomorrow or another day. However, you can call up the minister to lay the papers on the Table.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIVATISATION (Ms Rukiya Chekamondo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members present. I beg to lay on the Table the proposed credit of SDR 18.2, which is equivalent to US $26.4 million and a railways partial risk guarantee of US $15 million from the International Development Association to finance the East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project.

THE SPEAKER: The document should be handled by the committee on National Economy for scrutiny and a subsequent report availed to Parliament.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am pleased to present to you the Treasury Memorandum for the Financial Year ended 30th June 1999. I wish to inform you that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is fully committed to making improvements in financial management and addressing accountability issues raised by the Auditor-General, the Public Accounts Committee and recommendations made by Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, the Treasury Memorandum is a government response to recommendations made by Parliament with regard to the report of the Auditor-General. It indicates measures taken to address weaknesses in implementation of government programmes identified by the Auditor-General. It also summarises the follow up actions taken by the accounting officers to address the recommendations. 

The last Treasury Memorandum prepared in June 2004 and presented to Parliament was for the Financial Year ended 30th June 1998. We have taken steps to follow up all issues raised by the Auditor-General and efforts are being made to ensure that the Treasury Memorandum is up to date.  

I wish to inform you that the Government is prepared to address the recommendations of Parliament and the current backlog of Treasury Memoranda is due to the reports of the Auditor-General not yet considered by Parliament. We are working out modalities with the Public Accounts Committee on how the discussion and follow up of the reports can be improved.  

I am pleased to inform you that recommendations in respect to the Auditor-General’s report for the year ended 30th June 2000 are being addressed and a Treasury Memorandum will be presented to Parliament soon. I wish to highlight below the major landmarks in the control of public expenditure:

1.	Approval of the Appropriation Act by the House: this is done in accordance with Article 155 and 156 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Budget Act, 2001 and involves scrutiny and approval of the annual budget in an Appropriation Act.  

2.	Disbursement of funds by the accounting officers: the accounting officers are mandated by Article 164 of the Constitution and Section 8 of the Republic Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 to manage funds under their ministries or departments. Consequently, they are in charge of managing the spending under them. In turn they are personally accountable to Parliament for the funds allocated to their ministries or departments.

3.	Submission of the accounts by the accounting officers to the Auditor-General: at the end of each financial year, each accounting officer is required to submit accounts to the Auditor-General in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. In addition, the Accountant-General submits consolidated accounts of government to the Auditor-General.

4.	The Auditor-General’s report on the public accounts and their presentation to Parliament: the Auditor-General audits the accounts from the accounting officers as well as the consolidated accounts by the Accountant-General and reports to Parliament.

5.	The examination of the audit reports by Parliament and presentation of the PAC report. Parliament receives and sends the Auditor-General’s report to Public Accounts Committee for scrutiny. The committee reports to Parliament with recommendations, which are forwarded to the Executive for implementation. It is important to note that government starts the process of addressing recommendations of the Auditor-General immediately they are received. However, a Treasury Memorandum cannot be submitted to Parliament until Parliament has pronounced itself on the report of the Auditor-General.

6.	The tabling of the Treasury Memorandum to Parliament: the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is supposed to ensure appropriate action is taken including any policy changes and to address recommendations by Parliament. In this regard, the Ministry coordinates the process of addressing the recommendations and prepares a Treasury Memorandum. Once presented to Parliament, the Treasury Memorandum marks the end of the accountability cycle for a given financial year.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to bring to the attention of honourable members that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is currently implementing financial management reforms including the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. It is envisaged that as a consequence of implementing the integrated financial management system and the professional training initiatives for the government financial managers, the existing delays in implementation of recommendations made by Parliament and compilation of the Treasury Memoranda will be eliminated. 

The presentation of this Treasury Memorandum for fiscal years 1998 and 1999, therefore, completes the final act of Parliamentary control in the cycle of public expenditure for the Financial Year ended 30th June 1999.  

Mr Speaker, I wish to inform you that we received the PAC report for the fiscal year 1999/2000 and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is currently preparing the Treasury Memorandum to address the recommendations. It will soon be presented to this House. I thank you and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you must realise now that what we are getting is something for the Sixth Parliament and yet this is the Eighth Parliament; we must definitely find a solution to this as you realise that already two Parliaments have passed!  Thank you all the same, Madam Minister, for presenting this document. We shall scrutinize it and hopefully get another one soon.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS OF THE BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2006/2007

3.25
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Namayanja): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for the Ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs for the Financial Year 2006/2007 and the minutes herewith attached.

In accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution and rule 161 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to present to you the report of the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and the policy statements for the Ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs for Financial Year 2006/2007. 

As you may realise, the report is big but I will not go through everything. I will just go through the highlights. The scope of the report is contained in paragraph 2.0, with (1) presenting the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Page 2 contains the scope of the Ministry of Defence and paragraph three covers the methodology. Paragraph four handles the Ministry of Internal Affairs and in particular its major activities in the financial year 2005/2006 as item 4.1 and 4.2. 

There is also Vote 009 for the activities of the headquarters, Vote 144 for the Uganda Police Force and Vote 145 for Uganda Prisons Service. On page 5 we have the emerging issues in the ministries. They are seven and I cannot go through all of them. I just want Members to note that some of the emerging issues include the need to secure alternative land for the Police and Prisons in the event that some of their land within the city is availed for investment as proposed by the Government. 

There is also the issue of relocation of Kigo and Bufulubi Prisons, which are located on the land of Buganda and Busoga Kingdoms respectively. Mr Speaker, I will not read the rest because they are covered in the bigger part of the report.

Paragraph 4.3 comprises of the outstanding issues in the ministries, particularly Ministry of Internal Affairs. Paragraph 4.4 has the planned activities for the Ministry of Internal Affairs. At this moment I will go to the observations for the Ministry of Internal Affairs first.  

Mr Speaker, at the headquarters the committee observed that the Registry of the Directorate of Immigration is in an appalling state. Files that date back from 1934 up to 2002 are crowded in a small store in manila folders. The stores have no extra space and files are piled on the floor. This kind of storage makes it difficult to trace multiple applications for travel and other documents issued by the Department.  

The Directorate of NGOs lacks not only computers but also staff. It has three officers, one typist and one cleaner.  Further to this there is lack of office accommodation and one of the ministry stores has been turned into an office for the whole directorate. 

Mr Speaker, we also noted that some border posts are not manned and this is due to lack of staff while many are not even networked. 

Another observation is that the Directorate of Immigration currently issues machine readable passports yet at border posts there are no machine readers.  

The committee further noted that the process of issuing national identity cards has dragged on for so long. This item has been appearing in the ministry policy statements for the last four years but has not been implemented. This will negatively impact on the fast tracking of the East African Federation, as we all know that the treaty emphasises common practices. 

The committee further observed that the existing legal framework does not adequately provide for auxiliary forces.  

On the issue of peace talks with the LRA, the Government has engaged in peace negotiations with the LRA mediated by the leadership of the Government of Southern Sudan. The committee commends the Government of Southern Sudan for the initiative and the Government of Uganda as well as the LRA for the compliance so far. The committee has interacted with some of the individuals involved in the negotiations and these include the Minister of Defence, Minister of Internal Affairs, some Members of Parliament from the affected committees who are taking part in these negotiations, and the legal consultant of the mediating team. 

The committee observed that there is optimism in these talks, it welcomes this initiative wholeheartedly and wishes to request Parliament for total support. May I add that the committee has been receiving reports regularly from the Ministry of Defence and Internal Affairs?   

On the Police, the committee observed that the proportion of the Police budget has been falling over the years. For example, the Police budget in 1996 was 3.7 percent of the national budget but now it stands at two percent of the budget. Critical areas like investigations have been crippled leading to backlog and failure to prosecute suspects.  

Another observation is that promotions in the Police Force have been suspended due to lack of funds to pay for the corresponding wage bill implications. The force requires Shs 2 billion to carry out promotions that are long overdue. 

Mr Speaker and Members, I would beg your indulgence on observation No. 3. Observation No. 3 does not affect the 15 percent deduction nor does it affect the entire police force. This is just for officers who are entitled to housing allowance as part of their consolidated salary. If they opt to stay in the barracks then 15 percent is deducted from their salary.

Observation No. 4 involves the creation of new districts. It does not take into consideration the budget component of keeping law and order. The creation of districts requires establishment of police administrative structures and other related structures but this cannot be done without adjustment in the budget allocations. 

The number of auxiliary forces in the country is not established yet they are meant to be facilitated through government funding. Lack of establishment of the actual numbers is likely to create room for ghost forces. 

With the normalisation of the security situation in the Northern part of the country and the planned decongestion and resettlement of IDPs, the Police is expected to take over keeping law and order, a role that had been taken over by the Army and auxiliary forces.  

The committee further observed that as resettlement in Northern Uganda takes route, it is envisaged that there is likely to be a high level of crime in the region. This will, therefore, require specialised Police services to handle a generation of traumatised people.  

Mr Speaker, the local police force was taken over by the central government with the coming into force of the Police Amendment Act, which was passed and assented to this year. There will, therefore, be need to retool this extra force and this requires extra funds to implement this.  

The committee further observed that institutions that are legally mandated to manage and control fires in this country have ignored their responsibility and left the burden of fire fighting to the Police. Although it is perceived that the Police are responsible for controlling fires, it is not particularly provided for anywhere in the Police legislations save for the general mandate of keeping law and order.

Mr Speaker, the Local Governments Act, Cap 243, the second schedule provides as follows in part (i): “Functions and services for which urban councils are responsible but not limited to include: 
1.	Establish, acquire, erect, maintain, promote, assist or control with the participation of citizens;  
	(b) Fire brigade services.  
2.	Prevent, extinguish fires, remove buildings in order to prevent the spread of any fire and to compensate the owner of any building removed.”

The fire stations in the country are grossly inadequate.  For example, Kampala has only one fire station and the whole of Northern Uganda has none.

Observations in regard to the Prison Service include that the local prisons were centralised as a result of the Prisons Act, 2006. The prison budget has, however, not been adjusted to take care of this. 

Mr Speaker, it was understood at the time of considering the Prisons Bill that the resources, which were being used to cater for the 174 local prisons would be transferred to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the resources would be enough to fund the transferred prisons. However, to the contrary, the following has been noted:

1.	Payment to local administration prisons differed from one district to the other and some were at a rate lower than that of the central prisons. Centralising them, therefore, requires harmonisation of remuneration, which has an upward effect on the wage bill.

2.	Districts were paying the forces using locally generated funds as top-up for the unconditional funds coming from the centre. However, what was transferred to the ministry was the unconditional funds minus the top-up from local revenue.  

Mr Speaker, the transferred funds only cater for the wages. The non-wage and development expenditure was not included. Members should realise that the summary of the non-wage financial requirements not provided for amount to Shs 9,487,797,000.

The committee recommends as follows: 

1.	There is need for government to devise concretised mechanisms of rehabilitating the areas and the victims of the war in the North and North eastern Uganda.  

2.	The Directorate of Non-government Organisation should be facilitated to enable it carry out its mandate.

3.	More sensitisation should be carried out about the community service programme so that it is better appreciated and implemented. 

4.	The committee urges the Ministry to implement the recommendations of the report on the Parliamentary Select Committee on Immigration.
	
	Mr Speaker, we may recall in the Seventh Parliament that there was a Select Committee on Immigration and a number of recommendations were made and adopted by this House. However, we realised that the time we had was very limited for us to comprehensively them follow up. We, therefore, request that under rule 161(e) and (f) the committee continues to interact with the ministry and briefs this House on the affairs of the Immigration Department.

5.	We also recommend that the machine, passport readers be installed at many of the immigration posts.  

6.	The Ministry in collaboration with the relevant departments should document auxiliary forces operating in the North and North eastern Uganda. Those that will not be integrated into the existing government structures should be discharged and given discharge documents for current and future reference as well as an appropriate and affordable discharge package.  

7.	There is need for closer monitoring and scrutiny of the private security organs to ensure that they follow the guidelines that govern them.  

8.	The auxiliary forces should be harmonised, regularised and given a definite name instead of having several of them with different nomenclatures. Further, a specific legislation should be put in place to address these forces. Mr Speaker, at the time of passing the UPDF Bill there was hope that this would be covered. Unfortunately the Police Amendment Act did not effectively cover the recruitment, deployment, command structure and remuneration of the auxiliary forces.

9.	The community service programme should be integrated into the local government plans with a budget line and leave the National Community Service Programme at the headquarters to deal with the policy related issues. This will further ensure sensitisation of the programme to the masses.

10.	The Minister should initiate the necessary amendments to the Community Service Act to address the lacking areas in the Act, like inclusion of minors, those who fail to pay fines and those already convicted but could otherwise qualify for the community service.

11.	The committee also observed that rather than spend Shs 1.5 billion to repair the old police helicopter, a new helicopter be procured at Shs 3.4 billion.

12.	Mr Speaker and honourable members, recommendation No. 12 was to the effect that the deduction of the 15 percent be rescinded from the police officers.

13.	The institutions charged with the responsibility of managing and controlling fires should share the responsibility so that the burden on the Police is reduced.

14.	Mechanisms should be put in place to ensure that when districts are created there is a framework for providing police and police related services to ensure that we have a proper policing structure for the new districts.

15.	The non-wage component item for the prisons should be increased to enable the prisons department cater for former local government prisons. The funds to purchase food for prisoners should be treated as a matter of urgency and be availed to avoid catastrophe in the prisons.

16.	The Police should refocus their priorities to include the fight against corruption. 

Mr Speaker, paragraph 5 is on the Ministry of Defence and page 16 covers the scope of this ministry and its achievements. On page 17 we have the achievements of last financial year. 

I would like to make corrections on achievement five. The figures were interchanged but it should read that they passed out 30 officers from the command college and admitted 40 new entrants. There was also a typing error on achievement No. 6. The Ministry facilitated the ex-servicemen to access the pension payroll and currently 156, instead of 156,000 are on the payroll. 305 cases are being processed and are already in the Public Service, 187 are being audited and 4,850 cases of survivor benefits have been handled.

Paragraph 5.3 contains outstanding issues while paragraph 5.4 contains the new policies. Planned activities are on page 19. 

The general observations on the Ministry of Defence include: 

Although the Karamoja region has not been fully disarmed, cattle rustling activities have been curtailed both outside and within Karamoja. 

The committee observed that the soldiers’ take home pay of Shs 153,000 per month is too low compared to that of other public servants. 

We also observed that the Ministry has difficulties in retaining personnel in the professional category because the pay in the civil service for those in the professional category is well above that of their counterparts in the UPDF. 

We further noted that the Ministry of Defence land is not fully surveyed and documented.

The committee recommends the following: 

1.	That the House should get regular briefs from government on the progress of the peace process with the LRA. We should continue to get these progress reports, as has been the case.  
2.	The reduced operational costs of the UPDF arising out of the improved security situation in the country should be reflected in the welfare of the soldiers as this will improve their morale.
3.	A definite framework to pay arrears of the five percent salary increment for soldiers should be put in place. Further, implementation of the salary increment should be made a priority to bring it at per with that of other public servants. Mr Speaker, initially it was ten percent but the Ministry assured us that they had cleared the five percent given the funds that were availed and now what is lacking is the five percent and this is coupled with an increase in the salary of soldiers to the level of other Public Servants.  
4.	A specific programme to demobilise the ineffective force within the UPDF should be devised and implemented. This will in the long run reduce strain on the Defence budget. As was the case with the Police, we realised that there are so many officers that are due for retirement but cannot retire because of insufficient resources and this creates a bigger but less competent force for this country.
5.	Funds for payment of pensions, gratuity and survivor benefits should be sourced.  
6.	The Government should clear the domestic arrears amounting to over Shs 20 billion and this is particularly for the suppliers of the Ministry of Defence. 
7.	All the Ministry of Defence land should be surveyed and documented.  
8.	The US $1 million in legal claims by the Uganda Air Cargo from the DRC should be followed up.
9.	The Ministry should adhere to its promise to have the C130 aircraft back from repairs in South Africa.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, allow me to salute the gallant sons and daughters of the UPDF for the resolute energy that they have expended in trying to weed out insecurity in this country. (Applause) The future has never been brighter than it is today and we believe that hope is on the way.

The committee recommends the adoption of this report and the approval of the budget and on the Votes I will beg your indulgence as the Ministry of Internal Affairs has just brought in the amended figures from the Finance Bill. Therefore, there will be changes particularly for the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

However, Vote 004, Ministry of Defence, has Shs 339,867,242,000.  

Vote 009, Ministry of Internal Affairs, the recurrent non-wage budget is Shs 19,010,000,000; and the new figure for the recurrent wage is Shs 2,250,000,000. 

Vote 144, Uganda Police Force, the new figure for the recurrent non-wage is Shs 36,979,999,000; the recurrent wage the new figure is Shs 50,110,000,000; and the new statutory figure is Shs 43,422,000.  

Vote 145, Uganda Prisons Service, recurrent non-wage is Shs 13,086,000,000; recurrent wage is Shs 14,400,000,000; and the statutory figure is Shs 43,422,000. 

The development expenditure for Vote 004, Ministry of Defence, is Shs 13,802,000,000.  

Vote 009, Ministry of Internal Affairs, MTEF is Shs 570,000,000; Justice, Law and Order sector has Shs 2,062,000,000.  

Vote 144, Uganda Police Force, development MTEF is Shs 4,290,800,000, tax inclusive; the Justice, Law and Order sector has Shs 2,800,000,000.

Vote 145, Uganda Prisons Service, development MTEF, the new figure is Shs 1,520,000,000; the Justice, Law and Order sector has Shs 3,728,000,000.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much chairperson and the committee for this report.

3.51
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS AND HUMAN RIGHTS (Mr Hussein Kyanjo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report and I will also use this opportunity to thank the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs for the background report in form of the policy statement.  

I am honoured to present to this House the considered response of the Opposition to the Government’s policy statement in respect of the Internal Affairs Ministry to which I serve as the Shadow Minister.

Ugandans await a change in the way in which matters of government are going to be worked out in the multi-party political dispensation with a legitimate opposition this time not crying out for political space but rather for enriched policies that are going to benefit citizens and the entire country. In that regard, therefore, we have endeavoured to observe, analyse and subsequently recommend to government what we think are the best alternative options. We have identified areas where we agree with government and where changes are required.

Mr Speaker, in full regard of the above, allow me to go through some of the most critical areas, which we thought needed attention. I will lay this document on the Table at the end, Mr Speaker.

The review of this policy takes into account what the chairperson of the committee has already indicated and includes the following departments: Finance and Administration under the Ministry Headquarters, Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control, the Government Analytical Laboratory, National Committee Service Programme, National Focal Point on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Amnesty Commission and the Non-governmental Organisations Board. There are also two other departments, which are self-accounting, and these are the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Prisons.  

Let us look briefly at the achievements of the ministry headquarters. These have been laid down in the ministerial policy statement and I am sure it was availed to every Member and you will find them there.  

On the Directorate of the Immigration Control, the achievements of the directorate are listed on page 36 of the ministerial policy statement. The achievements of the Government Analytical Laboratory are also well laid down in the ministerial policy statement.

We have two other departments in the National Community Service Programme, which include the Amnesty Commission and Non-governmental Organisations.  

Let me look at the Police force with specific interest.  A strong Police force is critical to the administration of law and order. We in the Opposition decry the continued neglect and even the abuse of the Police force. While Shs 4.6 billion has been provided for recurrent budget of 4,000 constables, government continues to spend huge sums of money on anti-riot gear whose use in the recent past has been to suppress the people and undermine their rights to free expression. The inclusion of Shs 1.4 billion to buy anti-riot vehicles only reminds us of the use of the Police to suppress and harm the Opposition and the militarisation of the Police under its current Inspector-General. This money should instead be used to recruit an additional 1,217 police constables.

Once again the Opposition commends the Prisons Services for the good work it is doing for our country. Amongst the service’s achievements, they generated Shs 2 billion worth of food even after reducing the prisoners’ hours of work from 8.00 p.m. to 6.00 p.m. 

Through increased mechanisation, over 10,000 prisoners have been exposed to good farming practices. Given the effectiveness of this service, we note with concern the gross under-funding of this department.  

MR KUBEKETERYA: I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker. We do not have a copy of what he is reading. Maybe it would be of use if we compared what we need because there are some sentiments, which are stated that we need to compare so that we can be on board.

THE SPEAKER: I think you should note the highlights of the sentiments that he is expressing. However, I think arrangements must be made to avail Members with copies and especially the ministers because they have to keep these records for comparison. Let the Office of the Clerk assist you in getting copies.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your guidance and I thank the Member for noting that important issue. It is simply because facilities are inadequate for this exercise. 

Mr Speaker, I was saying that given the effectiveness of this service, we note with concern the gross under-funding of this department. We are also deeply concerned about the congestion in our prisons due to the backlog of people on remand. Government must stop holding people in prisons on tramped up charges.  

We have some observations on the planned activities for the Financial Year 2006/2007. I would like to comment briefly on two planned activities under the ministry that we consider very important. Of course the rest are also equally important but because of the time constraint, it was decided that I highlight these two.  

On ICT installations, the Minister plans to install an Internet and Local Area Network intercom system for its headquarters as well as design a ministry website for Shs 75 million. The Department of Immigration also plans to link all its upcountry offices and regional departments to the headquarters with the same Local Area Network (LAN) for an additional Shs 50 million. Mr Speaker, we beg to submit that with careful planning and management all the above installations can be made at a half of the proposed cost.  

We also note that the ministry intends to use LAN connection instead of one connection for the installations. If I can explain briefly, the use of LAN is typical to a building or a station. However, when you use one connection, it covers nearly the entire country at almost the same cost. We recommend, therefore, that the Minister of Internal Affairs work closely with the ICT Ministry to chart out the best way forward.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Immigration Department remains one area of grave concern to us. During an on-spot visit to the ministry headquarters, it was discovered that the entire directorate and therefore the whole of Uganda has one small computer unit for processing passports. To promote ICT use and enhance efficiency, we recommend a full computerisation of the department. We also recommend that in doing so, possible use of a comprehensive immigration software be seriously studied. We refer the Minister in particular to the Supercom Group and specifically to the receipt, alien and file accountability control system software. This software has worked well in many countries with minimum hindrance to the officers concerned.  

The other recommendation we wish to make is that the process of implementing the national registration and citizens’ identification system, which was halted be reactivated. In doing so, it is our honest advice that the ministry considers a policy that employs a biometric system called Magna. This system is very superior as the user’s anatomy is the means of identification. That is to say, it is a biological password and cannot be forged, lost, lent out, forgotten or even stolen like PIN numbers. The technology is very easy to use, is accurate and can be relied upon to create a national database with solid integrity.

The other matter of importance that I would like to bring to the attention of the House is the issue of accommodation and headquarters of the Uganda Police Force with particular respect to the Nsambya Police land. Mr Speaker and honourable members, during committee deliberations the Minister drew our attention to the plight of the Police Training School at Kibuli where the Police Headquarters has occupied 80 percent of the premises of the school. He further indicates that crucial departments of Police such as CID, SB, Mobile PPU, Marines and others are scattered around town. This he says is not only expensive but also offers a security challenge in terms of co-ordination and communication.  

Mr Speaker, the Minister proposes a solution to the effect that there is already a site earmarked for a comprehensive Police Headquarters residence and that the architectural drawings and bills of quantities have already been prepared with a total estimate of Shs 19 billion. The Minister goes on to state that for now the preliminary requirement is only Shs 4.5 billion to cover phase one of the project. He proposes a similar figure each subsequent financial year in the medium-term and concludes by appealing to the Ministry of Finance to prioritise the Police to benefit under BOT.

Mr Speaker, this is a matter of reasonable urgency and we do not find the explanation adequate to place it under unfunded priorities. The Opposition thinks that this is a legitimate appeal and we appeal to this Parliament to impress upon the Ministry of Finance to heed the call of the Minister of Internal Affairs. However, this call comes at a time when there is talk making rounds in town to the effect that Police land at Nsambya is under sale; that is if it has not already been offered for free to an unknown potential investor. 

When the committee met the ministerial team, the honourable minister denied knowledge of this. However, the way Ugandan Government business is sometimes transacted, there is strong ground for suspicion. We, therefore, want the Minister to come on the Floor of Parliament and give this House a clear position regarding this land.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Opposition is fully aware of the relative value of land in town and we are not blind to the fact that some of the installations like the Police facility at Nsambya can be relocated without causing damage to public order. We are also deeply mindful of the necessity to attract investors for obvious reasons that would not necessitate anybody lecturing to this House. However, we strongly object to the idea of giving Police land for free to any investor and recommend the following alternatives: 

Let government negotiate with an investor who is willing to buy part of that land at a conservative value of not less that Shs 500 million per acre. Honourable members, the land at Nsambya and Kibuli has four titles, all-totalling to well above 150 acres. If we sold 100 acres that will fetch a net total of Shs 50 billion. With this sum you are able to put up an ultra-modern barracks. The Minister’s cry is just Shs 19 billion. In addition to a modern barracks the Police can purchase two new helicopters for its air wing for Shs 6.8 billion – as according to the evidence by the Minister himself in his policy statement - and establish a modern fire-fighting unit as well. Mr Speaker and honourable members, how and why does this government fail to see such a simple process and logic? The country demands these answers. 

We are also gravely concerned about important inconsistencies in the policy statement. I do not know whether these are the ones that have been collected but on further scrutiny of the policy statement we found very many disturbing inconsistencies, particularly in regard to stated costs and sector estimates. This is sloppiness that is totally unaccountable in any government system.  

We also wonder whether the contradictory figures are not deliberately embedded to enable officials corruptly redirect budgeted funds to areas of their particular interest, or to even effect exorbitant payments for goods and services. 

Honourable members, these few examples will illustrate this point. When you refer to annex B on page 80 of the policy statement, it contradicts all the above information. Whereas the requirement for the current expenditure is Shs 16.2 billion, the table shows Shs 16.1 billion. For the development budget or MTEF it is indicated at Shs 570 million. Also in the policy statement in (1), the requirement is Shs 20 million while in the table it is Shs 15 million. In (2) the requirement is Shs 55 million while the table shows Shs 150 million, which is Shs 100 million above. For the requirements they are stated at Shs 105 million while in the table it is Shs 165 million. In (4) it is Shs 20 million, but this does not feature at all in any table while (5) above shows Shs 70 million for a pick-up while the table shows Shs 150 million for two pick-ups. There is no mathematics that can tally this type of thing.

Mr Speaker, the programme on page 46 of the policy statement in (2) required Shs 305 million for training and sensitisation of stakeholders while in annex B, page 81 the figure changes to Shs 390 million. In item (4), page 46 the motorcycle is valued at Shs 5 million, while on page 81 the value of a motorcycle is Shs 3 million.  

Again, Mr Speaker and honourable members, there are a number of items on page 48 and 49 of the policy statement, which do not tally with the layout in annex B on page 84 and 85. If you quickly added up the activity value from one to 22, you will get Shs 68.705 billion, while the stated requirement is only Shs 91 billion. Furthermore, salaries, which form an important component, are not indicated at all in the table. If you add it, the total will rush up to Shs 142.967 billion. This is not a matter of concern only for the Opposition but rather for the whole nation. Can the Minister, therefore, clarify on these calculations? This is a policy statement of the same ministry with a central team of experts. Why should it reflect such disparities? We in the Opposition take this trend to be dangerous. We, therefore, strongly demand a fair explanation to that effect from the Minister.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, we once again thank the Minister for attempting to make an effort in that direction and for the policy statement. We thank the committee for their report, which was actually very comprehensive. I beg to move; and lay this document on the Table. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. What I need to know, hon. Kyanjo, is whether you are the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs or you are Shadow Minister for Local Government. This document is signed by the Shadow Minister for Local Government. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, we could be reading different documents. I do not know which one they gave you, but I have the pleasure to present to you the very one I have used for this presentation. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so this was an error, apparently.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Namayanja): Mr Speaker, I would like to make a few corrections. I know hon. Kyanjo is a member of the committee and we went through this together in the last meeting. The Minister sent corrections to the policy statement when we were going through the draft report. The corrections were to affect page 44 of the policy statement. What was indicated as 20 in the narrative on finance and administration is actually the figure. That should be the same figure on page 80, for installation of an inter-com telephone system at the ministry headquarters. 

The figure for the installation of an internet and local area network, which was indicated as 55 on page 40, is actually the same figure that should be reflected on page 80. Remodelling of the office block should be at Shs 165 million instead of what was provided for. On procurement of the pick-up, it is one pick-up not two pick-ups as was indicated in the policy statement, and at a cost of Shs 70 million.  

These are corrections that were sent by the Ministry to the committee. I wish to correct them here. Thank you, Sir.

4.12
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I make a brief response to the policy statement of the Ministry of Defence, allow me to point out that much as the Front Bench on your left is now part and parcel of this Parliament, we are operating under very difficult circumstances. Even with these difficulties, we are trying our best to give the alternative policy for the betterment of our country. 

Mr Speaker, you also double as the Chairman of the Parliamentary Commission. I, therefore, take this opportunity to call upon you to at least avail basic facilities like office space and some staff to work for these shadow ministers, so that they can produce something, which can match with what we get from the government ministers. You very well know that many of these ministers were appointed by the President far after the technocrats in the ministries had prepared these policy statements. As soon as they were appointed by the President, the technocrats merely put the names of these ministers just for them to sign and own these documents. This is not the case with shadow ministers. So, I really call upon you and the entire Parliamentary Commission to do something to improve on the work of the shadow ministers. 

These few documents I have presented to you, to the Minister, and to my Chief Whip I have done it out of my pocket because I want to serve this country. So, it is now the responsibility of whoever to produce more copies for the entire House because I cannot do that myself; I have done my part.  

Having said that, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I take this opportunity at this most memorable occasion in my national, political career under the pluralistic political dispensation as the first ever Opposition Cabinet Minister of Defence to respond to the Ministry of Defence policy statement for the 2006/2007 Financial Year. Thank you.

Uganda is one of the poorest countries in the world. We should, therefore, learn to budget in line with what we have in the resource envelope. We have a substantive Minister of Defence and also a substantive Minister for Security. The English define security and defence as follows: defence is the organisation of peoples and systems that are used by government to protect the country from attack. While the word security is defined as the activities involved in protecting a country, buildings and persons from attack, danger and so forth. Security simply means defence. So, the two can be used in that endeavour. 

Why does a poor country like Uganda have two substantive ministers doing almost the same job? Probably, when he is responding, Dr Kiyonga will tell me where his role starts and where Amama Mbabazi’s stops. As the Opposition, we see no reason as of now for Uganda to have two substantive Ministers for Defence and Security.

For any country to think of its defence, the first tool cannot be the military, especially for a third world country like ours. Our conviction is that we always spent too much money in the Ministry of Defence. So, why can’t we think of a way that can curtail our defence expenditure by looking at other more acceptable methods to enhance the defence of our country? One such method, which many civilised nations apply, is to ensure that you live in harmony with your neighbours, good neighbourliness. 

Two, any responsible government must always ensure that it eliminates political dissent. All these rebellions that have been going on in the country - even after 20 years we are not in a position to talk of total peace in the country - is because we have failed to address the issue of eliminating political dissent. So, it is our conviction that all rebellions in Uganda are politically motivated; therefore, the Government must do everything within its means to eliminate political dissent. 

Elections must be organised in a manner that all parties are content with the results. There must be a mechanism of presidential succession even within the party in power. Constitutional presidential term limits are a key factor in establishing political stability in the country. We have seen it in South Africa, we have seen it in Tanzania and it is there in Kenya. Nigeria recently did us proud when they rejected Obasanjo’s ambition to go for a third term. The Malawians have done it. That is a sign that people love their country. Their political inclination is far above an individual in the country. Sometimes in Uganda here we look at the Presidency as being above Uganda. We even look at the Presidency as being above the ruling party, which is very unfortunate. 

I also want to submit that it is a common practice in a country like Uganda for any sitting government to manipulate and abuse the military. We saw it during Amin’s time. After capturing power, he turned the Army against the people who were in power then, namely, the Luo. When Amin was overthrown, all the fire was turned to us in West Nile because that is where he came from. Now in the NRM era, we have seen that the Army has been predominantly engaged in military operations in the North, parts of Lango, Teso and the infamous disarmament or the failed disarmament process in Karamoja. 

In civilised countries, the Army is there to protect the country against foreign aggression. In Uganda we have persistently seen the Ministry of Defence targeting fellow Ugandans. You budget national resources to destroy yourselves. In some countries when they lose one citizen from whichever part of that country, the entire nation mourns. In Uganda here when we use our own guns to kill ourselves, we proudly say “we shall finish them”. This is the language; “we shall kill them! Give us 30 minutes, we shall be there in Garamba and we shall finish them”, and we take a lot of pride in it. What a shame!

In our view, the vision of the Ministry of Defence should be to maximize her limited resources to adequately train and equip the Army to the highest possible professional standards in order to guard our country against external aggression. The Army must be truly national in character, patriotic, nationalistic, apolitical and pro-people. 

Yesterday, I stood on the Floor of this House to thank the Army because starting from the 1970s to date it is an army I consider as the most pro-people. Our problem only comes when we go to presidential elections. That is when the Army, within that short period of three months, does not behave as a pro-people army; it takes sides. In 2001, I participated in the presidential campaigns and senior military officers came out to publicly say that if Ugandans voted for Col (Rtd) Kiiza Besigye, they would not work under him, they would not honour his authority –(Interjections)-  You know who they are; it is a public secret.  

I want to take this opportunity to tell the Army to reconsider its position, its inclination when it comes to presidential elections –(Interruption)- no, he is not telling me that I am doing badly –(laughter)- it is just a communication from the Chair that I should summarise because of time. 

The structure of the Ministry:.
We are told, as we also know, that we have the political element of the Ministry in terms of structure and also the military wing. The Minister has indicated that on the side of the military, we have the land forces and the air forces. Uganda has very many large water bodies and fortunately or unfortunately, most of them are located at our common borders with neighbouring countries. We are of the view that the Ministry, or government, should consider establishing marines for purposes of our security especially on the water bodies. 

In 2001, the President came out openly to support his desire to stand again for the presidency. What he actually used to defend his position was that he wanted to professionalise the Army and, therefore, Ugandans should give him a chance. According to the statistics we have here regarding the budget of the Ministry of Defence, it is our considered view that this exercise of professionalisation might actually not yield the results. If it yields results - I can see the State Minister is not agreeing - these results will be minimal. Why? 

In the 2002/04 budget, the Ministry only used 3.7 percent of the budget of the Ministry of Defence for development. In 2004/05, it rose to 4.6 percent. In 2005/06, it again came down to 3.4 percent. In this current budget, they have allocated 3.9 percent for development. The rest of the 96.1 percent of the Ministry budget goes to recurrent expenditure. 

So, what are you saying? You are simply telling us that all this money you are asking Parliament to approve for the Ministry just disappears in thin air, because there is nothing you can do with a mere three percent of the budget. You cannot do substantial work in the professionalisation of the Army. I would rather be happy if you were running at a level of maybe 25, 30, or 35 percent. I leave that to you to think about and reflect on.  

Mr Speaker, on the security situation in the country, it has always been like that - the Kony factor, the Karimojong element - until hon. Kiyonga took over. We have now seen the disappearance of the PRA. We congratulate hon. Kiyonga for that. That was what your predecessors used to report; that we have a lot of force from the People’s Redemption Army, which rebellion has links with Col (Rtd) Kiiza Besigye, the Onzimas and so on. At least in the policy statement of this year, I do not know whether it was an omission but I thank you for that because it is not here. We only pray that the PRA issue will not arise again towards the year 2011 to justify your militarization of the next presidential elections. 

Pension: if you want to increase on the security of this country, we urge government to formalise the pensions of the armies that were there before the NRA, namely, Uganda Army, which was there during Amin’s time, and the Uganda National “Repression” Army which overthrew Amin. Most of these men are in their late eighties and they have not received anything. An explanation was given that they do not have the records. You do not have the records, but these people run away leaving the records behind. You are the people who came and drove them away, now who do you want to provide the records for you? So, find out where the records are. 

Some are saying that the other time they were told a Major in the 1970’s used to get Shs 700. I think the two ministers were there, what is Shs 700 today? We are saying, yes, if a Major was getting Shs 700 that year, go to the records in Bank of Uganda, find out the equivalent of Shs 700 then and give them what belongs to them. It is as simple as that. If Shs 700 has been taken up by events, do not just use it as an excuse. Even when I joined public service, my starting scale was Shs 1,200 and that was a lot of money. I would pay my rent, feed myself, dress myself and do other things and even out of that, I would save something. So, Shs 700 during Amin’s time was a lot of money.  

Mr Speaker, I think those are the major issues that we want to raise. We want to appeal to government not to mess up the Army. Once you are given an order in the Army, whether it is a bad order or a good one, they tell you to first abide by that order and then you can complain afterwards. So, to us the problems in Uganda have been the abuse and the manipulation of the Army. We are appealing to government to use all the avenues we have elaborated above to create a conducive atmosphere in this country. Use the resources properly to build a strong army in readiness for any external aggression; anything internal is the responsibility of the Police. 

One unfortunate thing we have seen under this government is suppressing and ignoring the Police Force. They always talk about corruption in the Police. They are accused of still carrying the colonial mentality where you can have a peaceful country if you live in harmony with your neighbours and eliminate all sources of political discontent! With a small army and a powerful Police that maintains law and order, you will have a very peaceful country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.49
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Mr Speaker, I wish to thank the committee for the work well done. My observation here is on page 21, that is, on pensions and gratuity. Although the Shadow Minister hinted on this point, I think this issue is a bit crucial, particularly for the North and West Nile. We all know that the majority of the former army men, particularly from the UA, were from West Nile. Each time we went for campaigns, this issue kept lingering around. We are challenged because of non-payment to these people.  

Secondly, these people are trouble causers. You find that all these rebellions, URF-I, URF-II, were caused by these particular people. Since their grievances have not been addressed by the government, you find that they are easily lured into rebel activities.  

Mr Speaker, peace negotiations are going on between the Government and the LRA. I was getting perturbed because the position in which the LRA was had become dangerous to the people of West Nile. I was getting worried because if these people are not contained, there will actually be an emergence of insecurity in the area. Our people still feel that this element, where they are supposed to be thanked by the Government, has not been fulfilled. I, therefore, thank the committee for coming up with No.5, where they stress that all alternative avenues must be sought to get something to give these people so that they retire peacefully.  

Worse still, for us politicians who have survived as Movementists, we are very difficult people to handle because we are committed to campaigning. This is the same element because these armies have sons who have grown up, they have families now and they have actually dominated the whole region. So, for us to survive from these people was not easy. I wish to call upon the Government to heed to recommendation No.5 so that these people’s demand is really fulfilled. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.54
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I want to first of all, thank you for the opportunity and also thank the chairperson of the committee and the shadow ministers for the presentations they have made to this House. I have three comments: one on the immigration directorate, secondly, the police force and then salaries for the soldiers.

Mr Speaker, on the Directorate of Immigration, it was appalling to note that the storage of the information at the immigration department is in an appalling state. Dates and information on any person’s coming and leaving the country are very important, but the way we manage it is not good. They are even more important in the face of terrorism. I want to support the recommendation that we should computerize the department of immigration so that we have data that cannot be destroyed and that can be kept safely for a long time.  

Mr Speaker, when you move around the borders of this country and also Entebbe Airport, I think we need to increase on the staffing levels of the immigration department to match the tasks that these staff have at the borders. I would recommend that the staffing of the Directorate of Immigration be reviewed to match the required targets that they have in their directorate.

Mr Speaker, I want to get clarification on the deductions for the police officers, especially as reported on page 15 of the committee report.  Probably the minister had good intentions when deducting staff salaries to buy unipots. In the first place, the police and prisons are among the staff in this country that are underpaid; to go on and deduct their salaries to construct where they are going to stay is a bit ironical. Probably there were good reasons why they did this. I would want to get some clarifications from the chairperson and the minister where possible.

Mr Speaker, I also want to comment on the salaries of the soldiers. Every time we come here, we thank and salute them, we say we are very appreciative of the men and women in uniform for the good work they have done. As a House we need to make sure that our appreciation goes with action. I want to appreciate the increment of their salaries but also note that you could have equipment, the best in the world, but if you do not have a motivated staff force to operate that equipment it will end up not being used well.  

I want to recommend and agree with the report that we need to make this salary payment a priority.  I agree that we can reorganise our budget and make the increment and clear salary arrears, so that they are at par with the other staff of the public service.  

Mr Speaker, finally, I just want to comment on the peace talks. We do appreciate the work, which is being headed by Dr Ruhakana Rugunda. As leaders, we all need to create an environment that provides peaceful language that can facilitate the peace talks. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SANTOS PIRO (Independent, East Moyo County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the presenters of this report given by the shadow ministers.  My contribution is about the welfare of the UPDF. I have observed that a lot of money has been voted for Ministry of Defence. Mr Speaker, if you see the houses in which the UPDF soldiers are living, you will really sympathise with them. The popularly known mama ingiya pole along Arua road, Gulu-Adjumani road and around the areas of Karamoja, do not really befit the modern soldiers like our UPDF. I wish the Minister of Defence could allocate a good chunk of this to improve the shelter for the soldiers.  

My father was a soldier, my elder was a soldier and I was about to join the UPDF. By the time I lived in the barracks, the UPDF used to have an army shop where they could get duty-free items for their households. These days you do not see these army shops. When you pass around Bombo, you find UPDF soldiers hanging around butchers trying to buy meat, negotiate the price as if they cannot have army shops to provide them with cheap and nice meat in the barracks. This is not good for disciplined soldiers like ours.

You find the officer’s mess, Junior's mess, being turned into prisons. We have Luzira prisons for keeping criminals or suspects. These places used to accommodate officers for rest because they have tedious work. The work of UPDF is to defend our territorial integrity from external aggression, but the way they are actually being kept in houses, which do not befit them, is really very pathetic.  I appeal to the Ministry of Defence to look into the welfare of the soldiers and pay their pensions.   Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SAMUEL BYANAGWA (NRM, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am very grateful for this chance to address the Members. I am going to make one observation and three clarifications.  

One, I wish to thank the Government of Uganda, Sudan, our MPs who are participating in negotiating for peace and security and the team of hon. Ruhakana Rugunda. I think this House should put its foot down where there is insecurity. For anything that goes beyond the comprehension of the police, the government in power must have authority to involve other forces until the insurgency is blown away. Things cannot simply go berserk and you are just watching. It is not acceptable!

My second point is on taxation without representation by the police authorities. On Page 10 somewhere in the middle, it says that 15 percent of the police’s paltry salary, so little, is being deducted. I think our Constitution makes it very clear that the imposition of tax is by this august body. Therefore, I think this was illegal and should stop forthwith, unless the authorities, as a colleague mentioned there, can convince us that they had that authority.

Two, this is addressed to the Army survivors’ benefits. I have been a victim of recovering survivors’ benefits; it is a long journey.   Imagine a poor woman in Kabale who was told to go to Bombo to collect the benefits because the husband had died in action. She went and at first she failed and then went back to Kabale. When we started politics, she came to me and I had to go through so many steps. I ended up being given a number and we had to go again. 

Who is footing all those bills? These are poor people from upcountry, they have nowhere to stay and they stay at the bus park. I propose that we get transparent on this matter, go to the media and put up programmes. I know there is a problem with payments but at least tell people that they will be paid from their local areas, without having to come to Kampala and to Bombo to look for money, which they have already spent on transport and accommodation along the way.

As for the welfare of the Police, even the Army, to a great extent they live in squalid conditions. I am glad government is doing something. I have seen a good office building in Mbarara for the Police. It is commendable! I hope when all the hostilities subside there will be a review of all the budgets, both Army and Police. We can then uplift the development budget of the Police and others who are getting so little, so that acceptable accommodation can be built for them. As it is now, it is difficult to imagine how they survive in those little things. Thank you very much.

4.58
MS OLERU HUDA (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee generally for the work well done. I thank NRM government for the reform they have brought in UPDF. It is part of history that the soldiers of Uganda are the most disciplined, if I can say, in the whole of Africa. That is very good history we have to recall. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I am here only to mention two important issues, which I think should be considered. Now that we have peace in Northern Uganda, I am requesting the Minister of Defence to remove the convoy between Adjumani and Gulu districts. It really disturbs our travel. People start travelling from Yumbe at 4.00 a.m. and reach Kampala at 6.00 p.m. and the whole time they are just on the way because of the convoy between Adjumani and Gulu.  My request is that the convoy be removed because there is now peace. 

Another thing that I think is very serious and I should put it to this august House is, whenever our UPDF soldiers die, when the bodies are taken home they are rolled in blankets and no support is given at the funeral place. The soldiers who take the bodies will instead collect people’s hens and come with them. That is so sad! 

Sometimes when we lose these people, the bodies can even stay for more than a month before they reach home. The people will wait for the body to be brought for burial and get tired then they will leave the home. At the last moment, you get surprised that the body has been brought. Sometimes the body that is brought is different, not the real person. 

Sometimes they can take the body and dump it somewhere before reaching the real home of the dead soldier because they say they do not know the details of that soldier. That is so sorry! I appeal to those concerned that the records be kept very well so that such bodies should be brought to the homes where they belong.

Lastly, because of the little salary they get, Ugshs 15,3000 per month, these soldiers incur a lot of debts. When soldiers are around you, it is obvious that they have no money and any time they can be changed. When they move, they move with peoples’ money and at the end of the day they do not pay. That is another problem. I think this is because of the little salary they are paid. Therefore, they should be considered and at least something is done about it. 

This can reduce the burden on women. You know, it is cultural for a soldier not only to have one wife but at least two or three. Now that they are not paid enough money, the burden is on the women. As women, this is really a very big problem to us. I think that could also be considered, and that can also reduce divorce. Most of these young girls in the villages think the soldiers have money. They just rush for them and then after realizing that things are hard, very many young girls become frustrated. In our language we call them poporaras. Thank you.

5.03
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Rakai):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have some observations to make. First of all, I would like to say to the chairperson of the committee that the report is very elaborate and we need to really support the recommendations in it.

Mr Speaker, there is nothing that happens without a background or without history to it. When you evaluate the work done by defence since this government came into place, it is tantamount to being recommended as work well done. In a society where we do not have peace, the political cost cannot be quantified. I would like to inform Members of this House that if defence or security is under-funded, society lags behind. For the 20 years that have passed, the budget of defence has been under-funded. Parliament evaluated and increased the defence expenditure and I think we are receiving results. 

Terrorism, which was in the North, is reducing because of the global trend. The peace prevailing in the North is the work of the UPDF. They have done a lot of work and we commend them for that, and that is where we are going to see the results. If there is peace in the North, we shall achieve production which yields results in the economy. What about revenue? If people participate in activities, the economy will grow better. I therefore say that if the need arises, depending on the valuables of the environment, I beg the whole House to support defence expenditure as it is here because the results are seen and are laid on table.  

On Page 21, they say that salary arrears and pensions are not paid. I beg this House, because this is a constitutional right for any citizen of Uganda, if defence is asking for this money, which is reported here, the whole House should support this. If we support it, the pensions given to the citizens of Uganda, if utilized properly by them, have a multiplier effect on the economy.  

What does that mean? It yields results. The revenue in the budget coffers comes in. Therefore, when I hear the Opposition say that the defence expenditure is too big so we should reduce it, I think we must give credit to where it is due. The UPDF sons and daughters of this country have done a lot to achieve what we have now.  When you compare where we came from to where we are now and to where we are heading, I think there is a bright future. I, therefore, say that the budget as forwarded by the Ministry of Defence and Internal Affairs should be recommended, even highly, and we should give them support. 

Harold Koontz in Management says society is managed by four letters: political, economic, social and technological. Political is not quantified; where it is unstable, you do not achieve the three. Therefore, I say that the budget as presented by the Minister of Defence should be supported to achieve results. Thank you very much.

5.09
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to comment on one issue on Page 11 regarding clarification about the report on the recent escape of prisoners from some prisons. With the data given there, my concern is that, as far as Apac prisoners were concerned, on the 23 of February 2006 the records given there have not shown the number of escapees who were killed. I understand some of these people who escaped were killed, but there is no indication as to the number of those who were killed. They have either put them under those recaptured alive, or dead; it is not indicated. Maybe they can explain this to us so that we understand. I understand this has been happening in some prisons.  

Last year, towards the end, we lost a friend in Morkatipe Prison Farm in Tororo. When we went there, we found the escapee was shot 11 times in an attempt to escape. Are they allowed to shoot a prisoner up to that level, 11 bullets and so on and so forth? This has not been indicated.

Mr Speaker, honourable members, this time I want to thank the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs for leading us to Juba in these famous peace talks between the two Generals, that is, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda and Gen. Kony. I think it is now high time to accept that Northern Uganda has been a laboratory where all these Generals, Lieutenant Generals and Majors have been produced by Kony and also on the other side. Kony is a General and has those ranks. 

The people whom we represent - I represent IDPs of Erute County North - are saying we should support these peace talks. I was one of the first who endeavoured to go to Garamba to meet Kony. It cost us to go and meet Gen. Kony. I found out that the man is a very civil man, contrary to what we have been reading in the papers. He told us in his own words, when we presented our papers to him from Lango sub-region, that he was no longer going to fight. He said that he is prepared for peace talks, and I think our people are willing and able to forgive him if he accepts to sign these peace talks. 

We are following these two sides very carefully to see who is going to abuse this opportunity. We were saddened to learn that some very highly placed military officers are in support of fighting when actually they have fought for 20 years and they have not delivered any peace. May I take this opportunity to inform you that we have suffered enough! I think let us give peace a chance and, therefore, support this.  

When we went to Kony, it did not mean that we were supporting him. We wanted to hear from him. Now when we are supporting the government as we represent our people, it does not mean that we are supporting the government totally in that sense, but we support the good side put forward by Kony and the one put forward by government and then we negotiate that difference. That is what we should be doing, so that this time it does not become peace jokes. Thank you very much.

5.13
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the chairperson and the committee Members for very good work done. In the same breath, I would like to thank the shadow ministers for their input, which I believe will be taken into consideration by government. 

Mr Speaker, I rise here on three issues. The first issue is that of Uganda Police Force. I see no good intentions from government in supporting the Police as a department. Right from the time when the NRM Government came to power, there have been a lot of misgivings about the Police. His Excellency, President Yoweri Museveni at one forum said if he went to contest with a cow in the Police barracks, he was sure the Police officers would give their votes to the cow and not him. 
 
Professionalisation in the Police has been stifled by government. We know of very many young dedicated, well-trained police officers whose ambitions in career advancement have been stifled by government. 

Police as an institution has been over-militarised. We have had two Inspector Generals of Police: first was Maj. Gen. Katumba Wamala and now we have Maj. Gen. Kale Kayihura. These are all from UPDF and yet we have senior officers like Julius Odwe and Francis Rwego. These are people who went to Munduli right from university and they have risen through the ranks. What are the criteria for appointing people to head this department? Is it through the Public Service Commission, or it is a way of rewarding cronies by first looking at the name and the structure of a person before he is given that responsibility? 

When I talk about the structures, do you doubt where I come from? (Laughter) Even from my name, will you doubt my origin? Will you doubt the origin of Julius Odwe? So, what are the criteria? Why are these senior officers being frustrated and here we are talking of professionalisation? Have they been given an opportunity to defend themselves, to show cause as to whether they deserve promotions or not? They have never been given that opportunity, and here we are talking of professionalisation. 

I think government needs to be serious when it is looking at institutions like Police. In a very civilised country, in a country where there is total peace, the army has no business moving outside the barracks. Law and Order within the country is the responsibility of Police. Here is a situation where a population of 28 million Ugandans are left in the hands of frustrated, ill-supported police officers. No wonder at times when they say there is a lot of corruption in the Police it may be attributed to poor facilitation.  

There is the issue of lack of professionalism and a lot of government interference with the work of Police. Recently, you heard the Director of CID accepting in a court of law that, yes, they coached witnesses to testify against Dr Kiiza Besigye in the rape case. Where is professionalism? That is tantamount to perjury! What action has government taken against such an officer? Here we are, as long as they are doing work, which is to the advantage of NRM all is okay. When it is on the other side, you say they are corrupt. I think we need to be a little serious.  

There is the issue of the LDUs and special police constables, who have been recruited to beef up the Police. These personnel require professional training. A week ago, there was a very unfortunate occurrence in Terego County. Special police constables went on the rampage and killed two primary school children. I think Police is meant to be a pro-people institution, and I think the training also exposes them to that type of handling and dealing with the public. The LDUs and special police constables that have been recruited require thorough training.  

The second issue that I would like to dwell on is that of the immigration department. There is no government department in the civil service of Uganda, which raises more revenue than the immigration department. We are ready to accept the revenue from immigration, but we are not ready to plough it back. How can you continue to milk a cow that you have not fed? Immigration department is the poorest department in the government structures of Uganda. In the whole department there is one dilapidated pick-up vehicle, which I think is only being used by the commissioner.  Ndugu Rugunda, you are here, I stand to be corrected if what I am saying is wrong.  All I know –(Interruption)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I would like to give my brother, hon. Wadri, is that the pick-up in immigration department is actually not dilapidated; it is a relatively new vehicle. We are hoping that with your support, we will be able to reinforce the department with more vehicles.  

MR WADRI: I am very happy you have heard from Ndugu Rugunda, the chief negotiator for peace. He is confirming the fact that the department is actually not facilitated. No wonder, Uganda is a country where aliens come and stay freely. An alien can come here and stay for as long as he wants, unless he commits a crime. 

Uganda is not like other countries. Just next door, when you go to Tanzania or Kenya, the first thing you will be told is, “Toa kitambulisho (Where is your identity card? Show it). But in Uganda, we have all sorts of aliens coming here freely, staying and committing crimes but they get off with it. This is because of poor facilitation given to the immigration officers to track people who come into the country, even for the Police to follow up –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, which kitambulisho will he ask you to give? Must we have kitambulisho? Maybe we first start with kitambulisho and then you talk about immigration officers.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I have brought in the element of immigration department because of entry of aliens to this country. At the border points, once you would be able to come with a travel document and a passport for that matter –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Actually, the aliens that my honourable colleague is talking about have even become LC chairpersons. 

THE SPEAKER: The main problem is documentation. Without documentation, a black American from Atlanta can come and settle in my district of Masaka and become an LC, and he can be conversant with Luganda, Runyankole and so forth. Because there is no documentation, it becomes a problem to challenge him; he will say, “I can speak Luganda”. So, he is a Muganda and when he is not one, he is a black American.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, you have actually made the point very clear. I have nothing useful to add to what you have said. At every entry point in developed countries, you are expected to indicate where exactly you are going to reside and the number of days that you are there. When you stay there, you would be followed. They will want to know whether you have reached the place, which you declared at the point of entry. Should you stay there longer than that, they can trace you, all because of documentation. With our immigration officers, who are ill-facilitated, there is no way they can do this. 

I recently had an experience in London. As I checked through the immigration, I indicated where I was going. In the evening, what did I hear at the door, a knock and they asked, “Has so and so arrived here?” I said, “Yes, I am here.” That is the way immigration is supposed to follow aliens when they come into the country, but they are ill-facilitated so there is no way they can do so.  

Mr Speaker, the last issue, which I want to raise, is on the poor infrastructure facilities in prisons. This year on the 24 of February 2006, while we were determining our fate after counting votes, Arua prisons was broken into and very many suspects and convicts found their way out. Little did we know that some of them went in Garamba until a few months back when I was surprised with a telephone call from Gen. Vincent Otti. I felt restless when he told me, “Your people from West Nile have joined me.” 

The first thing I had to do was to go and report to the Deputy Speaker that I have received a telephone call from Gen. Vincent Otti. Thereafter, the next thing I did was to go and report to the Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Matia. I went to him and said, “Do you know, I have received a telephone call from Gen. Vincent Otti and he is telling me some of the people who escaped from Arua prisons are with him in Garamba.”  Surely, if prisons facilities are made to keep wrong elements out of circulation, the more reason for them to be made very secure. 

It was not only with Arua prisons; Opinzinzi of Adjumani within less than a month was a walkover. Are we serious? We are complicating work for the already ill-facilitated prisons officers. I think as a government we need to ensure that wrong elements who are supposed to be kept out of circulation are really kept out of circulation for some time. This can only happen if the government is able to assist and facilitate these institutions. 

Lastly, but not least, I want to comment on the issue of community services. I had the privilege of being one of the three idea founders of reinstating and starting community service in this country.  Prisons are over-stuffed, especially with suspects who are charged with trivial offences. If we are able to put in place mechanisms to facilitate the operations of community services, I think we would do a lot to decongest these prisons. 

When we decongest the prisons, resources allocated for recurrent expenditure, like procurement of food items, will be reduced and those resources can be converted to other developmental undertakings. I think there is need for government to closely work with other partners that are interested in community service. Government can also work with other line ministries to ensure that community service is given due attention so as to decongest our prisons. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: For those who are going to speak, use five minutes. 

5.30
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification on this issue of the Police authorities deciding that they would deduct 15 percent from salaries of members of the Police force. If you look at what a non-commissioned person in the Police force gets, it is only Ugshs 158,000, and 15 percent of that money is roughly Ugshs 23,000 plus. I am just wondering, first of all, under which law was this exercise conducted. 

Secondly, is this money being transmitted to the Consolidated Fund? There is a recommendation, which I strongly support that it should just be rescinded, I think even there should be a closer inquiry. Who authorised this irregular exercise, because salary is a right? The mandate to provide accommodation for police staff is in the hands of government. So, what happens if these staff decide to take the ministry to courts of law for abusing their rights, for removing their salary without authorisation? 

I think there should be a closer look at this exercise. Was there consultation? Did the members of staff in the Police force append their signatures and say, “Please, deduct my salary.” This is very irregular. I think we need to pronounce ourselves clearly on things like this one, where we see blatant abuse of the rights of workers and employees of Government.

The second issue, perhaps a general clarification which I anticipate, is that I have been expecting this for years and I think the minister has still made another promise; where is the law governing auxiliary forces? This morning, Mr Speaker, I had a related question, unfortunately I had been assigned commission work and I did not know the question was coming. The reason why the auxiliary forces in this country are abused, not compensated, neglected, treated in all sorts of dehumanising forms is just because there is no law that binds the person who recruits them to treat them in a very dignified manner. If there were a law, they would know they are entitled to a salary. Because there is no law, you can promise them Ugshs 60,000 and take 10 months, and they have no framework on which they will hold you accountable. 

If we value the services of these auxiliary forces (the Amukas, the LDUs, the Earth IIs) I think the minister should not just keep on promising to bring the law. Every financial year there is a promise to bring the law. What has happened? Is it a problem of drafting? Do you want us to sponsor a Private Members’ Bill? Will you clear it so that we have this law in place? What is the problem?

Last week, I also inquired whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs would be bringing the amnesty law for review, given the recent developments with negotiations. I hope that the minister will be looking at that particular aspect when it comes to the statement he is due to make to the House.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to find out why Ministry of Internal Affairs, and particularly the prisons department, continues to keep people who are granted bail in custody. The PRA suspects were granted bail by the High Court of Uganda but 210 days plus, they are still kept in custody. Is the prisons department an accomplice in abusing the rights of these people? They were granted bail, what is the issue? Are we by any chance under a rule of law and order? Is it there in this country? Courts, the institutions we fund, grant bail but next they are kept for 200 days and they live under very difficult conditions. Most of them are sick and neglected. Only last week, some were even denied access to their lawyers. What is the problem? 

It is not only those ones. I am privileged to sit next to the chairperson of the court martial. There are also those cases, which should have been handled, but you hear the chairman of the court martial is attending a burial –(Laughter)- he is receiving the visiting –(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, I want to inform the honourable member holding the Floor that just a few minutes ago, a fellow Member from her party made a serious and important statement in this House. He said that these people who are a danger to society should be kept away as long as it is possible for the good of the society. (Laughter) I just wanted to remind her. (Laughter) 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my neighbour for that reminder. I also know that my honourable colleague, the Shadow Minister for Defence, actually meant that the danger should be proven. It is not just assumed danger. If the courts of law go through the process and prove that these people are not as dangerous as one person has perceived them to be, and decide to grant these persons bail, they should be granted bail.

Finally, Mr Speaker, on behalf of those who represent the internally displaced people in this House, I would appreciate a comment from the honourable Minister of State for Defence. She has been very active in the business of restoring peace in the affected parts of this country, but there is a statement attributed to her, that the IDPs actually enjoy staying in the camps. I think this statement is irrational, untenable, militaristic and unrealistic. So, I would be happy if hon. Ruth Nankabirwa clears the air. Thank you.

5.39
MR SIMON EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to begin by seeking clarification from the Minister of Defence. We have some of our brothers who have served the Army for quite a number of years and they wanted to retire, unfortunately they were not given an opportunity and at the same time they have not been deployed. A case in point is Gen. Odongo Jeje who hails from Teso.

Mr Speaker, I would like to refer you to page 10 of the policy statement. It says that the number of auxiliary forces in the country is not established. This is very shocking! The auxiliary forces use firearms and if the government can give firearms, a dangerous weapon, to people whose number they even do not know, where do you think this country is moving? 

It is true that the number of the auxiliary forces is not known. In my constituency, I remember in 2003 when the Kony era entered our region, we recruited so many boys. I was among the boys who were recruited to fight against Kony. Unfortunately, from that time up to now, many of those boys have not been registered. A few of them earn salaries. So, if the ministry concerned cannot establish such forces, is this country up to keeping the security that the people of this country really need?  

On the same issue of the auxiliary forces - I want to narrow it to the Arrow Boys where I belonged sometime. For nine months now, they have not been paid and yet these are fellows who are moving with guns, keeping security. Some of them are actually keeping the camps. How do you expect them to survive? They have families, which need treatment and food. It is very unfortunate that due to the time of the influx of the LRA, the food was destroyed, how does the government expect these fellows to feed their families?  

It is very unfortunate that at one time when a case was raised, both the Ministry of Defence and that of Internal Affairs denied the Arrow Boys. So, where do these boys belong? I suspect this is the reason why these fellows are not paid. So, can the government put a policy in place just like what the hon. Alaso said that the law has not been in place?  At the moment these boys are demoralized and they are running away. Some of them have been taken to the border of Teso and Karamoja, because of the insecurity that the Karimojong have caused to Teso.  For all those periods, they have not been paid, they are leaving the guns but unfortunately when the guns are taken by their superiors, they are not recorded.  

Some of these boys after the guns have been taken, they are again collected and they are tortured. I have an example of one of those boys who was badly tortured that I want to bring to Parliament to show the irresponsibility of the UPDF who are keeping these boys. Through you, Mr Speaker, if you can allow me, I will bring this boy and we parade him before us and you see whether that is actually human treatment. Is that how a fellow fighter is supposed to be treated?  

Mr Speaker, I would like to say something on the current peace talks going on in Juba. Everybody is appreciating what is taking place. But I would ask the government to be committed. We really don’t want to see a situation like the one that took place in 1994, where Kony came out and when he went back to assemble the troops, the President issued a statement that he was given a seven days ultimatum, if not he was going to be crashed. So, we have seen the agreement, it is true it is there, but it is not yet signed. 

The government should be committed. We are tired of being in camps. So, we only want to face the problem of the Karimojong. But the LRA problem should now be history. So, let me ask the government through this House to be committed to the peace talks.  

Mr Speaker, I have one point to make in relation to the salaries of the Police. 
 
THE SPEAKER: I think I said five minutes and you have exceeded that period.

MR EUKU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much.

5.44
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all thank the committee chairperson, hon. Namayanja and the entire committee for a report well done.  

Mr Speaker, some years ago, I was an active journalist sitting in that gallery reporting about these issues in Parliament and I would say I had a privilege to visit the Police barracks in this city, Kampala. In this report, there is quite a highlight about the Police barracks, but I would have loved something comprehensive about accommodation of the Police. I remember I wrote a story that really moved this House. We moved with the then Minister of Internal Affairs, I think it was hon. Butime, with the committee Members then on Defence and Internal Affairs. We discovered that some Police officers were living in toilets, bathrooms, dog kennels and worse still in the mortuary in Nsambya Police barracks.  

When I look at this report and it is just a highlight, considering the appalling situations in these barracks, there should have been something more about construction of more houses for the Police.

And if you look at the Army barracks, they are quite different. The Army has got a lot of innovations, which can be introduced to the Police as well. The innovations are on sanitation, Mr Speaker. If you look at Army installations in Kampala like Mbuya barracks, soldiers with their own hands have got community initiatives where they put up good lavatories. But if you compare with Naguru Police barracks, even when you are driving past while going to Ntinda, you cannot believe that human beings live in those buildings. First of all, the Police Force does not have the innovation. If you are living in a house and you leave it to rot, just under your nose, you are also to blame.  Somebody should pick a piece of wood and put it in the window other than sleeping outside.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I want to raise an issue about the immigration department. I went to the passport office about two weeks ago and what I saw is surely something the Ministry of Internal Affairs should work upon.  First of all, there came some Somalis who wanted to renew their passports and they were told they could no longer renew passports. The question is, how did they get the first passports in order for them to come to renew?  They said there was an error, which they needed to correct. But these guys went to lawyers and got letters challenging the position of the immigration department not to renew their passports.  

There is a form you fill and there is a tribe they ask you to put on the form and none of the tribes they were putting on the form exist in our Constitution. So then, you find a contradiction surely. What exactly happened, how did they get the original passports in order for them to be Ugandans? They have a case because when the lawyers wrote back, the passport officers were confused whether to renew or not to renew.  

Mr Speaker, there is another problem of which passport somebody should carry. There are political appointees who get diplomatic passports. Conventionally Ugandans have black passports, but when you cease to have that diplomatic status, like I have been a minister and now I have my private business I do not think I should continue carrying a diplomatic passport.  So, when they take them for renewal, they are confiscated then they revert to an ordinary passport. But these people also complain that it is not good since they have served in some capacities so they can retain the positions. 

What I know is that, in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and that of Internal Affairs - first of all, if you have a diplomatic passport, you need a diplomatic note in order for you to get a visa. The Ministry of Internal Affairs I think does not liase with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to know which position somebody should belong to after they have lost like their jobs, which required them to have these diplomatic passports. So, now you find there is always a fight. 

I was told hon. Miria Matembe is the only person who has returned a diplomatic passport after she ceased to be a minister. With the others, they only have to confiscate from them or else they do not take them back and these days a passport is 10 years. So, if I cease to be a diplomat today, I keep using a diplomatic passport for 10 years! I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We are ending with the honourable member. We cannot really exhaust issues on this issue today. I appeal to chairpersons of committees as soon as we go through this process to continuously meet and then have these complaints handled and come back to us. That is the only way but today is not the last day to deal with these issues.

5.51
MS MARGARET KISIRA (NRM, Woman Representative Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me. I thank the chairperson of the committee for the detailed report she has presented and I thank the Members on that committee. I also thank the Minister of Internal Affairs and the whole ministry at large.  

Mr Speaker, I thank the Inspector General of Police for the commendable, detailed and admirable job he has done on the Police of Uganda. Surely speaking, he has done a tirelessly streamlined and reminded the Police officers of what they are supposed to do.  

Mr Speaker, after the elections, these policemen or security officers did not keep in line with the law by being non-partisan but he has gone ahead to sensitise them by visiting one police post after another. While he is doing that beautiful work, it is upon this august House and the Ministry of Internal Affairs to at least avail vehicles to the police posts so that they can carry out their work efficiently. You will bear with me that when people commit crimes, the Police take time to carry out investigations under the guise of not having transport. It is true most of these Police units do not have vehicles, which hinder their work. I pray that the Minister of Internal Affairs looks into this seriously. 

Mr Speaker, even the infrastructure is appalling. The Police units in most of the new districts have no latrines. In fact, the entire plantations around them are endangered because those officers defecate in them since they have nowhere to go when they are in need. The housing is so poor. One room can be slept in by even a DPC simply because these are new districts which of course have not yet been cared for. So, I beg this House when passing budgets to at least look into this. The Police should be given serious attention. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

MR STEPHEN WASIKE: Mr Speaker, according to our rules, this House moves as an institution if we have a resolution. I have followed the debates on peace talks and we do not have any resolution appreciating government’s efforts or associating ourselves with the peace process.  Members who have moved ahead have principally moved at individual levels. Is it not procedurally right to have a resolution of Parliament in order for us to talk as an institution?

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is okay and as of now the item on the Order Paper is about the budget but any Member is free under our rules to move a motion and that will be accorded a slot on our Order Paper. If it is necessary, we shall consider it but let us consider the business we have. What you have heard are the general expressions of support of this process, which has just come as a by-the-way. When they are dealing with security and so forth, they say these talks are going to assist, but if you want to bring a formal motion I will accord you an opportunity to move it.

Now, honourable minister, briefly can you respond because we have finished with this. Tomorrow we have three; we start with Defence.

5.59
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.  I will try to summarise. On the other hand, very fundamental issues were raised and I think it is to the benefit of the House and the country that we do explain them very well.  

We had very candid and deep discussions within the committee. In fact, at one time we sat in a closed session and at the end of it I expected that my colleague hon. Kyanjo would have fully associated himself with the report from the chair.  Unfortunately, my counterpart on the other side, hon. Onzima I think for other reasons was not there most of the time because some of the issues he raised were fully discussed within the committee.  I would also like to note with gratitude the commendation that the committee has given to the work of the Army. I also note with satisfaction the concern that the House has shown about the welfare of the Army. 

Mr Speaker, some of the issues raised fall somewhere between the Army and the Ministry of Internal Affairs and precisely that is why we fall under one committee. I will just pick two of them and I expect my colleague to handle the rest.

The issue of Generals being deployed to work with the Police: The Leader of Opposition this afternoon created the impression that this deployment is on sectarian grounds, that we look at where people come from before they are deployed. I will make two points there: First, as he said himself, the first General who was deployed in the police was Gen. Katumba, and the current General leading the Police is Gen. Kayihura. These clearly come from two different regions of this country.

All Members of Parliament will recall that since NRM took over power in this country, the leadership of the Police for a long time was under the professional people within the Police. We all remember Luke Ofungi, Apollo Byekwaso, Sam Mugenyi, Odomel and Kisembo.  Again you can see first these were professionals within the Police and also they are spread all over the country. They were not from one region. 

As I said, my colleague will say more about this but I would like to inform this House that in Tanzania, South Africa and particularly in Egypt both the Police and Army train together. In fact, in Egypt the ranks in the Police are exactly the same as those in the Army. So, I do hope that my colleague will give more elaboration on this so that colleagues can be comfortable with this initiative, which in my view has brought improvement within the Police.

Yesterday, my good friend hon. Mabikke from Makindye East prefaced his remarks with the argument that although we are now a multi-party Parliament, there are issues that are bi-partisan, that should be strongly supported from both sides of the divide. I thank him for that statement but I would like to go further and say actually more than just bipartisan issues. There are issues we should regard as common good, as central national interests and when we are discussing such issues, there should virtually be no divide in this House.

Such issues, Mr Speaker, include: the sovereignty of this country; territorial integrity of this country; the security of this country; and the question of effective governance, among others.  Sovereignty and territorial integrity are political issues so, if the Army has the duty to ensure the sovereignty and territorial integrity of this country, I find it difficult to buy the argument that the Army should not be political. What the Army should not be is sectarian but clearly it is to be political. As I will indicate further, this country has had a lot of benefits from routing the Army in the ideology of the central interest of this country.  

So, my appeal, Mr Speaker, on the outset is to appeal to all colleagues in this House that on national common good issues we must speak the same language.

Reference has been made to issues I would call the external environment and external obligations. Let me start where my colleague was very strong on the issue of external threats on his perception that this country is hostile to its neighbours and that this has made our defence policy very difficult.  

Mr Speaker, I believe all Members in this House are very happy: that Southern Sudan is what it is today; that our people in Southern Sudan and the leadership of the SPLM can now speak with their heads up; and that we can work with the people of Southern Sudan to bring peace to that region through the discussions in Juba. The situation in Southern Sudan did not come by chance; rather the people of Uganda had to stand with their brothers and sisters in the Southern Sudan. So, those of us who are happy about what is going on in Southern Sudan must surely define hostility properly.

In my view, I would talk about positive and negative hostility. Where rights of the people are violated it is a revolutionary duty that you stand by such people. It would have been a betrayal by the NRM and the people of Uganda to shun our people in Southern Sudan as they struggled for their rights. We could not accept the Government in Khartoum to oppress our brothers and sisters in Southern Sudan. So, if there was hostility, it was positive hostility. I am glad that finally the Government of Khartoum has seen that the NRM is principled and we are working together to the extent that now UPDF operates in Southern Sudan with the knowledge and consent of the Government of Khartoum.

There is no hostility between us and DRC. Indeed, we sympathise with our brothers in the DRC, they have full hands, they have a difficult situation and because of that you find insurgents who want to attack Uganda operating from the DRC. My good brother hon. Onzima was saying that PRA has disappeared. PRA has not disappeared; PRA exists in Eastern DRC. Initially, the United Nations denied this but later on all of us who were reading do recall that the UN acknowledged the presence of PRA in the DRC. We have alongside insurgents of ADF and NALU that are still marauding in Eastern Congo.  

We shared our anxiety with the committee as far as the situation in Congo was concerned vis-à-vis Uganda. We realise that Congo was going through elections and we expected that our cooperation with Congo, in regard to clearing insurgents who are there against Uganda, would improve after the elections. This is the understanding that the DRC has given to the authorities in Uganda. So, I want to make it clear on the Floor of this House that there is no hostility between the DRC and the Government of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I want to go to the side of the external environment or external obligations. We have all been following attentively events in Somalia. Some sectors of the press have defined Somalia as a failed state. For us in Uganda, we feel very sad that a fellow African country should be in that situation. So, operating in the appropriate forum of the African Union, IGAD, we have been part of the resolution that fellow African countries should assist Somalia to stabilise. The operation is at two levels: One, we should assist to send peace keeping forces; we the states in the IGAD region and Uganda and Sudan were initially earmarked to carryout this job.

While we accept this responsibility, we were equal partners in taking these resolutions. We nevertheless underscore the need for the leaders in Bidowa and the leaders in Mogadishu to go and dialogue so that they can bring peace to their country. So, I take this opportunity, Mr Speaker, to inform the House that very soon Uganda will have to fulfil this obligation by sending some troops to Somalia for peace keeping. But this will have to be done in line with our Constitution, in line with the law that governs the UPDF. We will have to come back to you here in the House and we pass the appropriate resolution.

I would like to spend a few minutes on the situation in Karamoja. The approach of government in Karamoja is to take an integrated approach that while disarming, we ensure that there is law and order. We are also making active intervention to ensure that there is development in the area of Karamoja. It was for that reason that this government put aside the Ministry of Karamoja with a minister of state to ensure this integrated approach. 

Although the situation in Karamoja has improved, it remains difficult. But we are moving in the same direction now. We have had several discussions with our colleagues in this House who come from Karamoja. We intend to move on to our colleagues who neighbour Karamoja so that there is total consensus on the way forward. But both in Karamoja and outside Karamoja everybody has agreed that the gun must go. That is a point of consensus, what remains is to define how exactly we should remove the gun.  

You should have heard accusations that the UPDF is being too hard while it is removing guns and that it is violating rights. Our stand, Mr Speaker, is always firm on the question of discipline and human rights and as I speak now, the chief of defence forces has set up an inquiry within Karamoja. So, if we find any soldier that has been violating rights, he will be handled in accordance with the Army Code of Conduct.

We also think it is insufficient for Uganda to act alone in this situation because what we see in Karamoja is a regional situation. Cattle rustling goes on in Kenya and in Southern Sudan. So, at the East African Community level, we have gone into deep discussions on this issue so that we have a regional approach. In the meantime, the para-military police in Kenya and the Army in Uganda are coordinating operations to be able to scale down this issue of cattle rustling. 

We believe that if Somalia also stabilises, this will have benefits in Uganda because part of the guns that are being used in Karamoja come the whole way from Somalia. We will also be working closely with our colleagues in Southern Sudan so that the regional approach is more complete.

Very soon we will be proceeding to Karamoja to launch the national committee on disarmament and also the regional committee and then set the pace to launch other committees down to the village level. So, I would like colleagues in the House to be assured that appropriate steps are being taken to deal with this long-standing issue of Karamoja.

Let me now go to the area of the welfare of the Army; the questions of pay, pensions and burials referred to by my colleagues during their contributions. I would like to admit, Mr Speaker, from the outset, that sometimes the Army has missed out on increments of salaries within the Public Service. Sometime back three or four years ago, there was a general increase in the salaries of public servants by 10 percent. But because the money could not go around the Army, being rooted in the ideology, we found it easier to convince the Army that they wait while other people benefited.  

That is the history of the arrears that the honourable chair referred to of the 10 or five percent delayed increment of the salaries in the Army. And this financial year, colleagues as you know, the primary teachers have moved to a gross of Ugshs 200,000 per month. Once again because of other national imperatives, the Army has missed out.  

However, we are in very advanced calculations and discussions within government starting with the Ministry of Finance so that we can move to near full commitment that come next year, the Army salaries particularly at the lower level should be brought within parity of other salary scales of other officers. I would like the Parliament to stand with us on this issue. The Army is yours, it is ours, and it is a national Army. The imperatives that we are talking about of: power crisis, CHOGM and paying the teachers are national imperatives. But when you have to cut your cloth, you can only do so according to the size that you have.

While it is unfortunate that the Army has missed out, we as parents - Parliament and the Executive- should be on the side of explaining to the Army the rationale for this decision.  

Regarding the issue of barracks, Mr Speaker, one colleague has already said what we all know, this issue of mama yingiya pole (small grass-thatched houses). But the Chair will bear me witness and also people who were in the Seventh Parliament that progress is being made to improve the accommodation of the soldiers. A number of barracks have been constructed and even this year we are going to carry out more work to build more barracks. We hope that with the support of government and Parliament, within a period of two or three years, this matter should be behind us. The Army should have proper accommodation.

The issue of a duty free shop has been raised by the Ministry of Defence with the Ministry of Finance. The understanding of Ministry of Finance is that, this is a desirable matter, but needs to be raised with Cabinet and also with Parliament. We are moving to fulfil that procedure and we hope that when we come here, Parliament as usual will be very supportive.

It is true, Mr Speaker, that when soldiers die, because of resource constraints, we are not able most of the time to deliver them within a short time of their death. It is true that sometimes it takes a week and at times two weeks. The reason here colleagues is that once a comrade in the Army dies, first he must be buried with honour. He must be put in an appropriate coffin; we must have our contribution to the mabugo in place; and we also process his benefits. Then the transport that we have is very constraining.  

As I speak now, there are battalion commanders without transportation. I am mentioning this to underscore the fact that, were are very short of even vehicles that should convey dead bodies to their villages. So, in the short term what was decided is that, if we have 10 bodies then we can be able to move a vehicle to one region and deliver these bodies.

We do realise that this is a very difficult situation, and in the current budget we hope to relieve this by acquiring a few more vehicles so that bodies can be delivered home as soon as possible. But this is the first time that I hear that there have been situations of bodies of comrades being abandoned. If this is true, this must be the exception. Most of the bodies are delivered to their homes and buried with honour. If there is even a single case where a body of a comrade has been abandoned, those who will be found responsible for that will be handled severely and we are ready to receive any information in that respect.

When it comes to pensions, Mr Speaker, pensions are now handled collectively in the whole government by the Ministry of Public Service and my colleague the Minister of State for Pensions did give us an elaborate statement here. We were told that we have arrears of Ugshs 321 billion and the Army is within those arrears. This year there is only Ugshs 51 billion and it is only either Ugshs 20 or 25 billion of that that will go to the Army.  

This government took the progressive view that any person who served the Army, irrespective of who was the leader, was serving this country and therefore whether you were in Army during Amin’s time or Obote or Tito Okello, you are treated as someone who served in the Army of Uganda and therefore you are entitled to your pension and gratuity where applicable. So, the only thing we see is the question of arrears and delays and I must also admit that the procedures have been somewhat confusing.  

Only two days ago, I was handed a bunch of forms, filled in Soroti to go and deliver to the pension’s officer in the ministry. This is because our guidance has not been quite straight. But we promise to improve so that people can give in their forms as close as possible to their homes and they are also informed that the forms have been received and given a rough date as to when they are likely to receive their pensions.

Now when it comes to the issue of the level of funding of the UPDF, Mr Speaker, I must thank the hon. Onzima for the table he produced in his presentation. I hope that some people got these copies. Hon. Onzima’s table, I do not know which page, has shown that between 2001 and now, the budgetary allocation to the Army has more or less not changed and that is factual. It has remained around Ugshs 350 billion. We have informed this House –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: But I think he was also emphasising the capital development percentage and the percentage was ranging from, I think, four to three and four to five.

DR KIYONGA: Which I will come to, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to use it first to show that the allocation has not been changing for five or six years. This House has been informed that this country carried out a deep review of the defence structures and this review was not carried out just by the Ministry of Defence, it was multi-sectoral.  Other sectors were involved and actually it went beyond our boundaries in the sense that development partners got involved. As you know, they have been very inquisitive as far as the expenditure in Defence is concerned.

At the end of the review, all the people formed the consensus that the Army at the very minimum should be spending Ugshs 400 billion per year. They went further that over and above the Ugshs 400 billion, the Army should have on the side Ugshs 50 billion in order to implement the key elements in the Defence review. Now the budget level is at Ugshs 350 billion, which means the Army has to do without a number of facilities and of course the Ugshs 50 billion that should have fast tracked the implementation of the review has not yet been forthcoming for understandable reasons of shortage of resources within the government.  

I have seen people writing in the papers and a few people on the Floor of this House continuing to harp the point that the Army is having a big budget. I do hope that they will trust this presentation and come on the side of arguing that as soon as possible, we should be able to give the Army enough money.

Mr Speaker, if I can go to the point you have just raised, which hon. Onzima raised: the relationship between development budget and reform or modernisation of the Army. Modernisation in the Army is not on the development side and I will give two examples. For example, we believe a strong Army must have a strong core of officers and to make officers means they must train and retrain. So, as I speak now, we have established a school for senior officers in Jinja at Kimaka. Now we can talk of 40 or 30 officers to be going for training and retraining. Yes, putting the school, you may call it development, but the training and retraining of people is on the recurrent side.  

Computerising the operations of the Army has a development side, but even more importantly there is a huge recurrent element because these computers have to be run on the recurrent basis. So, while it is true that if the development could be increased, we would move faster on modernisation, we should not think that modernisation only means the development budget. There are elements in the recurrent budget that are assisting the modernisation of the Army.  

As I get closer to concluding, Mr Speaker, I want to comment on this question of, “What will happen when peace finally comes? Where will the money go?”  That is what I hear people asking. First, as I have said, the Army should be operating at Ugshs 400 billion every year. We are now at Ugshs 350 billion while fighting.  

So, if the war ends and we all pray that that happens, then we shall have an opportunity to do certain things which we have not been doing in the Army, including improving the welfare of the Army. And the bigger benefits will be in ensuring that never again should we get destabilisation like this. Our people in the North should be able to go back home and settle down to produce. 

We also plan that as soon as this war is done, part of the energy of the Army should be diverted to productive work in construction, producing some of their recurrent needs like ammunitions and sharpening their capability to intervene in relief situations and disaster situations.

So, let me go back to this point of the Army and politics. Once again I thank hon. Onzima for loudly and clearly speaking that the UPDF has made a difference, that the UPDF is different from the Uganda Army and the UNLA. This is obviously the truth. But the soldiers of the Uganda Army, UNLA and UPDF are children of Ugandans. 

So what is it that has made a difference? Why is UPDF different from UNLA? Why is UPDF different from the Uganda Army? The difference is that the people’s Army is founded on the basis of a pro-people ideology. So, when my colleague, hon. Onzima, says the Army should be apolitical, this is a big mistake. To say that the Army should be apolitical is to say the Army should go back to the armies that were making a lot of mistakes.  

So what we should be pleading for is that, the Army continues to be a national Army and continues to be non-partisan. If there are any elements in the Army who project anti-national sentiments, such elements must and will be dealt with very seriously because to do so will be to reverse our gain. So, I want to plead with this House – what I keep hearing is that the Army should be in the barracks; the Army should be apolitical. That is a big mistake if we take that road.

One colleague has just said that Maj. Gen. Jeje has asked to retire and that he is not deployed. This came to me as a surprise because I know that Maj. Gen. Jeje has an assignment in the Army; I know that only at the end of the last government, Maj. Gen. Jeje was a minister in this government; I know that Maj. Gen. Jeje is still active and we think that he is still very useful to this country through the Army. So, I am surprised and I hope the colleague was just guessing. I do not believe that Maj. Gen. Jeje would go to anybody to make that complaint.

Ndugu Onzima did suggest that we should have a marine unit, and I agree with you completely.  Indeed we now have a marine unit, but for lack of sufficient funds we have not raised it to the level of a fully-fledged service. As and when the funds become available, we will move in that direction.

Mr Speaker, in the interest of giving time to my colleague, I would like to thank comrades and also thank the Chair and the committee. I promise that we shall keep very active with the committee and share with them everything that goes on in the Army. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for those comments.

6.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I want to begin by thanking the committee, especially its chairperson, and all the Members, for two reasons:  One, I want it to be recorded in this House that the cordial relationship and the supportive sentiments the committee exhibited to us during our interaction, to say the least, was excellent. I also want to thank them for a good and comprehensive report, and we share and agree to most of their recommendations, which we shall try, if funds permit, to implement.  

Sir, like my friend, hon. Byabagambi, I have also a problem of procedure here because hon. Kyanjo was a Member of the committee. We gave him all the time, all the attention, and it took me a bit by surprise that he decided to table a separate report. But I congratulate and thank him for the observations he has made, and as I said, where it is possible we shall be able to implement.  

But I should comment on a few things that he has raised: That the anti-riot Police are a suppressing machinery to freedom. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I think let us watch our words, please.  The anti-riot Police are there to protect the properties and the lives of Ugandans. It is not there to suppress. There is when a situation arises in our security situation and the anti-riot Police have to move in. I do not want to go on with examples. I think many people do know what has taken place. They know when the anti-riot Police have been in action, what they have done, and what it has forestalled that would have otherwise been disastrous to the lives and properties of Ugandans, especially here in Kampala.  

Congestion in prisons: Mr Speaker, on this question of congestion in prisons, I want to submit to this House that this is a multi-sectoral problem –(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, when you try to say something and the person holding the Floor does not yield, it means that he is not accepting. Please bear with us.

MR KASAIJA: Sir, can I elaborate on this point of congestion in prisons? The mandate of the Uganda Prisons Service is to keep custody of suspects or convicts that have been brought into our custody: keep them healthy, rehabilitate them and help them to become better citizens. There are other players in this scenario; you have the DPP and the courts.  So, while we do agree and accept that our prisons are over-congested, and I can testify that is what I saw in Lira a couple of weeks ago, but the problem is much bigger. Can I say that the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) is definitely addressing that problem.

Cost of installation of telecommunication system that hon. Kyanjo says that, according to him, that system can be installed at half the price; can I inform this House that cheap things are never cheap? We are trying to put in place a system that should be able to last and be operational for quite a while.

Computerisation of the passport office: Sir, honourable members, I agree with that entirely and I can assure you that efforts are being made to computerise the issuance and the keeping of passports records.  

Accommodation of the Police: I also agree entirely but can I also inform this House that a comprehensive survey both for office and residential accommodation has been conducted and a report has been compiled. At an appropriate time, we shall inform this House how far we have gone.  

Sell of Nsambya Police land:

Mr Speaker, can I draw the attention of my colleague to the answer, because this question was raised to us and on page 7 of our response we did give the answer. For the benefit of those who are not on the committee, can I read this answer? Your question was: “What is the status of the land on which the Nsambya barracks is housed?” The answer is as follows: “The land has three titles; two titles leased from the Registered Trustees of the Mission of St Joseph Society of the Mary Hill Fathers. They are RRV 57 plot 14 to 20 for 99 years effective from the 1st of January 1954 and the 1st of January 1957.  

Two, the third, which is a portion where part of Nsambya and PTC Kibuli lies is a free hold title, all titles are registered in the names of Uganda Land Commission. 

As far as we are concerned, there has been no sell of the Police land in Nsambya, but we are making expletory moves to find if we can get a suitable investor with whom we can negotiate and we do an exchange in value, value for value, shilling for the shilling.”  

I thought I really should make this statement in this House and I hope this is the last time we shall hear that the land in Nsambya, where our Police are sitting, has been sold. No, it has not been sold.

Inconsistencies in the figures:

Yes, I agree there were some mathematical errors but I want to submit to you, hon. Kyanjo, through you, Sir, that those inconsistencies have now been rectified and we shall give you a corrected copy.  

The appalling state of records storage: 

Hon. Bahati, I think I have already alluded to that one. I agree with you that definitely there is need for improvement and as I said, the question of computerising that department is underway. I also agree that the staffing levels are not sufficient and that one is being handled. At an appropriate time, I will be able to respond to this House on what is taking place.  

Now this is an issue that has been addressed by quite a number of colleagues, the salary deductions from officers and use of the proceedings to build. Can I inform this House that it is not every policeman and policewoman that his salary or her salary is deducted from but maybe the report did not put it clearly. It is only officers who opt to reside in barracks that have their money deducted. 

It was agreed among the Police themselves that a certain percentage would be deducted because if they were not living in the barracks, then they would be hiring premises outside. It is that 15 percent, which was agreed upon and not imposed. I am saying this is an understanding that we reached with the full consent of the officers. They have two choices: They have to either live outside or live inside the barracks. (Interjection) I have refused clarification from other people, Mr Speaker, I cannot see why I should accept another one. Can we proceed?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, let the committee investigate what the minister has said and report to us within a week or so because we must have evidence. Otherwise, we will not be able to get that evidence here, but the committee will do that work for us.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Now, hon. Gutomoi asked whether the figures, which show that the people that had escaped from prisons and were captured, included the dead. The answer is no, those figures do not include the dead and from the information I have received, we do not have anybody that has died in Apac. 

Hon. Wadri, my dear brother, that Police IGPs are being appointed on sectarian grounds. I think my colleague the Minister of Defence has alluded to it. But I want to tell you this and really to emphasise the point that officers are appointed in light of the challenges. These officers are not appointed merely for the sake of it, they are appointed in light of the challenges and it is also an international practice. In other countries, like Tanzania, you can be transferred from the Army to the Police and vice versa.  

I see no contradiction with this; we are not saying that the officers the Julius Odwes and so forth are not being given an opportunity. They have been civilian police officers if I may use that, and now we can talk of military police officers. The situation as it stands now and having looked at our list of officers demanded - and please, I emphasise this word “demanded” - that maybe we get somebody with military exposure to help us put the Police on track.  

Lack of professionalism: 

Yes, I can agree there may be lack of professionalism in the way we do some of the things. I want this House to note that it is true there are certain offices where we do not have sufficiently qualified manpower. But I want also to assure this House that that matter is being addressed. Indeed, I may wish to add here that we are also going into a policy review just like the Army has just concluded. So, we shall definitely be addressing that point.

Training of the SPCs:

Yes, that is true, they needed training and I want to report to this House that about a month ago, we passed out a group of both SPCs and auxiliary forces in Masindi and these have been deployed as the Earth IIs in the Lango and Teso sub-regions.

Immigration ill-facilitated:

Again going on the points raised by hon. Wadri that immigration is ill facilitated, and your system is not sophisticated to be able to trace foreigners within our country. Yes, to some extent I agree, the department is definitely not facilitated to the level which all of us would wish to be. But again this is because of the resource envelope. 

There are so many things that we would like to get for that department so that it can move, but again the problem has been resource availability. Therefore, we cannot move in the sophisticated manner that the Member was alluding to. However, I want to assure you that we are not seated; we are not just keeping our arms on the chest, definitely certain steps are being taken. And at an appropriate time, we shall periodically come and report to the committee and even to Parliament if need be.

Prisons poor structures:  

A colleague attributed prisons poor structures as the ones facilitating the escaping of prisoners. Yes, that is also true, again because of lack of sufficient resources. We need not less than Ugshs 400 billion in order to adequately house the Police both for residential and office accommodation. We are carrying out a similar exercise for prisons. But it will not be very far from that figure. So, you can see the magnitude of the resources that are required. As I said, we are moving systematically hoping, as the economy picks up we should be able to meet the requirements of the Police and prisons at the same time.

Community service programme:

The whole purpose of the community service programme is to assist decongestion. Absolutely, we agree with that and a programme has been put in place for sensitising both the population and the other law enforcement agents including the judiciary so that this system can be fully operationalised. That would be part of one of the ways that we can reduce congestion within our prisons.

Hon. Alaso, I think she has raised two points. One I have already responded to; the question of the 15 percent salary reduction and whether it is sent to Consolidated Fund. Two, whether it is by law? No, there was no law, but it was by agreement.

Amnesty law for review:

Yes, I agree that that law after the insurgency in the North has been contained and the agreement has been signed the law should be able to come back here so that we can look at it afresh.

Auxiliary forces:

“Are the number of auxiliary forces known?” The answer is no. We do not know how many exactly they are because there has never been a complete register. These were voluntary people who came to fight for a given cause. Some returned before they were recorded, but we are coordinating with the Ministry of Defence to harmonise especially those that we shall retain. Those that we shall not retain will definitely be sent off with whatever package we shall afford.

Now, “What are we trying to do in order to improve the directorate of immigration on national citizenship and immigration control?” There is a reform programme; the Seventh Parliament, where I was not, passed a law. Now it is a directorate and we are restructuring it. 

Interviews:

We have a director on top with three commissioners and other officers. Interviews for the other officers have been completed. We are only waiting for the Ministry of Public Service to send us the names and then we will be able to post those officers. As for the director and commissioners, those jobs are due for advertising any moment from now.

Passports:

Mr Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to inform this House that there are four types of passports that we issue: There is a diplomatic one, an official one, a general one and the East African one. I will send a memo to all of you Members of Parliament indicating to you because that also is in an Act of Parliament. I do not have the details with me here indicating who qualifies for which passport.

May I also at this juncture, Sir, inform the House - because I know quite a number of you have come to ask me to assist you to get passports. We are going to create a desk for the honourable members of Parliament and their families so that when you come to seek a passport either for renewal or a new one, you are not inconvenienced. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, I want to share with my honourable sister, Kisira Mbeiza from Kaliro when she made such a nice remark that the current IGP is doing an excellent job. And I would really request this Parliament to support him. He is doing an excellent job, he is really making sure that we have streamlined operations and we have people in the correct place.

True, the facilitation, like any other sector definitely the Police force is not maximally facilitated. That is why through you, Sir, we are asking honourable members to support our budget so that money is released to us to buy vehicles to facilitate us and have a more up-to-date Police force. 

Mr Speaker, yesterday on the Floor, there were three issues that were raised touching my ministry; but I was unable to respond because I did not catch your eye. In the Foreign Affairs report, there was an issue that was raised about the relationship between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and that of Internal Affairs in handling foreigners in the country. I would like to put record correct as follows:

One, a question was that there is a general complaint from diplomats about delayed processing of their special passes and entry permits. Sir, the ministry does not delay the processing of special passes and entry permits. All facilities are processed on a first come first serve basis and according to serial numbers. Priority is always accorded to applications from the diplomatic community and a case is recommended by the Uganda Investment Authority.

Two, there was also in that report a statement that there was delay and rejection of the dependent pass applications for children, parents and other family members of diplomats. The answer, Sir, is as follows: We do not have any delayed dependent passes and we are not aware of any rejected immigration facility in respect of any diplomat or dependent. If there is a case, we would love much to hear about that case.

Three, there is parity in visa fees. The initial rational for uniformity charging US$30 was to attract and boost tourism in this country. Sir, I should take this opportunity to put the record right that we are actually neither frustrating diplomats nor investors wilfully. We are doing everything possible to make those diplomats stay here comfortably, but in accordance with the law. 
 
Now I would like to finish with one point -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, my two questions as he finishes: One, I asked about the progress in the law governing auxiliary forces. I seem not to have heard the response. Then two, why does the Ministry of Internal Affairs continue to detain people who have been given bail by the High Court?

THE SPEAKER: But you see, the procedure on that is a legal one. The prisons people detain people on certain orders made by court, but those orders could be defective. Of course, the prisons authority will not allow somebody in their prison unless there is a document backing up his being detained there.  The question you are talking about is that sometimes the High Court grants bail, but it happens that that same person may have another document affecting his confinement. So, what I have to do is to seek an order of habeus corpus for the prisons people to come and explain why they are detaining them. That is when they will produce a document, which may challenge. That is the procedure.

MR KASAIJA: Sir, thank you very much, I have nothing more useful to add since I am not a lawyer. (Laughter) The only thing maybe I can say is just to repeat what we have already said. Our job in keeping people in prison is that we keep them safe, healthy and try to rehabilitate them. Who brings them to us, please that is a different sector, which I would not like to go into.  

As I said, I would like to wind up with two points.  One, as a political animal –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think she has asked you one question, is there a plan to bring a law to deal with these auxiliary forces?

MR KASAIJA: Sir, there is no need for another law because the UPDF Act and the Police Act adequately address the question of auxiliary forces. [MS NAMAYANJA: “Point of information”]. My chairperson would like to – can I finish Sir, and then maybe my chairperson can chip in?  

Two points, Sir, which I would like to end on.  One, I would like to speak like a political animal.  The hon. Onzima made a statement, which I thought as a Ugandan, I need to respond to although the Minister of Defence did allude to it. Dear colleagues, I do not think we would be correct in saying that we under play the role of the Army.  Those of us who have seen this country in the past 20-30 years, when we compare it with what we see today, it is very wrong for us to under play the role of the Army.

Two, I do not think it is correct to say that we enjoy in killing one another. It is the circumstances of governance of the society. Indeed, when hon. Onzima was talking on that point, I wondered whether we are living on Mars or living in Uganda. Governance, Sir, is dictated by social, political and economic circumstances. To say that we should behave like either Americans or Britons in Uganda, we are not being objective. The objective of the conditions of life here are totally different and, therefore, the Army has to behave very differently.

Finally, Sir, once more I want to reiterate my thanks to the committee. As I said, I have faced a number of parliamentary committees here, but I had never seen such a cordial and friendly relationship between the committee and the sector. (Applause)   I pray – yes I am being told women were in charge.  I pray that we continue to interface and support one another in Parliament because we are trying to build a nation.  

May I, therefore, pray that you do pass our budget inadequate as it is so that the services we are rendering to this country in this ministry can be improved. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I just want to put this record clear. We interacted with the Minister of Defence and that of Internal Affairs particularly on the issue of auxiliary forces. When we were with the Ministry of Defence, they failed to bring out a provision in the UPDF Act that really covers auxiliary forces. When we were with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, there was no provision in the Police Act that was concerned with the recruitment, deployment, command structure, remuneration and terminal benefits of the auxiliary forces.  

I think, Mr Speaker, it is clear that there is no law that really handles auxiliary forces and we want to interact with the ministers concerned to ensure that a law is in place to really streamline the operations of these gallant sons and daughters of this country who have fought for peace. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Speaker, the plea on presentation of reports was that we adopt the report. I put the question.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, we are remaining with four reports, which we should try to finish tomorrow. We shall start with Legal and Parliamentary Affairs report in the morning and if we finish early, then we shall deal with the committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, followed by Natural Resources and we end with Tourism and Trade. Please let us be on time tomorrow and we start at 10.00 a.m. House is adjourned to 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 7.05 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 31 August 2006 at 10.00 a.m.)


