Tuesday, 30 August 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairman, Mr Ekemu Joseph in the Chair.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA TOURIST BOARD BILL, 1994

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Mr Salim Bachou):  Thank you, Mr Chairman. The House does not have a quorum for proper discussing of public business.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I adjourn the House for 15 minutes.

MR BACHOU:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Uganda Tourist Board Bill, 1994 be read the second time. What I would like to do in presenting this Bill to the august House is to do three or four things.  

One, I would like basically to map out to the House the basic context of framework in which this Bill is being presented.  And within that frame, I would like to look at few things and I would like to look at the performance of the Tourism Ministry in the past, as a back graph to what it is doing now.  

I also would like Members to know what is government policy about the promotion of tourism, then I will point out some out of the Bill itself if you will permit me.  

Hon. Members will recall that in the 1960s and after the time of 1970s, the Tourism Industry was the third best performing economic sector in the country.  Tourism was growing at the rate of 20 per cent per annum and had become a major foreign exchange earner.  Until the Tourism Industry here was competing effectively with the same sector in countries bordering Uganda in the Eastern and Central African Region.  

Also, there was a Bill of complementality for tourism destinations, particularly in the countries that constituted the East African Community and further. It was conducted in the 1960s at the airport in Nairobi.  It revealed that to most tourists, the Ferilide and Murchison Falls National Park was the best destination all over the continent.  Now with this kind of background, we would expect to have reaped a lot of benefits from tourism activities in this country in the decade of the 70s as well as the 80s.  But as you know very well, Mr Chairman and hon. Members that, this was not possible on accounts of the various problems that we went through in this country.  Current Government Policy, therefore, is to try and revitalize the tourism industry and again given that background. 

Government believes that perhaps in tourism lies the hope of revitalising our economy; in tourism lies the hope for realising foreign exchange that will assist us in paying our foreign debts etc. In tourism lies the hope for generating employment and better income for the people etc. That is what government policy tends for and that is a mandate of the Ministry of Tourism about which I am sure most hon. Members are aware and are quite familiar with. How has this sector performed up to today, and why is it that, it is necessary for us to create a tourism promotion Board at this stage?  

The reason is because I feel that - I mean I would like Members to know that the Ministry of Tourism have performed fairly well of the last four or five years and also up to some extent, we also experience some bottlenecks in our operations.  So, this provides I think the crew as to why we feel this Bill is important and the Members should under attend that the meaning of the Bill in this context.  

Right now, with the activities that have been undertaken under the Ministry of Energy.  We have realised that an 18 per cent growth per annum in the sector and, therefore, we feel that with this growth straight which is on a 2 percentage point below the highest growth rate that we have ever experienced in this country, that we must boost the sector by providing the Ministry of Tourism with a storage business arm that will promote tourism activities on behalf of our country.  

We have with the assistance of the UNDP and the World Tourism Organisation produced a ten year master plan that looks at the Tourism Industry in its totality and makes out what should be done by way of excess road etc. at a tourist destination by way of boarding facilities, by a way of institutions etc. and in terms of institution or capacity of building, the reason why we would like to have the Uganda Tourist Board is because we want to enhance all capacity to perform better in the sector.  So, this Board that we are thinking about is intended to enhance capacity building under the Ministry of Tourism.  Of course, there is a sister Bill which will be coming in due course that is also part of the capacity building exercise.  

We have also with the help of this house managed to bring the number of National Parks now to 10, in other words, we have increased the tourist destinations in the country and we have also diversified.  Because now we can bring in tourists who are concerned with conservation and concerned about environmental issues etc, because as you very well recall, three of the Parks we have added to the existing stock of parks are actually forest parks.  We have also managed to promote gorilla tourism particularly in the Bwindi Impenetrable National Park.  

Right now as I speak to hon. Members here, gorilla tourism or gorilla tracking has been booked fully up to about the beginning of November because this is an area in which I think Uganda enjoys the monopoly given that both in Zaire and Rwanda where gorilla tourism had actually been better established, there have been some problems and the tourists are not considering Uganda as their only destination for this particular tourist activity.  And we are doing quite well in this regard, we have managed to habituate a number of gorilla families and the number will increase in due course.  

Of course, being fully booked, does not mean that they are dozens or hundred of crowds of people going there, because we have to be careful that we do not destroy the environment that is actually the source revenue for us.  And we do not want to scare the gorillas because they are extremely sensitive, that is why habituation is a pre-requisite before we can actually pause the gorilla to tourists.  I believe also the general context of relative peace and stability in the country - because you know very well that if there is disturbance and instability in a country, tourists are going to be scared away from the country as a tourist destination.  There is a case; the situation in Rwanda is a tragic situation but it is a very good example of problems scaring away tourists, because gorilla tourism had been best established in Rwanda.  Now it is going from a peak to bottom level just because of the problems that our brothers and sisters there are going through.  This is looking at our activities on the positive side, but it also had problems.  

At the end of 1992, we conducted a survey which indicated that only 10 per cent of the personnel working under Ministry of Tourism, the hotels etc. two operators and so on, less than 10 per cent of them were tried.  Therefore, there was need to institute training in catering in house keeping in reception and food production and other related areas.  These areas are the subjects of another Bill and I will mention them again.  But this area we feel for us to be able to re-benefit from tourism promotion, we must begin by looking at the personnel then going to assist the country in achieving this particular objective.  And that is why we for the last two, three years, have been training people at our institute in Jinja, an institute, which we hope this House will help us establish formally.  

The other problem with experience is the problem again which is quite familiar with government departments and ministries and so on, and that is our inability to promote our tourist product within the country, within the region and Abroad.  We do not have the means for doing that and for the time being, and I believe that it will be very healthy it can enhance our capacity to promote Uganda as a tourist destination.  That is why we need this Board to help us with promotion.  We need this Board because its source of funding can be different from just treasury alone.  
We can with the help of the House institute certain measures that can help the Board generate funds enough to promote Uganda as a constable tourist destination.  What does the Bill itself say in terms of its objectives and functions?  

Following the background that I have given, the objective and functions of the Board are the following, and with your permission, I will just read them from the Bill itself.  

One; to promote the Tourist Industry of Uganda both within and outside Uganda.  

Two; to carry on such activities as are incidental or conducive to the attainment of the object specified in paragraph (a) of this section.  Without prejudice to the general effect of section - of the above section, the Board shall for the purpose of the attainment of its objects have the following functions:

One, to promote market and popularise Uganda as a tourist destination.

Two, to encourage investment in Tourism in Uganda and for that purpose to liaise with the Uganda Investment Authority and other relevant organisations.

Three, to promote and sponsor educational programmes in the tourist industry.

Four, to provide or coordinate the provision of consultancy services within the Tourism Industry. 

Five, set and force and monitor standards in the tourism industry.

Six, be responsible for Uganda’s liaison with the World Tourism Organisation and other international organisations.

And finally, carry out any other function prescribed by or under this Statute or directed by the Minister.  

For the effective discharge of its objects and functions the Board may appoint one or more committees comprising members of the Board or persons who are not members of the Board or both.  The Board may assign to a Committee appointed under this section such functions and with such limitations and conditions as the Board may prescribe.  The Bill itself of course, runs from the first page to the last one, but a lot of the items covered here are the general administrative conditions of procedures, which I do not think is necessary for me to read to the House because I may leave that.  Members have had this Bill for some time and have looked at all provisions.  

So - but what is relevant, is something to do with the financing of the Board.  And again with your permission, Mr Chairman, I would like to read from the text.  The funds of the Board are:

One, grants from the Government.  

Two, any money accruing to the Board as tourism promotion levy.  

Three, money accruing to the Board in the carrying out of its object and functions.  

Four, interest earning.

Five, moneys borrowed by the Board.

For the purpose of the above paragraph sub-section (13) of this Statute, the Minister may after consultation with the Minister responsible for finance by statutory order, impose a tourism promotion levy.  In the entire Eastern and Southern and Central African Region, training levy and tourism promotion levy are the usual forms of the revenue earnings for promoting tourism, and I believe that in Uganda, we cannot consider ourselves as an exception.  

One other thing is that, as a Board, the proposed Board is likely to be amicable to receiving grants in other forms as well, whether by way of consulting the services expertly prepared reports etc, which usually the Ministry itself may not be able to receive.  

So, with these remarks, pointing out the general context of the contractual frame work in which this Bill is being proposed to the House, as well as what I intended to be the objects and functions of the Bill and its forms of final, Mr Chairman, I beg to move.  Thank you. (Applause)

DR TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill, but before I talk about the body of the Bill, I wish to, Mr Chairman, with your indulgence to express concern about the excessive deployment of the military in Mbale Municipality elections during the CA by elections and to congratulate -(Interjections)- and I would like to use this opportunity to congratulate Mr George Masika -(Applause)- for winning this election despite reported open sponsorship and support for Mr Godfrey Wandira by the NRM and intimidation.  I think this is an important thing, I think we should not use public -(Interjection)-

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Continue please, hon. Tiberondwa.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I now get on to the text.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member has mentioned something very substantial.  Now is it in order for him to give his speech without substantiating how the government was sponsoring the candidate, is he in order?
  
THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Tiberondwa, would you like to substantiate?

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I was very, very careful with my words, I used the word reported and I can substantiate by pointing out that this has been reported in the Newspapers and particularly today in the Topic that money has been used, and that Mr Ssesanga has been sponsored and supported by NRM, that is my substantiation, Mr Chairman. (Applause).

THE AG CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Tiberondwa, now limit your remarks and please proceed to the Bill.  

DR TIBERONDWA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, I now come to the Bill.  Mr Chairman, Section 11 of the Bill talks about the appointment -(Interjections)- talks about the appointment of the Chief Executive of the Tourist Board that is, the General Manager.  We have established a system in which many of the Bills we have passed, enclosed the Chief Executive is appointed by the Minister on recommendation of the Board of Directors and I would like us to be consistent that here the General Manager be appointed by the Minister on recommendation of the Board of Directors.  This development tends to remove the possibility of the Minister appointing his favourites.  But if you have Directors from different corners and from different groups of the society, you are likely to pick up the best person available on the market.  

What I am not very sure about this Bill, I have  - last Friday I did study the Uganda Tourist Development Corporation Decree, 1974, which is now supposed to be repealed and to be replaced by this one, I find very, very little difference between that Corporation Decree and this Bill.  I am not very sure why this has been present apart from changing names.  It now seems a system of changing names from corporations, from Boards to Authority.  I do not understand, it now seems to be a fashion of changing names for its own sake so that we can in future say; this Board was created during this time when actually it is reprinting of what was created during Amin’s time. (Laughter)

I think on this Bill, we should be able to acknowledge the military regime of Idi Amin which produced the same Bill but gave it a different name. 

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Information.  Mr Chairman, the information I want to give hon. Tiberondwa is that much as he would want to appear that the NRM Government does not give credit where it is due, the Minister of Justice and Attorney General only stood up in this House and recognised that certain laws made under Idi Amin were good laws.

DR TIBERONDWA:  I wish he was also able to point out that the Uganda Tourist Development Corporation Decree was a good Decree because it is actually the same thing we have here with a different name.

I would also like to raise something that we have dealt with in the previous laws that we have passed in this House.  The Schedule to this Bill, which has five parts, contains substances and statements, which should ideally be inside the body of the Bill itself.  The difference between an article being inside the Bill and be in the Schedule is that in the Schedule the Minister can change it very easily by issuing a Statutory Instrument.  He may come to this House but the practice has been that Ministers rarely come to this House to get their Statutory Instruments confirmed by this House.  

For example, the common seal of the Board, the meetings, the quorum, these normally are things, which are put inside the body of the Bill.  I do not see why there is now a shift from the traditional way of writing these laws.  So, when it comes to dealing with amendments I intend to propose that many parts of the Schedule become incorporated inside the actual Bill.

In Clause 21, I am happy that this Clause 21 has been included that ‘A member of the Board, an employee of the Board or other person on behalf of the Board shall not be personally liable for an act done by him in good faith and without negligence for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Statute’.  This is a very good section intended to protect people who do their jobs well but only two weeks ago, we were discussing the Non-Performing Act here, the Non-Performing Bill and we passed something which is contrary to this, that people who are involved in granting loans whether they were members of the Board of Directors, whether they were employees of the Banks, will be followed in pursuing the repayment of these bills.  And this one is a good one; I think the other one was a bad one.

Finally, I would like to point out that the Ministry responsible for Tourism has not been given its proper place during out budget.  Tourism can earn a lot of money for us but I have been trying for the last two or three years to contact the Minister and, in any case, the Deputy Minister may bear me witness, they have been without a phone, you cannot contact them.  So, I do not know how a Ministry that deals with Tourism that is supposed to be in touch with the rest of the world can operate without even a telephone.  So, I would like to appeal to the Government to give the Ministry of Tourism the treatment that it genuinely deserve otherwise, Mr Chairman, I support the Bill.  

MR WAMUSI (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support this Bill before the House.  (Interruption)- I am sorry; I cannot talk about elections, because we are here in the House discussing important matters not elections.  I think there is a forum where elections will be discussed.

I support this Bill, which is straightforward.  It is good as hon. Tiberondwa said, it is almost a replica of the one which had established the Uganda Tourist Corporation.  However, the Corporation which was installed by the Decree of 1974, never took off may be because the atmosphere during that time was not conducive for them to market Uganda as a tourist attraction country and even after Amin had gone, in 1982. I think it was revived again but the thing never took off because the atmosphere was still not good for tourist promotion.  So, it is necessary that we should have this Board in place, which will have opportunity to market Uganda, which has got a lot of endowment.  

Tourism is a very sensitive issue and it is unfortunate that incident which happened only recently at White Rhino Hotel in Arua, do not augur well for tourist promotion and I hope that when this Board is put in place, it will do everything possible to ensure that any adverse actions which can affect our tourist promotion are countered by marketing and explaining to the international markets.

Besides being sensitive, tourism is also very tricky.  As you are aware, most of the big tour operators worldwide have their headquarters outside this country and we may have just only branches in Uganda.  If tour operators are also put in place, we can end up by getting a lot of tourists moving around Uganda but probably not earn enough foreign exchange from their being here because such tour operators can easily make the tourists pay his inclusive tourist at their headquarters and only ask their branches in Uganda to cater for their stay in Uganda.  So, we have got to be very careful and when this body is put in place, we must have a policy to ensure that when tourist come to Uganda, the country also benefits from foreign exchange from their stay here.

I would like to now mention something about the finances of this Board.  As the Minister explained one of the ways of raising funds will be by tourist promotion levy, which is in Clause 13 and 14.  It is necessary to have some kind of levy so as to raise funds for both the Tourist Board and the in-coming Bill which is of the training institute, but I would like the hon. Minister to note this and take care and probably when he comes to discuss with his counterpart of Finance, to note that at the moment most of our tourist units like catering, hotels, pay a lot of CTL to Treasury.  

Now, if you put on levy both for the Tourist Trust Board and then eventually for the Catering Institute, we might end up by pricing our inputs out of reach and instead of attracting more tourists, we may have them going somewhere and Uganda, what we have here, the National Parks or what have you, are also available somewhere and for tourists to come, they would like to get the benefit out of their money.  So, I propose that may be the Minister of Tourism could discuss with his counterpart of Finance to ensure that probably CTL is waived from these tourist facilities like tourist travel agents and probably catering units like hotels so that instead of a levy is raised which can go towards the tourist promotion and also the catering institutions.  Short of that, we might as I said, price ourselves out of reach.  

Mr Chairman, with those few words, I support the Bill.

MRS KIRYAPAWO (Women Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill.  However, I would like some clarification from the Minister because as you have read and as we have heard on the radio, the Government is selling off hotels.  As we are selling off these hotels, I do not know what will be the duty of the Board.  I know some few have already been sold but this gives me a picture that maybe, all of them will be sold off.  So, in case all of them are sold or quite a number of hotels are sold where I think tourism goes together with hotels, then that is the clarification I am seeking from the Minister. 

Also, I would like to get assurance if not the whole House about the security in this country.  As we all know some tourists who were in Arua were attacked with a grenade, I am sure this scares off the tourists and then the objective of this Bill where it is to promote tourism and investment also put it at stake.  So, I would also like the Minister together with the Minister of State for Defence to assure this House, well I think they have a way of meeting and getting a dialogue, to assure this nation about the security -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Information.  Mr Chairman, Sir, I think the security of tourists cannot be separated from the security of Ugandans, of all human beings in this country so that the whole question of security should not be confined to tourists.  We should express concern and all of us work together to ensure that there is security in Uganda whether we have tourists or not.  

MR ASIKU:  Further information, Mr Chairman.  It is with deep sorrow that the House should note that issues, which happened at Arua, need serious thought.  We had a grenade attack in a bar in Arua about four months ago.  To the best of our knowledge, persons involved came from outside Arua district.  We had a Canadian also murdered by the use of a gun.  I believe -(Interjection)- and a Ugandan because he was going together with the Canadian researcher.  The people of Arua were disappointed; we had no cause in our own district to cause that insecurity.  Unfortunately last Thursday, tourists came from all over Africa, from North Africa, the tourists came touring from the West Africa through the areas of Africa and entered Arua, to the best of our knowledge, they only lasted two hours and the accident happened.  I am wondering and the people of Arua are wondering, it is not a sabotage?  It appears to me that some people elsewhere have organised themselves to create a sort of insecurity in Arua so that Arua can be disturbed.  This is our feeling.  We want security men to find our exactly what happened.  This has happened many times in the town where the security is tight.  Why is it that there are no valid reports?  Thank you very much; this is our concern.

MR MWANDHA:  Information.  Mr Chairman, you will recall that I think about last week this House expressed concern about land mines, which are being planted in some parts of the North by the Kony rebels.  The Minister of Defence assured this House that the government has minesweepers and, therefore, the problem should not worry the Members and only this morning, it is reported that eight people were killed in an accident involving land mines.  I think the Minister of Defence owes this House an explanation why, despite of the man sweepers these incidents actually occurs, Mr Chairman.

MR OGWANG:  Further information.  Mr Chairman, I am being interrupted by people who do not know much about democracy though they claim they know a lot about democracy.  I would like also to express my sentiments about the insecurity, which is happening in the North, especially in Arua District and especially in the districts of Lira and Apac.  On this point -(Interruption)

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, please give your information as precisely as possible.

MR OGWANG:  Mr Chairman, I have an investment in Arua that is why I am concerned about the security in Arua.  You remember a grenade was tossed last time at the DPC of Arua who happened to be my friend and my colleague and my classmate and he narrowly escaped because the grenade simply refused to explode.  The security situation in Arua is not just on the surface, there is a lot of behind since the Islamic fundamentalists from a neighbouring country are trying to penetrate our security defences and they are the ones causing instability in the district of Arua.  I may be able to substantiate but what I am saying is that all the aliens who are staying in Arua should be investigated.  

There are so many aliens in Arua especially from Sudan.  There are so many Arabs from Saudi Arabia and from Iraq who are staying in Arua.  These are the people I understand who are causing insecurity.  They are the people who have connections with people abroad and these are the people who are bringing dangerous arms, they have their people who are bringing dangerous arms, they have their people who used to be former soldiers in UNLA - in Uganda Army and these people are trained commandos and the nature of the attack in various places in Arua is a typical commando attack.  I am sure the Government will take note of this.  I do not want to emphasize much on security but I think the whole House is aware of the problem of security this country is having.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  Mr Chairman, I thank all the Members who have given the information and I think that one -(Interruption)- as hon. Mwandha was saying it is just of recent, last week, when the Minister of Defence was assuring this House and the nation about the security.

Now, the other point I would like to bring is about the members of the Board.  Here in the Bill it is the Minister who is going to appoint the members of the Board.  I am suggesting that the Chairman of the Board should be elected by those members of the Board and this is Section 4 on page 5 that 6 other members to be appointed on the Board, Section (d)(ii) one shall be appointed to represent the interest of the travel agents.  Why does not the agents appoint that person because I am sure they know among themselves.  And also (iii) where the tour operators to appoint one person amongst themselves to come to the Board and number (iv) hotel operators, because I do not know how the Minister may be in consultation with those bodies that he will be able to appoint people from there.  

So, I am just suggesting to the Minister to look especially in those three sections - the last three section (ii), (iii) and (iv) and also when it comes to the General Manager of the Board, as hon. Tiberondwa was contributing, I think we change that the Minister should not appoint and to me I suggest that may be an interview - people should apply for such a post and be given an interview so that whoever performs best is appointed to that post.  This creates a way of people appointing their friends regardless of whether they are capable or not to such bodies and you find that the management is at stake sometimes and once these people, the Minister and that person whom he has appointed, their friendship deteriorates, then it means that the person is not even sure of his job.  he can sack him any thing and bring in another one.  

So, I would suggest that the Minister considers the position of the General Manager just to be like in other organisations where General Managers are appointed differently from what the Minister is suggesting in this debate.  With those few remarks, I support the Bill.  

MR J. KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  I support the Bill but I think I have to make a few remarks about our Tourist Industry.  The hon. Minister said that in the 1960s and 70s, it was an important industry. The question is why did it collapse; what happened?  An explanation of course is that this country became extremely unstable and nobody would want to come to it, we hope that now things have improved and that people now want to come to our country.  But that is not enough, we must be determined to attract the tourists here, unless we make the necessary infrastructure, there is no way people can come here however beautiful your country may be.  

One of the best examples about this is the - which I have seen through my experience is the Victoria Falls, Victoria Falls are on the same river and that river makes a boundary between Zimbabwe and Zambia.  But when you go to Victoria Falls on the Zambian side, there is only one small hotel and nothing else to show and therefore hardly any two risks comes there, you just cross over on the other side of Zimbabwe and you wonder what is happening the other side.  The kind of facilities, the roads, the hotels, every thing is there and because there is no infrastructure on that sight, no business is there.  So, unless we set out to make an infrastructure to attract tourism here, this Bill will be useless -(Applause)- and I would have wanted the Minister to give us an indication of what he is doing in this line.

DR HIGIRO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, what the hon. Member holding the floor is saying is very, very significant.  Investment - about is relative in their expenditures, setting up a factory here in Kampala can cost a lot of millions after - 300 million dollars but setting up tourists facilities can cost less than 20,000 dollars and it will make millions of dollars.  Take for instance - yes, we have got assets, it is a touring asset like the ‘Biggo bya Mugenyi,’ the ‘Bwogero’ and others. 

These are historical facts they are giving us by the fact that this is where we settle and this is where a very important government set its headquarters in East Africa and we should take a look at Egypt; Egypt gets one third of its budget from tourism and they are just people who come to watch the pyramids and the old dead Kings. All that we would need to do for ‘Biggo bya Mugenyi’ would be only a road just to get a road from Villa to Tusi and Tusi another 10 kilometres into Biggo and that one of course is very little money entrepreneur will build the lodges and tourism will come an they be paying.  

I also want to mention that this insecurity which is threatening -(Interjection)- unfortunately we do not have that insecurity here in Tusi, but honestly, what he is saying is good and we should take a leaf, the Ministry has done nothing practically, nothing to prepare for this very important recreative sector.  Mr Chairman, I support him.

MR J. KAWANGA:  With that kind of support, Mr Chairman, I think I can go on - (Interruption)

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR KAWANGA:  So, it is in this light, Mr Chairman, that I would have wanted the Minister to tell us a little more what is being done about improving the quality of our hotels not only in Kampala but upcountry.  Some of you who go to upcountry stations these days, there are hardly any facilities where you can comfortably sleep -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to give this information. I would wish to inform my hon. colleague on the Floor that the hotels he is talking of are being sold, some of them being given out. (Laughter)

DR HIGIRO:  One would have thought that, that is being done in order to improve them, if that is the case perhaps that is a policy in the correct direction.  But I would have wanted the Minister to give us that kind of assurance, but otherwise why invite people here if you cannot cook food for them, if you cannot give them accommodation?  You are assuming too much because other people elsewhere are giving these facilities.  Now, the other item is to train our people in a tourist industry, this is something we have ignored completely in this country, in other places people take this very, very seriously.  

So, I would have wanted the Minister to tell us a little bit more perhaps I understand there is a Bill to deal with suspect, but as of now, hardly anybody in this country knows very, very few have been trained to be able to handle all tourist industries.  The tourist operators we have are only just hard-hocking -(Interruption)

MR RUTARO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wish to give the hon. Member on the Floor information to the effect that ILO was sponsoring training of people who would handle tourists in Uganda and the centre was in Fairway Hotel.  But after recruiting, the infrastructure in place - the hotel was handed over to the former owners and the training was stopped.

DR HIGIRO:  This is just to give an indication of the degree of seriousness we are attaching something, it is so very good setting up this Bill but we are really thinking seriously about the kind of industry that we want to promote, it is very good we are putting up this Bill bit really are we determined to get it work?  

Now, the other thing I want to point out is immigration facilities.  It is so very good seeing people coming to this country and so, but if your immigration facilities are going to be a hindrance the whole project may be a total wastage of time.  I am pleased to know that perhaps now these days in Entebbe Airport, it is possible to go through the system fairly quickly, but at one time, one would have taken an hour two hours going through various security agencies before you get to the terminal to be able to move to town.  But because the other one is to train our security people, our indication officers to know that it is their duty to attract people who come here to promote our tourists industries of course, the other is the aspect of publicity, I do not know how much publicity our tourist industry is given abroad even as of now, perhaps the Minister will tell me that this is the beginning and we shall get there.  But when these things are in place -(Interruption)

MR SALIM BACHU: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, my Colleague hon. Kawanga is of course advocating for the promotion of tourism quite - but he seems to have forgotten that the points he is raising are actually points that I noted here for hon. Members to take note of.  The issue of training of course are mentioned that a survey was conducted in 1992 and we found that only about 10 per cent of the actors in the Tourist Industry are actually trained and all these other issues he is mentioning are issues we have looked at, what is being done I pointed that out as a contest of frame work leading to the need to establish these tourist board as well as the training institutes so perhaps he should simply please the Ministry for what it is doing and advise that these things be done rather than appear to sound like the Ministry is doing nothing.  I think the Ministry is doing all it can about the promotion of - Uganda is a tourists destination abroad, I think I pointed that out as one of our witness, as one of our failures so far and again that is a background reason as to why we need this board.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR HIGIRO:  Okay, actually, the Ministry is doing a lot and I want to congratulate it, that is actually also reflected in the Bill that they had brought to the House.  There is nothing that this Board can do without the consent of the Minister under this Bill, it yet have any confident in kind of board it is putting there, hon. Tiberondwa mentioned that even the General Manager has to be appointed by the Minister.  But that apart is very interesting things, section 12 sub-section 2, the staff of the Board appointed under this section shall hold office upon such terms and conditions as the Board may determine with the approval of the Minister.  

So, even the staff cannot do anything without the approval of the Minister.  Borrowing powers, the Board may with the approval of the Minister borrow sums of money required by it for meeting its obligation estimates under Article 16, the Board shall within the period of three months before the end of each financial year costs be prepared and submitted to the Minister for the approval estimates of the income and expenditure of the Board for the next following financial year.  No, expenditure shall be made out of the funds of the Board unless the expenditure has been approved by the Minister under sub-section 1, actually everything under this Board is being done with the approval of the Minister.  

Now, if this is the case, why are we creating this Board?  We might as well leave a very strong department under the Minister and he runs it without this Board, either he wants this Board to run commercially and be able to produce or he wants to continue controlling it as a department within the Ministry.  I would want some clarification why the Board has to be tied virtually in the pockets of the Minister and he is asking us to approve that kind of situation.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that under Section 10 sub-section 5, even if a General Manager is going away for only one day, it means they will have to appoint somebody to act in his place.

DR HIGIRO:  And so on and so forth.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The information I would like to pass on to the hon. Member holding the Floor is that, I am a member of the Sectoral Committee on National Resources.  Just last Friday, we were handling the same Bill so as to enforce the points of the hon. Minister all that this we are raising like hon. Minister appointing a General Manager, we have taken note of this and we hope that at the Committee Stage the Minister who is actually having the backing of the Sectoral Committee with these points raised which I have a copy here, will take note appropriately and handle along the points that Members are elaborating, thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I would like to give additional information to the hon. Member holding the Floor from the experience we have had from the Parastatal Accounts Committee of this House.  We have discovered in that Committee that some of the causes of the failures of the Parastatals has a reason for the failures of the ministers and the delays by the ministers in giving the kind of approvals that the hon. Member is enumerating to the Members here.  For instance, in one Parastatal Body, the Minister took about 6 to 7 months before he approved the budget of the Parastatal Body and during that time, people were not sure whether to spend on this one or to spend on that or whatever and also there were a number of other situations where if the approval had been given by the Minister in time this particular Parastatal Body would have done much better business than it was able to do.  So, the Member has a very valid point.

DR HIGIRO:  Mr Chairman, finally, on the issue -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you.  I would like to inform my colleague holding the Floor of the House.  You see in this House we have tended when we are debating these Bills asking the implementers who are the actors to produce legislation, but the implementers are actors in the Ministries of a wrong placement, that is to say, there is no comparing reasons for a Minister in the Office of a Ministry to do the job as a Minister of State in Civil Affairs, these are military men that we have got to correct and do the job that the law says and it should be done.

DR HIGIRO:  Finally, Mr Chairman, I would have wanted to know why the Uganda Tourist Development Cooperation is being wound up, I would have wanted to know the reasons.  Because, that gives us an indication as to whether we shall not fall into the same but falls under this new statute moreso as the statute is very similar to the decree under which the Uganda Tourist Development cooperation was operating, and I would have wanted to know why the assets and properties of the Uganda Tourist Development Cooperation are not being passed over to this new Cooperation as normally happens.  Hon. Members will notice that under Section 25 sub-Section 2, the assets property, rights, obligations, liabilities of the Uganda Tourists Development Cooperation at the commencement of this statute, shall be deemed to be vested in pending on behalf or against the government as the case requires, you know, somehow the government wants to retain the assets and one would have thought that the government would have wanted to assist this new Cooperation with the assets of the old Cooperation that perhaps that would have helped, but in the absence of an explanation, I do not know why this is not happening.  But in view of that, Mr Chairman, in the right of all that, I support the Bill.  Thank you very much.

MR TURYAHABWA (Kinkizi County, Rukungiri):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me this time to contribute to this Bill.  I would like to start by thanking the hon. Deputy Minister for having introduced this Bill to this august House and for his brief clarifications on the importance of the Tourist Board, maybe, with this Board, Ugandans can benefit and see proceeds from the Ministry of Tourism.  We have always heard that Tourism brings a lot of money as he has said during the previous years before the instability. But I would like to assure you that areas which are neighbouring tourist attractions have nothing to show that tourism can be positive and bring about development.  

We have also expanded on the attractions for tourism, we have for instance established new National Parks like Bwindi Forest National Park and others; I wish to observe that some of these areas which would be developed for this tourism are on the borders of Uganda; they are far away from the city.  

So, as the hon. Deputy Minister has said, this Board should approach Ministries to work collectively to make sure that these centres of - are accessible that roads leading to these National Parks are worked on and improved.  It is a pity to try to visit a National Park and indeed you travel very, very roughly on a rough road.  So, it would be a shame to talk of tourism and not improving on the roads leading to these areas of attraction. 

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me an opportunity to give information to the hon. Member holding the Floor.  Mount Elgon Forest Park was created without consultation of the people, there hardly any roads in that area, there are three boundaries to the forest and each time some of these people want to find out the boundary - people and when they gave them some money, they did not tell them to go back.  So, the only way is to tell the Minister to find out the exact boundary otherwise, some of these things have been tourists part to a National Park may never be realised especially in Mbale.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  

MR ELYAU:  Point of information.  May I inform the member holding the Floor that the Minister should do a lot of research in this country in cases like in our areas where even one single sight of tourist is not known by the Minister, yet there are very important places there, for example, in Lake Kyoga as you go towards Kalaki, there was an entry point where the Europeans went and made the first district that is where Soroti existed and even Lira existed and two Bazungus died there, one was in a loyal family and one was a Captain such a sight would be very important for the British people to visit.  Now, only that one; even in Gora, there is a rock called Ngero, this would bring a lot of money from tourism, there is nobody who is serious about the plan.  

So, I urge the Minister to do a lot of research in other areas so that tourism goes through - (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, we are all here leaders in this country and whenever we feel there is something that can assist the country, we should be able to do it.  Is it in order, therefore, for hon. Members to expect the Minister to go to their own areas everywhere in Uganda to find out information which we leaders could bring here and we wait for only the Minister, is he in order?

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  One way of bringing any issue like that to the Minister’s notice is to challenge him on a point of ignorance, which the Member did.  He is in order.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor about my very recent experience of last Saturday.  I was escorting a tourist to Kabalega National Park and this tourist had come to Uganda especially to see an elephant and close quarters.  Now, when we got to the across the Nile trying to track the elephants, we found the elephant had been in a certain area with very fresh bush droppings and all that.  When we tried to follow our priest elephant, we could not because the track was impassable and this we have a four wheel drive but we could not still make it.  Then on the way back, on a trunk road between Butyaba and Hoima, we found two tracks loaded with tobacco lying in the road and these tourists were swearing never to come back or they cannot tell their friends that life is easy with tourism in Uganda.  Thank you.

MR TURYAHABWA:  Thank you hon. Member.  I think the hon. Member has emphasised is that Uganda should try to make these tourists sceneries attractive by making them accessible. 

 Another detail to observe is that the Minister should have interest in the welfare of the people around these attractive areas especially the National Parks.  Let me point out what has happened in Bwindi National Forest Park.  There used to be Pygmies living in the forest and now they - after having been told that their habitat has become a National Park, they are slowly coming out of the forest and putting pressure of settlement on the ordinary land.  The mixing of the pygmies with the ordinary people has not been very smooth.  Let me go further and say that the Church Missionaries who are receiving these pygmies and settling them in camps.  So, what I want to say is, that the Ministry of Tourism should be interested in this kind of -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of order, because the hon. Member is imputing that pygmies are not human beings. Is he in order to create that impression?

MR TURYAHABWA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I wanted to request the Ministry of Tourism to try and help people who may suffer from problems as a result of developments in their habitat.  So, the pygmies are human beings as you all know, but the Ministry should try to resettle them, educate them, to make their lives easier as they are coming out of National Park for the good of the nation.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Hon. Members, I would like to inform the speaker that, the National Parks Authorities are not in any way chasing away the pygmies because where the National Parks have been established are the actual habitats of the pygmies and they are supposed to remain there.  And, therefore, the hon. Member should tell the pygmies to go back to their habitats because the areas like Bundibugyo where the pygmies were removed from the habitats and settled and are now trying to revert back to their habitats.

MR TURYAHABWA:  Another thing which I want to put forward to the Ministry of Tourism is that we should not really act without order.  Once the people know that the Government is interested in what is happening around them, they give full support.  I am trying to say that Ugandans are very keen to support tourism.  It is only to expect rewards or some assistance from the Ministry of Tourism so that they can do their job much more effectively.

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  Please wind up your speech hon. Member.

MR TURYAHABWA:  Let me wind up by looking at one of the clauses here in the Bill.   Clause 5 of the Bill. Section (i) says that, the appointed Members of the Board shall hold office for 3 years and are eligible for re-appointment.  So, I do not see why again in sub-section 4, the Clause repeats itself by saying that the avoidance of doubt for a person appointed under sub-section 3 of this section is eligible for re-appointment as a Member of the Board.  I thought that 5(i) is enough.  You do not have to repeat yourselves in these brief Bills.  

Again, I would like to support Members who have said that the appointment of the General Manager should be done by the Minister after consulting with Members of the Board.  And again, in Clause 14 where the hon. Minister has talked of tourism promotion levy, I would like to point out that it is known that the investors in this Ministry already pay -(Applause)- concession fees to the Uganda National Park.  Now if they continue to pay this levy, it might mean that they are going to be taxed heavily and this may discourage their interest in establishing the investment of the tourism, and they may reduce the ability to attract tourists and we lose what we would like to trap.  With that, I beg to support this Bill strongly.  Thank you.  

MR OPIO GABRIEL (Samia Bugwe):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to say something about the Bill.  Before I say something on the Bill, I would like to state that although we were told here last time that our maize was going to be bought by the Kenyans, as we speak now, we still have our traders stranded on our side and on the side of the Kenya with their tracks loaded with maize and our traders are having a hell of problems to have the maize so bought or sold either side.  So, the telephone which came as one hon. Member is saying must have been very opportune may be to make us less aggressive and at the same time, nothing has happened so far.  

To go back to the Bill, I would like to state that I support the Bill.  However, I would like to state that in order to promote tourism in these areas, Members have said, we must make sure that we have security in the country, because there is no way we are going to attract tourists in the country when there is insecurity.  Tourism is very sensitive to insecurity problems. So, the first item must be to have proper governance of the country so that tourists can see Uganda as a country where you can go and look at what you want and come or go back to your country.  

I would like to state that although I support most of the articles in the Bill, I would like to urge the draftsmen to be including some of the experts in the finance and accounting in drafting some of these Bill.  Not that I am looking for a job, but you find that some of the articles or clauses which are appearing in the Bill require the lot of improvement and this could be that our draftsmen do not get any consultation from the professionals in the finance or accounting.  

For instance, if you look at Clause 15, section 3, it says that, the person who lends money to the Board shall not be bound to inquire whether or not borrowing of the money is within the powers of the Board.  Which financier can really lend money and fail to inquire whether the person who is asking for the funds is within the powers?  This is automatically wrong as far as the elementary professions in finance or accounting is concerned.  This we should move our amendment to make sure that nobody should lend money at the expense of who ever is providing the funds.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, now that we have learnt from one Senior Adviser to the President, I hope that is not deliberate way of corruption because of sensitive people and as we have seen somebody who repented and returned his money or the money he had stolen was sacked.    Now we know it is a policy.  So, may be we might put that to section 2.  Thank you.

MR OPIO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, and thank you for the information.  Except that if we are to follow that, there will be no legislation.  Just to reinforce my argument, that we need improvement on this Bill especially on the finance side, is if you look at Clause 17(ii) it says, subject to search directions as the Minister may be, the Board shall prepare in respect of each financial year a financial statement of accounts comprising a balance sheet, a statement of accounts compromising a balance sheet.  So, all these are repetitions and I think that is someone who knew some little accounting was involved in the draftsmen would not have wasted that time to draft the Bill and come to us in such a form.  

Further more, when you look at section - Clause 18(b), it says that, the financial statement of accounts refer to (e) in section 17 of the statute was prepared on the basis of consistent with that of proceedings financial year and that is in agreement with the books of accounts. Definitely that one required a lot of improvement, because you cannot prepare according to the books of accounts, which you are already preparing.  It must be in accordance with the principles of accounts rather than the books of accounts.  

When it comes to the roman numbers (ii) and (iii), they are saying the same thing.  They say, in case of the revenue or expenditure or the Board gives the true and fair view of the statement of the Board at the end of the financial year.  The one says, in case of the revenue or expenditure of the Board gives a true and fair view of the income and expenditure and proved that those accounts of the Board for the financial year.  

So, the point I am trying to emphasize is that these Bills have taken time, and they have been drawn by special law.  But we should encourage the lawyers to co-opt people who may ask aid them in making the Bill proper before the Bill comes in the House for debating.  There are several amendments, which we could make to improve especially the finance aspect.  The principle one, we are told that every accounting year, the Government shall be providing grants.  Now, this is the major problem we are likely to have, because if every year we have to look for grants from government and at the same time when some of the Ministers speak here, they talk of having independent parastatal.  

Now, why do we not have once and for all capital may be to start off the Cooperation and then we avoid these periodic or yearly grants from government which may lead to more and more use of Government funds without proper accountability.  With these remarks, I would like to support.  Thank you.

MR RWAKAKOOKO (Ruhama County, Ntungamo):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I support the Bill.  The subject we are dealing with in my view is a complex one because tourism is a very, very complex area.  It is not handled by just one Ministry.  It is a multi-sectoral aspect.  I want to start with some caution.  The first caution I want to give in relation to this Bill under the Board that we hopefully put in place is that we should not expect this Board to do everything to create miracles for the tourism industry, because as I have said, this is a multi-sectoral activity.  In other words, you will have so many players involved in order to make your tourism economics successful.  

I have heard hon. Kawanga say something about the hotel - the infrastructure in Zambia and Zimbabwe. I would like to suggest that a lot of research is done before decisions are taken.  The reason is this, there are many people who assume that tourism equals hotels, tourism equals roads.  I would like to suggest that those are secondary.  The primary activity is why the tourists come into the country.  They do not come to ride on your very good roads.  They do not come to sleep in your hotels, because they have probably in many cases better hotels than what you have.  I think what we should emphasize in this country is a pity we have; the fewer, the resources we have in the countryside.  

The Minister has indicated the guerilla in the South Western part of the country.  That is something we must hold very, very dear, and we must avoid tampering with.  I would like to go further and suggest that in fact, we discourage people putting up massive structures in the countryside in tourism.  The reason is when you have put these structures in place; the temptation of making the countryside commercial will tamper with natural beauty of the outlay of the country.  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  The financiers are not so willing to finance those big structures either.  So, there will not be construction of that kind in the countryside.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: I thank the hon. Member for giving that information.  I was only sounding a general indicating caution that we should preserve the beauty of this country, country-wide and we should make sure that our ecology remains intact.  There is no doubt; we need the roads basically for our own internal economical activities.  There is no question that this economy - in fact the tourism economy, will have first to depend on ourselves.  I have always heard an indication when we talk about tourism we are talking about foreigners.  We should encourage ourselves to become aware of our own resources.  I have many times stopped people who should know this country and I have been disappointed to find that probably even in this Chamber, you find that in the Chamber national figures do not probably know even one quarter of this country.  We must show the example, and we must take the lead.  

I was suggesting that the foreigners will pick the leaf from ourselves and if they find that we know the country very well when we are talking to the foreigners and we know the inside out of the country, we are the best salesmen for that country.  That means you have confidence in your country.  But you will find that foreigners will in fact, be teaching Ugandans about Uganda.  Which is a very big problem.  I know that in other countries it is also true that foreigners also teach other people about their countries.  But not as much.  So, I would like to suggest, that before we look at foreigners, we ourselves must engage in that activity so that we make it economically viable.

AN HON. MEMBER:  In attempt to follow what the hon. Member is saying, I took a foreigner visitor to Mburo National Park and as we drove to the Park and right inside the Park itself, we found there domestic animals; I found cows all over the place and we were not able to see a single wild animal.  I would like to hear from the Minister whether actually these are part of the tourist attraction or what.  

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, I listened very carefully and patiently to the hon. Member holding the Floor with regard to his encouragement of internal tourism.  That Ugandans, ourselves should actually show the way before we can get foreigners to come here and see the beauty of our country.  But the hon. Member is aware that the poverty is prevailing in this country.  Only 2 per cent of the population is very rich indeed.  The majority of the 98 per cent are living under the poverty line.  I do not know how the only Member would like the 98 to really encourage internal tourism. 

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr Chairman, I would like to suggest that if you went to the Bank of Uganda, ear in, ear out, you are likely to find so many foreign exchange forms filled and paid for by people who go to see foreign land when they are still ignorant about their own country.  We are most likely to find a lot of money spent to go and encourage the tourism economics outside when our own tourism economics is starving.  That is a change I would like to see made so that people who go outside for various trips which are not business trips should first go around the country and spend the money they spend outside which will help this economy. 

MR ELLY TUMWINE:  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House that, one does not have to have many people with a lot of money to make more money.  What you need is to have very many people with very little money to make enough money.  If internal tourism was organised and buses with cheap, cheap fares were organised, we would get more money out of many buses with little fare than a few people traveling in their four wheel drives in the country.  If you see how schools travel around the country, you will find that it is reasonably cheap.  But what it gives to the child or to the tourists to use public means, it is so much.  Even outside tourism has not developed because tourism is still dominated in the category of the 2 per cent that the hon. Member was talking about.  If it were made simple - if it was made part of the society, we would encourage internal tourism.  For example, the long-horned cattle that hon. Tiberondwa is talking about, only exist here.  The Ankole long-horned cattle.  There are some people who have not seen these long horned on some parts of Uganda.  So, the information I am giving to the hon. Member is that if we do not see the value that we have and value it and show it to our people, then we shall not be marketing Uganda as we should or as the Bill proposes.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr Chairman, thank you.  I would like to touch on another point, which is also related to that.  That is to say, that one of the reasons that causes the ignorance on the part of Ugandans not knowing their country is because we are not yet liberated between ourselves as people of one nation.  I have got evidence here, my brother here I work with him and we used to travel to West Nile Region and now many people used to think that I am not a Ugandan whenever I talk to them, for reasons I did not know.  

What I am trying to emphasize is that when you travel even in Buganda here; in the countryside, in Kalungu, in Rakai, in other parts of the country, you will find people will look at you as a stranger first.  They may understand you later on as one of them.  But this arises out of the fact that even we leaders here, are not yet sufficiently close as Ugandans.  Therefore, very few Ugandans think beyond their homestead.  

Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, when we are debating internal tourism, and I am sorry to say even Members of this House, many of them are uncomfortable to be in Arua, Lira, seeing that the environment is not good.  But if they are leaders in this House may be so even from North, may be not happy to sleep in Kigezi.  

Now, this problem shows that we ourselves the leaders of the country are not happy to move.  So, it would have been a proper thing to first of all demonstrate this, since we are not among the 98 per cent in any way, but we may be among the 2 per cent, and tour meaning, those from the North to go southwards, and those from the South to go northwards so that we know these areas.  Thank you.

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr Chairman, I want only to emphasize the fact that we leaders and others should give an example, interact sufficiently, and that will create an economic activity within the sub-sector of tourism.  

I would like to suggest also that the Board should be very carefully to look at the statistics that if the Body is set up or even the current department in the Ministry should look at the statistics as to why tourists or people go to different areas.  I am saying this from experience.  For the year I participated in the International Tourism Economics in North America, the first thing that we did before we plunged into any decision, was to analyse decisions why people go where they go.  So, I would say, I am going to visit my brother, others would say, I am going to visit my friend, others would say, I have come here for an official duty or for the business trip.  Those kinds of statistics or indicators would give you the planning directions of your tourism.  

What I know in this country, which is well endowed with the natural fauna and ecology, is that we should give priority to matters such as what was raised by hon. Higiro here.  I know that he has raised it several times.  But it is not a single matter if you want to gain from tourism in economics.  We must benefit from the fishing facilities at the base or at the extension of Karuma.  We must do the same in Kasese and we must also benefit from the source of the Nile and many such activities.  These are very important sites, which we currently take very lightly.  

I would also like to suggest that the Chairman of the Committee to avail these proposed amendments to members so that we do not engage any duplicated propositions, so that we can have all of them put together and probably give them to the Minister so that we can adopt them when he finally is winding up when we are in Committee Stage.  

I would like to suggest that the most important thing that has already been tackled by many, is the enabling environment.  That is, we must have peace here before anything else.  All of us must subscribe to this peace because without it, everything else will fall to pieces.  I thank you, Mr Chairman. 

CAPT. FRANCIS BABU (Kampala Central Division):  Mr Chairman, I stand to support the Bill.  I support the Bill because some of us have been witness to the tourism industry in East Africa and especially in this country.  At one time in the whole of East Africa, Uganda probably was leading in tourism.  It was leading in tourism because our government had made special efforts to make sure that the infrastructure for tourism was put up.  

In fact, the Uganda Hotel Limited is probably one of the indicators that has remained of that great empire of tourism in this country.  I have looked at tourism since I was in school and after that when I joined the Airlines business, we used to fly to a lot of these National Parks.  I have been to all the National Parks in East Africa.  Tourism is a process; it is not something that you create in one day.  It is dependent on certain facts and factors, one of them being the stability of the nation.  

Therefore, I am not happy when the people use the problems we have in this country as a platform on which they should stand on to debate a Bill of this nature.  In fact, we should be crying tears that some of our people in this country are being killed by grenades and by attacks of the nature, instead of using them as a manipulation to score a political victory.  

We must sympathise with those who are undergoing the threats and we should not use them. We should ask our government in no uncertain terms that he should come here and report to us what is going on.  Instead of sitting there and looking at the newspapers, we should be telling the Government to come here and tell us what is going on with security and what measures they can bring so that they can tell us what to do.  I would like to go to -(Interruption)-

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor of the House that, in this House we are having at this moment a serious type challenging all of us who are leaders particularly who are Members of this House.  Unless we pressurise the Government to put the national security as number one in the activity, whatever we are doing here - this case of training business we are just idle here.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, going to the second point, I want to say something about this election which somebody was using a few minutes ago as a political capital.  If anything, I would like to congratulate through you, this Government for having established democracy to an extent if someone is intimidated, is sponsored, is still beaten in the election.  That to me is an achievement in democracy.  Which means there is democracy now, we can stand, intimidate you, and you can still win those elections.  To me, that is the score and that is the achievement of this democracy.  

I would like to go to this point of the linkage of tourism.  The linkage of tourism; tourism is linked on a lot of things.  One of them is the infrastructure that everybody has talked about.  The other one is the relationship with foreigners.  The other one is the service industry in the country.  The other linkage is the security.  I would like also to go a little bit further that our officials of government their attitude towards tourism especially at the entry points - these have to be developed at such a level that they will appreciate tourism.  The other very important factor here in marketing of tourism, is airlines.  

Airlines can give special rates and tour, packages which they give to different people in Europe and they can come here spend a lot of time.  Our relationship with neighbouring countries is very important.  In the olden days, what used to happen is, the tourists would come from Europe.  They would come to Entebbe and spend one or two weeks in Uganda.  They would then move either to Tanzania in the Serengeti National Park or in the Manyara National Park which is the Northern bit of the Serengeti part in Kenya.  Or they would go straight to the Coast and this whole thing would be a package.  But they should not start in Entebbe, they should start in Nairobi and then come to Entebbe.  It started being the war and eventually we could not share these tourists.  

In other words, we became a little bit greedy.  I would like to propose, therefore, that in the three countries, we should sort of join hands because each of these countries has got a certain attraction.  One of the attractions that the other two countries have got that we do not have is the Coast.  That they have got hotels on the Coast and a lot of these people would like to spend a few days on the Coast.  We must, therefore, have a linkage that when these tourists have come to our country they can end up on that Coast for a week or so and then they can go back to Europe.  

The other one is about the people who are near these National Parks.  If we built the tourism industry, they will benefit because there will be employment.  Further more, there will be also business in these areas.  We are talking about internal tourists.  There was another point that was made that we have people in these National Parks.  Yes we do, because before these people came here, our people lived in these large lands.  If you go in Kenya you find Masaai, you come here, you will find that there are Karimojongs up there, and they have a National Park; they are not very far. The Minister appoints the Board; the Board represents the Minister.  When you see the Board, you have seen the Minister.  Once the Board is there, that Board should appoint the Management of the Organisation and I am not going to accept because I have passed a lot statutes here on Board.  You are trying to tell me that I do not know what I am doing and I do not like that.  

I am a Member of this House and whenever we pass a Bill here, I take collective responsibility.  If this House has passed a Bill, even if I am not here, I am a Member of this House.  Tomorrow if one of our Members stands up and criticise us of not having passed an Authority and a Board, when at the same time he was a Member of this House, I begin to wonder where we are going.  So, if you do not want a Board or an authority to be passed here, I would like to propose that you move that, that thing is thrown out.  But once you have been a Member of this House when we were passing that authority and that Board, you should for goodness sake, keep your comments to yourself.  

I am a little bit worried about the finances.  Why am I worried about the finances?  It says that there will be grant and then the levy.  Nobody seems to have told us how much this grant is and what the levies are.  Who is going to give the grant?  It says, Government.  Is this going to be the figure capitalising the Board?  I think the Minister should be kind enough to give us something to work on.  I do not want us to set up a Board that does not have finances.  Somebody should give us a picture of what the finances are going to do and these levies we are talking about, are they going to be immediate?  Because the tourism is improving but it is improving slowly.  Is this Board going to exist right now with the amount of tourism we have and if not the Government should capitalise this organisation before we set it up.  Mr Chairman, I thank you.

THE AG. CHAIRMAN:  I now adjourn the House to tomorrow.


(The Council rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 31 August 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)     

