Wednesday, 30th August 2000.

Parliament met at 11:18 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

ASCERTAINMENT OF QUORUM.

95 Members were ascertained as being present.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is indication that we may adjust our Order Paper in the afternoon to include another item, which does not appear on the Order Paper you have. This will be a resolution, under Article 159 of the Constitution, for Parliament to approve a loan of seven million US dollars from the Nordic Development Fund for a telecommunication's component for the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme. We hope this will be ready in the afternoon, so I just want to alert you, because there are few papers that are being worked out. In the afternoon, they are likely to be ready and, therefore, when we ask you to deal with this item after we have completed this work, you should be ready.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Daudi Migereko): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, before I present the report of the Committee I would like to make to the following corrections in the report: On page three, under the mandate and structure of the Ministry, the sentence that starts, “The overall idea of the above mandate…” Instead of that sentence, can we have, 'The overall idea of the above mandate is to facilitate generation of wealth for the individuals and country'. In other words, add the words ‘facilitate generation of' instead of “to generate”.  

On page four, the second sentence, instead of “implement the bulk” can we have 'implement some of the resolutions'. On page four, the last sentence in first paragraph, add the phrase ‘in good time’ between “explanation and “failure to act”. So, that sentence will read, “in case of inaction, the Committee recommends that the Ministry or Government provides an explanation in good time for failure to act”.  

There is a mix up with page 14 and page 15 in some of the reports.  In some reports, page 15 comes before page 14.  If we can correct that one, it will be okay. On page 17, under domestic arrears, the second sentence says, “Domestic arrears currently stand at U.shs. 117 billion”. The sentence should read ‘currently stand at over U.shs. 117 billion. 

On to page 19, under the Ministry's re-current and development budget provisions, the sentence says, “Mr. Speaker Sir, hon. Members, the Committee recommends that for the financial year 2000/01 a total of U.shs 2,890,396,000…” After that we add ‘for head 028'. The missing words are 'for head 028' before recurrent expenditure. You can use vote 028 or head 028. Other additions are, for head 128, a total of Ushs.4,838,900,000 for local development expenditure, plus $17,550,200 from donors for development expenditure for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.

MS. KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is it procedurally right for the chairperson to come and edit and proof read his report now and waste our valuable time?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe when he originally presented it, he was satisfied, but in the few minutes while he was seated here, he realised that it requires corrections. Proceed.

MR.MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for that wise ruling. This is the report of the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the budget/policy statement for the financial year 2000/2001.  

Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandates the Sessional Committees, among other things, to examine critically, Government recurrent and capital budget estimates and to make recommendations on them for the general debate in this House. The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry's mandate covers examining the policy proposals and budgetary estimates of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2000/2001 of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.  

The Committee received and discussed the policy and budgetary estimates of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. In addition, the Committee also examined the budget statements from the statutory bodies under the Ministry i.e. Uganda Export Promotion Board, Uganda National Bureau of Standards, Uganda Wild Life Authority, Uganda Industrial Research Institute, Uganda Tourist Board, and the Management Training and Advisory Centre.  

The Committee met the Second Deputy Prime Minister/Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry, the technical staff of the Ministry led by the Permanent Secretary, and the chief executives of the statutory authorities falling under this Ministry. During these meetings, policy statements were discussed, areas lacking in policy guidance pointed out, and clarification was sought.  

Taking cognisance of the role of the private sector after privatisation, and in a liberalised environment, the Committee received submissions from Uganda Manufacturers Association, Uganda Co-operative Alliance, the Private Sector Foundation, Uganda Sugar Manufacturers Association, Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, and the Trade Policy Capacity Building Project. These organisations made valuable contributions. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to thank the Ministry leadership, officials and all those who appeared before the Committee for their co-operation and in put.

The Mandate and Structure of the Ministry:
The mandate of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is: 
    (a) To promote, expand and diversify trade.  
    (b) Promote ecologically sustainable industrialisation and appropriate technology, and 
    (c) Promote conservation and sustainable use of the country's diverse bio-diversity and national heritage in order to enhance tourism.  

The overall idea of the above mandate is to facilitate generation of wealth for the individuals and the country, and thereby enhance economic and social development. 

The Ministry's structure, both at political and technical levels, still remains the same, and out of the 122 positions in the Ministry, only 98 are filled up. We urge Government to fill up these positions to reduce on the heavy workload of the serving officers.  

Ministry's response to recommendations of the previous financial year:  
The Committee notes, with concern, the failure on the part of Government to implement some of the resolutions of the Committee for the financial year 1999/2000. It is the view of the Committee that continued failure to implement some of the Committee recommendations and Parliamentary resolutions would only lead to incapacitation of the Ministry, in regard to execution of its mandate.  Also, desired goals and targets would remain unattained.  Appendix A indicates the Government action or inaction in regard to the recommendations of the previous financial year. In the case of inaction, the Committee would like to recommend that the Ministry or Government provide an explanation in good time for failure to act.

The Ministry in Global Environment:  
Uganda is a founder member of the World Trade organisation (WTO). By becoming a member of the World Trade Organisation, Uganda formerly agreed to be part of the globalisation process. This confers on us certain benefits, and the anticipated gains are in the areas where we have a comparative and competitive advantage. Our products would be opened up to much bigger and wider markets.  Secondly, we should be able to gain easy access to capital and enterprise, to beef up on the local stock.  

It, however, also imposes certain responsibilities and obligations. The obligations include opening up our borders to the free flow of goods and services by the year 2004, in the case of WTO, and 31st October 2000, in the case of COMESA. This has serious implications in terms of establishment and sustenance of industrial growth and in the area of employment for our people.  

In order not to get swallowed up and improve on our bargaining position on the global arena, Uganda and other east and southern African states formed the East African community and COMESA.  Government, for a long time, has known the timetable for implementation of WTO and COMESA provisions. In this regard, Government has been opening up our borders and steadily reducing tariffs on imports. The impact on our industries, which are still infant, has so far been negative. Other than conducting sensitisation seminars, Government has not done much to address this negative development in regard to our industries. 

The Committee notes with disappointment that the zeal registered in regard to compliance to WTO and COMESA provisions, has not been exhibited in regard to addressing the constraints that could help turn Uganda's comparative advantage into competitive advantage on the global arena. These constraints include lack of accessibility to concessionary credit for production, failure to promote modern methods of production, high cost of utilities etc. Furthermore, Government should produce a checklist of our obligations, stating what has been done, what remains to be done, and when, in regard to WTO and COMESA.  

It is our strong recommendation that, instead of lamenting about how disadvantaged we shall be, we take advantage of the time between now and 2004 to put in place policies and programmes to earnestly address the known impediments to attaining competitive advantage. Further, Government's withdrawal of a commercial attaché in Geneva at WTO be urgently reconsidered.  Representation in Geneva is the surest and only way of keeping abreast and taping into WTO programmes, which could be beneficial to the country.

Ministry's performance at the policy level:
The Committee noted that the Ministry has made attempts to initiate new policies to address problems bedevilling tourism, trade and industrial sectors. Foremost, being the closure and/or collapse of businesses and industries. Government, however, has not been fast enough at considering and approving the new policy initiatives of the Ministry. The Committee noted that it simply takes too long for an important matter to even get itemised for discussion to be considered to be approved by the relevant organs of Government and to be implemented by Government. Consequently, to date, there are no programmes to address the constraints that have resulted in the collapse of industries, led to the failure to become self-sufficient in certain basic commodities, and the inability to fully meet our export obligations. As a result, our goods become uncompetitive, and we also cannot overcome our balance of trade problems. If you look at appendix B, this matter is clearly brought out. For instance, in 1996/97 we had a negative balance of trade of 813 million dollars. In 1997/98, we had a negative of balance of trade of 1.237 million dollars. In 1998/99, we had a negative balance of trade position of 1,107 million dollars. For 1999/2000, this negative position persisted to 1.225 million dollars, that is not a comfortable position. 

The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that Government moves fast to discuss the policy proposals of the Ministry with stakeholders and at Cabinet level, and puts in place programmes and all remedial measures to address the plight of the sector. In addition, Government should expedite the operationalisation of the long awaited Big Push strategy as a way forward.  

The Committee noted with concern that the policy of liberalisation has been given the wrong interpretation in certain Government circles, i.e. that everything should be left to operate without guidance. This has virtually led to an abdication of some of Government's responsibilities. For instance, Government has abandoned the role of setting and monitoring production targets, hence there are no performance indicators and nobody can be held accountable for failure to meet targets –(Interruption).

MR.DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to interrupt the chairman of the Committee in his presentation of the report. But just a few minutes ago, he read certain figures, and I think they are from appendix B, on our trade deficit in dollars. He was talking of billions of dollars but appendix B talks of millions of dollars.  The difference between a million dollars and one billion dollars is so staggering that people will wonder what our economy is really like. I would like to get clarification from the chairman as to whether the figures he is quoting are from appendix B, and if they are from appendix B, let him correct that to millions of dollars and not billions.  I thank you.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much. Actually, the figures are in millions of dollars, 837 million dollars in 1996/97, and so on.  When you look at appendix B, it is very clear.  

It is the view of the Committee that, if the country is going to produce enough for domestic consumption, let alone exports, the Ministry and/or Government must be prepared to work with targets.  Indeed, budgetary allocations and all releases to Ministries that are directly linked to production should take into account their work plans and targets. Incentives based on performance indicators should also be considered.  

Directorate of Trade and Industry:  
The department has a mandate to develop both internal and external trade, with the greatest thrust on export diversification. The Committee observed that trade activities and results for the last year were disappointing. The country registered a fall of approximately 100 million dollars in export earnings last year, and a deteriorating balance of trade. The poor performance was attributed to the ban on our fish exports by the European Union, poor terms of trade, but more importantly, to the drought.  Unfortunately, even this year, we could register similar results because of continued drought, continued poor terms of trade, particularly coffee prices and failure to do value addition. In the short run, review of high taxes on irrigation equipment would help to popularise irrigation as an answer to the effects of drought. In the long run, we must promote commercial agricultural production and agro-processing industries and diversify the export base.  

Department of Internal Trade:  
Our interaction with the Ministry officials revealed that there is little attention being paid to internal trade. This was exhibited in the lack of figures for internal trade. We were informed that the bulk of the work regarding internal trade has been passed on to the private sector and districts. Unfortunately, the private sector still lacks institutional capacity and facilitation in this area. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) sector support programme, which was expected to cover the whole country and provide some facilitation, covered only few districts. As for the local governments, they are yet to fully internalise their role in handling internal trade and co-ordination with the Ministry. 

The Committee therefore recommends that the co-ordinating role of the Ministry in internal trade matters be beefed up. 

Secondly, compilation and dissemination of information on domestic supply, opportunities and potential demand be a major assignment of the Ministry. If the private sector is going to play the role expected of it, it must be facilitated.

Thirdly, in order for the volume of trade to increase, arrangements must be made to ease access to credit by both big and small producers and traders

Department of Co-operative Development:  
The biggest challenge that the department and Uganda Co-operative Alliance face is to structure the co-operative unions and societies to operate in a liberalised economic environment.  Capacity building and capitalisation must be undertaken in order for these units to effectively handle agricultural marketing, financial delivery services, trading, housing, et cetera. Due to the extensive rural coverage of the co-operatives, we recommend facilitation to the co-operative movement in order to administer poverty alleviation funds. 

Regarding the Co-operative Bank, the Committee recommends that Government comes up with a solution for the innocent former employees and other shareholders who took up shares prior to the closure of the bank. Furthermore, the Committee calls upon Government to expeditiously verify and pay the liberation war claims of the co-operative unions and societies throughout the country. This will help to address the capitalisation problems of the co-operative movement.  

Department of External Trade:  
The thrust has been increased to export diversification. It is worth noting, however, that export trade in Uganda is still confronted with a lot of bottlenecks, which include:
a) Dependence on natural weather for agricultural production.
b) Lack of consistence in quantity and quality of locally produced products.
c) Lack of concessionary credit.
d) Failure to promote value addition.
e) Inadequate information on potential markets, and
f) Absence of export incentives.

Until these constraints have been addressed, we shall lack competitive advantage in regard to our export sector.  Consequently, there will be dramatic improvements in our exports, let alone foreign exchange earnings. The above scenario is further compounded by the lack of dependable figures on production and absence of export targets. As a matter of fact, the Committee was astounded with the export projections presented because they did not bring out any marked increase in exports or earnings for the next five years, despite donor support. What we are talking about can be found in appendix C and appendix D. You can pick on a few agricultural items, where we are supposed to have a comparative advantage, like maize, beans and soy beans. You will note that after the year 2000, we have got a declining trend in regard to production and earnings in those particular items. 

In light of these projections, the Committee recommends an urgent review of our export strategy. Failure to do this will lead to the worsening of our foreign exchange problems and the exacerbation of our balance of trade position.

Import Trade:  
The Ministry is responsible for monitoring imports coming into the country, by liasing with the Uganda Revenue Authority and the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. Ever since the liberalisation of the economy and foreign exchange transactions, imports have increased tremendously. Last Financial Year, our imports amounted to approximately l.85 billion dollars as compared to exports which were less that 700 million dollars. This is attributed to lack of requisite production technology, low production levels, and consumers’ preference for imported goods.  

Given our level of export earnings, we can hardly afford the import levels so far exhibited. The bulk of the imports are due to grants and loans from donors. This arrangement is not sustainable.  We, therefore, recommend that we re-visit our import strategy to focus on importation of items that will enhance local production and reduce foreign exchange spending. 

Uganda Export Promotion Board:  
Uganda Export Promotion Board is at the centre of promoting export trade. However, some quarters have called for dissolution of this important trade centre as per the Hogg report. It is the view of the Committee that we still need the Export Promotion Board.  Indeed, Government must take the necessary measures to adequately fund it in order to strengthen it. Release of the statutory import levy will go a long way in bailing the Uganda Export Promotion Board out of its perennial financial problems.  

We further note, with disappointment, that increasing and diversifying exports have now become a mere slogan. The constraints to be tackled, in order to realise the desired results, have remained unattended to. This has been clearly brought out in point 7.3. For this reason, Uganda Export Promotion Board needs adequate institutional support.  

We also recommend a multi-sectoral approach and interventions to address these problems. Government, Uganda Export Promotion Board, the private sector and other stake holders should actually simultaneously agree on export targets and the time frame in which to clear the bottlenecks and achieve the desired targets.  Secondly, based on available statistics on private transfers, Uganda Export Promotion Board should be facilitated to aggressively market Ugandan manpower exports as a source of foreign exchange. 

Uganda National Bureau of Standards:  
Since the inception of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) in 1989, attempts have been made over the years to secure land to build a permanent home for it. The shifting of UNBS from one temporary location to another affects the development of requisite infrastructure and has a negative impact on the delivery of the vital national services. UNBS has budgeted for this item over the years, including this financial year, but to no avail.  The accommodation of UNBS is again in jeopardy, as the currently landlords are evicting them.  

The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development expedite the transfer of available land from Uganda Investment Authority to UNBS, and that it takes to provide the necessary financial support to facilitate the Uganda National Bureau of Standards’ activities.  

We also urge Government to implement the parliamentary resolution allowing UNBS, amongst other parastatals, to get funding from the import levy. It is also strongly recommended that UNBS be allowed to participate in the inspection of pre-shipment of exports and post shipment of imports. This will assist UNBS generate funds and save foreign exchange for the country.  

Tourism Development Division:  
The tourism sector is of major economic importance worldwide. In Uganda too, tourism has a lot of potential. The ten-year tourism master plan of 1993, produced by the Ministry, seeks to capture this potential. It has, however, been over taken by new developments in the sector. 

In 1998, prior to the Bwindi and Kanungu incidents, tourism earned us 142 million US dollars from 265,937 visitors. In 1999, mainly due to the Bwindi incident, a fall of ten per cent was registered.  Projections for this financial year stand at 287,980 visitors.  With improved security in the country and implementation of the Lusaka Peace Accord, we should record a higher number of visitors and hence higher earnings.  

The Committee notes that, despite the considerable foreign exchange earnings from tourism, there has been no corresponding investment in the sector by Government. The bulk of the responsibility for further investments has been left to the private sector. Unfortunately, due to the sensitivity of the industry, the occupancy rate has been adversely affected and businesses are threatened with foreclosure. It is the view of the Committee that the Government provides more investments, in order to attract more investment in the sector. Further, that Government takes more concerted action to improve on the image of the country. 

Increased growth in the tourism sector is also being affected by the cost of accommodation, which is still too high in comparison to the local people's income and also compared to the neighbouring countries. This has affected hotel occupancy. The Committee urges the Ministry to expedite the exercise of hotel classification. This will help establish standards for the various levels of hotel services, determine which categories are desired most, and what rates to charge. 

Wildlife Division:  
Wildlife is the main tourism resource in Uganda. Efforts are being made for the development of historical, cultural and national heritage tourism. Wildlife tourism can only prosper if the unique and diverse wildlife is preserved. It has, therefore, been the responsibility of this division to work with other Government departments, districts and NGOs to preserve wildlife.  Encroachment, however, is till a problem. 75,000 families are still living in areas gazetted as protected areas. We, therefore, recommend to Government to re-settle these families outside the game reserve areas or alternatively degazette such areas where it is technically permissible. 

Uganda Wildlife Authority:   
The mandate of UWA is to conserve the country's wildlife and bio-diversity in a manner that maximises its benefits to the people of Uganda. The Committee notes, with appreciation, strategies employed by UWA in fulfilling this mandate, particularly in creating a harmonious relationship between the protected areas and the surrounding communities. This has been through the sharing of revenue accruing from the protected areas. However, it is the view of the Committee that there is need to review the present approach, which simply focuses on provision of social infrastructure to the neighbouring communities. Supplementary funds should be procured to promote income generating activities in order to tackle poverty, which has been identified to be a major cause of environmental degradation in these areas.   

Industry:  
The Committee notes with appreciation, the new policy initiatives of the Ministry leadership in regard to addressing the disturbing state of the sector. 

We urge Government to urgently consider the proposals contained in these initiatives as a way of ensuring sustainable development in the country. This will also address unemployment. The reports we got indicate that presently 0.12 per cent of the available labour force is engaged in production.  

In the policy statement, the industrial sector is reported to have experienced a growth of 11 per cent. The Committee did not find these figures convincing. This was on account of the many businesses and industries, which have collapsed, and those which are under receivership. Some of those, which are in distress or which have collapsed, are provided in appendix E.  

The Committee noted that other than the beverages, sugar, soap and oil sectors, other sectors are operating at less than 30 per cent of installed capacity and are in dire need of resuscitation measures. 

The liberalisation and divestiture policies of Government require the private sector to play a leading role in the industrial sector. Unfortunately, our private sector is still in its infancy.  Indeed, it needs help in order to grow. The Committee, therefore, made the following observations:

Strategic Industries in our Economy: 
Almost every country has what it considers to be strategic industries. The considerations, when selecting such industries, are contribution to employment creation, forward and backward linkages, value addition, export potential/earnings, amongst others. In our case, Government is yet to come up with a list of industries, which it considers to be strategic, let alone a specific set of incentives associated with investing in such industries. In the national Budget 2000/2001, incentives were provided for those who use imported raw materials. There were no incentives provided for those utilising local raw materials. We consider this not sustainable. 

It is the view of the Committee that the list of strategic industries be provided, in order to focus our resources where we can attain greatest benefit to the economy and country. This would create multiplier effects in the economy, address unemployment and improve the country's earnings, both local and foreign. In this regard, consideration should be given to the cotton/textile industries, coffee, sugar, fish, cattle, steel and iron ore. The Committee also supports the Ministry's idea of setting up an agency to revitalise and spearhead investment in some strategic industries where capital cannot be easily sourced by private firms.

Trade Free Zones and Export Processing Zones: 
This is a matter, which has been discussed and recommendations have been given every financial year. It cannot be disputed that countries that have set up these zones have benefited immensely by attracting industrial development, creating employment, stimulating exports and enhancing effective demand in their economies. 

The Committee would like Government to explain why they are not keen on pursuing this arrangement. The Committee identifies certain constraints that need to be addressed if we are to overcome the present state of our industries, and these are contained in point 10.3. Overall, the Committee notes that the industrial, manufacturing and processing sectors will only be allowed to grow and become competitive if the following are addressed:

Funding: 
Existing commercial banks are not prepared to finance industrial development and their associated operations. Government must, therefore, urgently put in place an industrial development fund or revitalise Uganda Development Bank in order to deal with peculiar needs of the sector and solve long term funding needs of the industries. This may help reduce borrowing in foreign exchange, and avail high risk capital, particularly for the local entrepreneurs who are not Kampala-based.  

Depreciation of the Shilling: 
This should be to the benefit of our exporters. However, due to the limited nature of our exports, unfavourable terms of trade, and suspected uncontrolled capital flight, our foreign exchange earnings have dwindled. On the other hand, the demand for foreign exchange or US dollars is high, hence the depreciation of the shilling. Since most industries use imported items, particularly fuel, this has increased operational costs and prices of products.  Investment is also being curtailed due to the foreign exchange risk associated with loan repayment. The "quick fix" approach by Bank of Uganda, of pumping dollars on the foreign exchange market, has had no impact. It is imperative that new policy measures and programs to improve foreign exchange earnings and reduce outflow are identified and put in place to stem the depreciation of the shilling.

Smuggling and Dumping: 
The local industries have been subjected to unfair competition due to smuggling and dumping. Tax management and administration need to be improved. Similarly, clear policy measures against dumping must be put in place. Many countries have used a fiscal policy to encourage industrial development and create employment. That does not seem to be the case in our country.  

High Cost of Utilities: 
While the supply of utilities to industries has improved, thanks to competition, they generally remain expensive, hence increasing the unit cost of production. Utility companies must, therefore, be prevailed on to offer cost effective services and products.

Lack of Market for Local Products: 
While it is true that effective demand has generally diminished, Government procurement machinery is not local product friendly.  Given that Government is the biggest buyer on the market, this has adversely affected our industries, that is, the textile sector, leather industry, etc. This has hence eliminated all the multiplier effects associated with our local industries.  We, therefore, urge Government to implement the policy of buying local products.

Domestic Arrears: 
Local industries and businesses have been crippled by the failure of Government to meet its financial obligations to suppliers in good time. Domestic arrears currently stand at over U.shs. 117 billion.  Ironically, this sum is not allowed to attract interest. This has been one of the leading causes of the collapse of enterprises. We recommend that interest on commercial terms be paid on the outstanding arrears, but more importantly, payment be expedited.

Summary of recommendations:
1. Government should endeavour to meet its obligations in regard to the World Trade Organisation and COMESA, within the stipulated time frame, and at the same time, facilitate the private sector to meet the new challenges in order to benefit from this new world trade order.
2. In order to address our adverse balance of trade position, which is perpetually negative, both our production and export strategies be urgently revisited. Government should put in place multi-sectoral programs and interventions in order to achieve the desired goals.

3. Government should find a solution to the problem of shareholders of the Co-operative Bank and also speed up the verification and payment of liberation war debts to the Co-operative movement all over the country.

4. Government should explain why it has failed to implement the parliamentary resolution on release of the import levy to Uganda National Bureau of Standards, Uganda Export Promotion Board and other bodies, as by law. We should also be able to show how the financial needs of these institutions will be sustainably met.

5. The review of the tourism master plan of 1993 be sped up in order to address new developments in the sector and provide comprehensive guidelines that will attract investors and render it competitive so as to boost both domestic and foreign tourism.

6. Government should create a fund or revitalise Uganda Development Bank to cater for the long term funding of business/industrial projects.

7. Government should expedite the discussion of the new policy proposals of the Ministry as a way forward to stemming the collapse of businesses/industries and addressing unemployment in the country. Alternatively, the long awaited Big Push strategy be immediately operationalised.

Ministry's Recurrent and Development Budget Provisions for the Financial Year 2000/01:
The Committee recommends, for the financial year 2000/01, a total recurrent expenditure of U.shs. 2,890,396,000 for the head 028, and for head 128, a total of U.shs. 4.838,900,000 for local development expenditure plus $17,550,200,000 from donors for development expenditure for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry be approved by this House.
I beg to move.

(The full report of the Committee is to be found in Volume I, Sessional Committee Reports on the 2000/2001 Budgetary Proposals)

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Considering that the chairman of this Committee exhaustively presented the Committee's report, and you know how stimulating this report is and how important the economy is to this country, could we have a way in which Members are given limited time, so that as many Members as possible can contribute. The problem has been that, when we begin, the first few Members take maybe 30 minutes, and at the end of the day, many Members do not contribute. I seek your guidance, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The suggestion is reasonable. Each Member is given not more than five minutes, and I start with you.

MR.OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand to support this Motion and to thank the chairman for the report. Indeed, what the Committee has observed and recommended is worrying in as far as the state of the economy is concern. In any country, the backbone of the economy has to be the small-scale producers, agriculture, the small business people in the countryside, and what you call the small-scale enterprise developers. This has not been the case in the set up of our economy - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, I advise Members not to move out because we have a lot to do, otherwise we may have problems if you move out.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. The backbone of any economy is the small-scale producers, but the macro economic policy of Government has not addressed the production at the lower level of our economy. The macro economic policy has emphasised liberalisation of the economy and privatisation of our enterprises, and it has focused more on divestiture. This policy has turned this country into an economic setting, where I do not know what will happen within the next five years, if we continue with it.

I will go straight to the recommendations on page 18, since I do not have much time. The funding of small-scale industrial projects in this country has not been addressed. Uganda Development Bank was set up during the era of Idi Amin with a view to addressing the development of the business sector, industries and commerce.  The Uganda Development Bank has been vandalised by bank robbers, by people who get loans and do not pay back, and Government has blinded its eyes to the deeds of these people. We are looking forward to NPART becoming operational so that UDB loan defaulters are subjected to paying back their loans.  

No business can operate on the current commercial bank interest rates, and that is why there is a collapse of commercial banks. Greenland Bank, in particular, collapsed because it lent money to borrowers who invested in long term projects, which should have been financed by development banks. You have seen the result of this. They produce bank robbers, who are left free. I think Government should come up with a policy. This is a situation where the Government has been put to task to pay 150 million Dollars equivalent to bank robbers. I do not know how the Government can sustain this, maybe, it is the wish of the Government that this money be paid like that, but it is not fair. And it is equally not fair for the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of Trade and Industry not to address this particular issue. 

My last point is with regard to the depreciation of the shilling. There is no way that you are going to save the shilling from depreciating. The shilling has continued to depreciate. If you look at the actual value of the shilling as per the 1987 demonetisation value, one US dollar was equated to 60 shillings.  After liberalisation, if you look at the value of the shilling against the dollar, you find that the shilling has depreciated by 3000 percent. This is a serious issue, which should be addressed.  So, why don’t we spend the money we are spending - about 10 million dollars in a month or in two months - to save the shilling from falling further on other things? If you identified capable entrepreneurs and gave one million to a district, and you spend the 45 million dollars on each district, you will stabilise the shilling! But we cannot continue with the way we are spending, or the way we are supporting the shilling. 
I would like to thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

DR. OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Talking about comparative advantage, I think we have a great comparative advantage in the area of tourism. It is an area in which we used to earn a lot of foreign currency, and it is an area in which we could still continue to earn a lot of foreign currency. Unfortunately, our areas of greatest tourist attractions are also the ones in which we have the highest problems of insecurity. I see the Committee has made some very typical rational recommendations on increasing the potential of tourism, but they have forgotten that whatever intellectual input is made in this sector, as long as insecurity continues unabated, all other input will simply be wasted. 

Secondly, I would like to comment on two things that are affecting our local industries and businesses. This issue of domestic arrears and secondly the question of second hand textiles, both clothing and foot wear. One time I said we have become a second hand economy, everything is second hand rehabilitation, second hand cars, second hand tyres, second hand clothes and underwear.  We should come down seriously on the question of second hand textiles. Our textile industry is being crippled by these second hand imports. We cannot build our textile industry if we continue with the importation of second hand textiles on large scale. We can either ban these things or put a very heavy tax on them, so that they become a disadvantage to the local industries.  

Domestic arrears, honestly, are the worst invention we have introduced in our business relationship with Government. They are crippling business! You do not pay in time, you do not give any interest, the other thing, which is most dangerous, is that businessmen will over quote. So, Government is actually paying for the same service almost three times as much for the delay and for the lack of interest. And since the delay becomes inordinate, then businesses close up.   

If we are serious enough to encourage local businesses, the question of domestic arrears should be put on top of the issues that should be resolved.

The third point is this so-called growth of 11 percent in industry. Having been a chief planner of this country, and having travelled in many towns now and seen the state of former industrial areas, I am simply perplexed and I want to know where this growth comes from. Most manufacturing industries in the industrial areas have either collapsed or they have been converted to services. They have become warehouses, they have become garages, and they have become showrooms. If you follow the entire 5th Street, you find only three manufacturing units. The entire Port Bell road has only two, the tobacco factory and Uganda Blankets. If you go to Jinja, they are actually derelict. If you go to Tororo, the industrial area is derelict. If you go to Lira, the industrial area is derelict. All the railway sidings that were meant for heavy industries are dead. They are not working.  Where is this growth coming from, from mineral water? And what was the base for this growth?

Finally, the President was quoted recently as having said, in Lusaka, that he is not in favour of globalisation. I want to thank him for this change of mind. Globalisation is not in our interest. Some people today are very excited about globalisation because of scientific interests, but globalisation is simply the previous colonisation or imperialism in a new era. We stand to gain very little from globalisation, therefore, we should be watchful. When the Americans were demonstrating in our interests, during the World Trade Organisation meeting, we were sleeping here. They were demonstrating in our interests, but we did not even know what was going on. That is the extent to which globalisation will disadvantage us.  Thank you. 

MR.CHEBET MAIKUT (Kween County, Kapchorwa): I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to commend the Committee, chaired by hon. Migereko, for this good report that highlights the problems in our economy.  

Our economy is ‘sick’, therefore, there is urgent need for Cabinet or Government, for that matter, to retreat and analyse the problems that obtain in our economy. Why is there a lot of unemployment? Why is our shilling depreciating every other day, in spite of the huge injections of over 100 million dollars this year alone, into the foreign exchange market? Why is there a trade imbalance of over 1.2 million dollars in this last financial year?  Why is there a big gap in the trade imports and exports?  What is the problem? I think it is high time Government, and indeed this House, come together and chart the way forward. Short of that, this country will not enjoy the vision pointed out in vision 2025, of having a prosperous Uganda in the next 25 years.

I want to comment, very briefly, on our deteriorating exports. When you look at appendix C, you can see Uganda's export values for the period 1996 to 2004. When one analyses this very carefully, there is almost a decline in our value of exports, both the traditional exports and the non-traditional exports. There is a decline in all of them and this situation is worrying. I am particularly worried, because, even under our current budget proposals, there are no definite provisions made to cater for these kinds of shortfalls. I would like to observe that the farming community in this country, which is sustaining our economy, is not adequately catered for in our various budgetary proposals –(Interruption). 

CAPT.CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I just want to inform him that the Ministry of Agriculture is still working on the plan for modernisation of agriculture. They have not started the modernisation, so the exports are still low.

MR.CHEBET: I thank my dear neighbour for giving that information, but yesterday, hon. Mutesasira did inform this House that the budgetary provision for agriculture alone, in this current financial year, is only a mere one percent of the overall budget. I think all of us recall that statement that was made yesterday. I believe that the budgetary provision for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is also not more than 5 per cent, I am not so sure of the figures though. This is a very serious shortcoming, hon. Colleagues. 

As I was saying, the bulk of our economy depends on the farmers, the majority of whom are small-scale farmers. What is provided for them in the budget?  We all know that investors are being given some incentives, but are our farmers being given incentives? Don’t you think that our local peasant farmers are the largest local investors in this country?  I would like, therefore, to implore and call upon Government to provide more incentives to the majority of our breadwinners, the ones who are toiling day and night to provide for our sustenance.

I would also like to underline the importance of establishing an investment bank. All countries the world over, even the U.S.A, which is said to be the champion of this liberalisation, have got this kind of facility in their Government. They have investment banks with facilities that give concessionary rates to the producers in their economies. Therefore, I see no reason why Uganda cannot go ahead and establish this kind of facility.  

Lastly, I suggest, very strongly, that as a demonstration of tackling our economic problems, we, as political leaders, should sacrifice one month's salary. All political leaders and civic leaders, including we, Members of Parliament and the Ministers, should sacrifice one month's salary towards tackling our sick economy. Otherwise, short of that, we are doomed to nurture a poor population. I thank you very much.

CAPT.MUKULA MICHEAL (Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the chairman of the Committee for having done a pretty good job, because he has been able to analyse very critical issues in the economy.   

The private sector is the engine of economic growth in this liberalised market economy. It is very unfortunate that now, there is no effective drive by Government to try and build a middle class within the structure of this market driven economy.  Countries like South Africa, Japan and Germany had to take a deliberate approach to build and ensure that they support entrepreneurs within the country, to be able to participate equally in the economic development. 

Now, in the financial sector, most of the banks that we have here are foreign owned. When we look at the energy sector, most of them the investments are foreign-owned. It is easy for them now to even form a curtail, when it comes to the pricing of fuel and so on.    The argument I am trying to put forward, hon. Colleagues, is that, as we try to put a little bit of money into the economy, it should be through the Ministry of Trade and Industry. There should be a deliberate approach aimed at stimulating or directing energy towards the private sector. These are our entrepreneurs, who have now been disadvantaged, when you look at areas like Soroti, Lira, Gulu, Kasese and all these areas. It is not possible for the average entrepreneur in Kitgum or in Gulu to access this apex loan. Government has been able to source for funding, but those who are implementing the apex loans find it difficult to take security from areas like Kasese, Kitgum, Bundibugyo, Hoima and so on. So, the economy continues to degenerate, and to create wheels of development only within the confines of Kampala. This, to me, is a very serious disadvantage to the whole economy. 

Secondly, I would like to comment on the export sector. The shilling depreciating against the dollar would have been an advantage if there was an export that would be able to give money to our people. But as the shilling continues to depreciate, our export sector is suffering very seriously, as was rightly pointed out by the chairman of the Committee. I would like to ask the Minister what strategic policy we have to try to energise or to jumpstart the export sector of our nation, so that we can be able to have a more buoyant, dynamic, and effective economy. Right now, the shilling will continue to tumble against the dollar because of the obvious factors of demand and supply that are being perpetuated by the fact that our exports vis-à-vis the imports are not at par. I would like to know from the Minister what strategic policy Government has put on the ground to try to energise the export sector. We have agencies that were funded, like the Export Promotion Council, Uganda Investment Authority and many others.  What strategic framework do we have to put in place?  

As I conclude, I would like to say that the hidden industry, that is the tourism sector, is a critical sector in export earnings. But now there appears to be no deliberate approach by Government to meet the stakeholders in the tourism sector, to discuss or carry out a post-mortem. There was the long study, which was carried out in 1992 or thereabouts, and there was also a ten-year strategic framework, which was drawn up by Government to try and give some energy to our tourism sector. In essence, we do not seem to have come out to evaluate and point out the set backs that we have suffered in the tourism sector. I would like to know from the Minister what strategic framework we have developed to meet the challenges that we seem to have met in the tourism sector. I thank you.

DR. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to the report from the chairman, it is clear that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry has performed poorly and one of the problems is funding. You are aware that other reports that have been submitted to this Parliament specially highlighted the problem of funding. That really baffles me. Who in this country determines which Ministry should be core or should not be core, or which department in the Ministry should be core or non-core? Some of the sectors that are responsible for the economy of this country are regarded as non-core. For example, the livestock sector is non-core, fisheries is now non-core, and these are sectors which are supposed to bring in foreign exchange, but they are non-core. Who determines whether a Ministry is core or non-core? Possibly, we shall get an answer at the end of this session –(Interruption). 

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: I would just like to inform the hon. Member following his statement that fisheries is a non-core sector. The approach in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is not by sub-sectors under the Ministry it is by the functions. So, research, extension and disease control are core because they cut across. Even if you talk about crops, fisheries or livestock, you need research in order to generate technologies that can help, including fish fry. So, in a way, the fish sector is a core because of the functions that would improve on the production.

DR. KASIRIVU: Mr. Speaker, the Minister has not answered my question, and I am not satisfied with his answer. Who determines that research is core and extension is not core? This is what I want to know. We have always lamented here that we should improve our exports so that we get more foreign exchange. And possibly some of the problems we are grappling with, like the dollar raising up and down, stumbling here and there, could be addressed.  But somewhere, some person is responsible for taking a decision, and we do not know how that decision is arrived at. Possibly, if we were given the formula, then we would be convinced or we would give some input.  

Uganda is an agricultural country and the chairman has said Uganda has an advantage over many countries in the region, because we can produce quite many crops that can be exported to our neighbours.  The Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry handles export, and this is a Ministry that has been crippled because it is non-core, so it cannot get enough funding. How shall we move? (Interruption)   

MR.OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that we do not have core-Ministries, what we have are priority areas that are programmes. So, if there is a programme within the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, it becomes a priority area. But we do not have a definition for core-Ministries in our Cabinet. And if there is anybody to define a core-Ministry it should be the Cabinet, for which the Minister -(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: I would like the Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance to clarify what we heard yesterday. We heard that the Ministry of Gender can receive a current budget of about four billion shillings to operate at headquarters (Vote 030), and the Ministry of Health receives a recurrent budget of 25 billion shillings and Ministry of Education 58 billion shillings?  How do you determine Gender to receive four billion shillings and the other one receives 58 if we do not have that idea of core and non-core?

MR.KWIZERA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like clarification on the issue of core-Ministries. Why are some programmes and departments being moved from some Ministries to Ministry of Finance, like the plan for modernisation of agriculture or tourism promotion?

MR.ERESU: The Minister of State said that there are no Ministries, which are called core-Ministries or non-core, except programmes within Ministries. May I know if export promotion is not a priority, or whether it is a core or a non-core activity in Government?

MR.OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Dorothy Hyuha asked why the Ministries of Health and Education have more money than the Ministry of Gender. I would like to state that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the department responsible for the Youth have just started and they are developing programmes that we are discussing with the Ministry. These programmes are now beginning to -(Interruption)

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to inform the hon. Minister that the women's councils, the youth councils and the councils for persons with disabilities came into place when this Parliament was starting. Up to now, they are still operating, do you regard that as new, hon. Minister?

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I heard a statement being made by the Minister, and I am perturbed by it, to say the least. The Minister had the audacity to say that the Ministry of Gender is young or new, and is just starting to submit programmes to this Government! That is rapping our good intentions, to say the least, and the good interests of this country. I do not agree with that statement and I would like the Minister to clarify that this Ministry has been around from the inception of the National Resistance Council, which was created in 1986. Even in our Constitution, it is a matter of great concern. Now the Minister has got the audacity to state that this Ministry is just starting to plan.  I seek clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now see that we are opening a debate on the Ministry of Gender, which we concluded yesterday. Let us restrict ourselves. We can just give an example, it may be right or it may not be. Restrict yourselves to the debate before us. 

MR.OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will give an example of land.  Land is a constitutional matter. We are to come here, draft a Bill and then have a law on land, and we are to source for money to implement the land Act. Also, in the Ministry of Gender, and for Youth, some of the programmes have to be started from the ground and they are being developed. It is only when they have been fully developed and we source for money, that they become fully funded.  So, it is not possible for the Ministry to develop a programme within such a short time and we begin to source for money. This is the point I raised. The Ministry, which we are talking about, is developing programmes for the youth, for the women, for labour, and these programs become mature when we have sourced for money and begin to provide sufficient funds. So, we are working with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us end this debate on core-Ministries because we are opening up a debate on a Ministry that we dealt with yesterday. Let us abandon this. We shall get some other time to generally talk about core activities and core Ministries.      

MRS.MUKWAYA: I would be the last person to stand up when my Colleague is trying to contribute, because of the principle of collective responsibility, but I would like to inform you that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is one of the oldest Ministries in this country. And we have mature programs.  The only problem we have had is the Ministry of Finance telling us that we should use the sector wide approach, or use some other way, or that we have to reorganise. So, it must not go on record that we are a new Ministry. There must be information that we do not have programs, but it is because of the resource envelope, which we acknowledge and we share.

DR. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Mr. Speaker, my time has been taken up. The reaction from Members gives an indicator that there is a problem. The Ministry of Finance should explain to this Parliament, and they should give us a comprehensive list of Ministries that are core or non core, and which departments are core and non core, so that we also know and give our input accordingly. The Ministry of Finance should not be left to determine for us. I am actually now confused. Since the Minister of Finance started giving clarifications, I am not sure what core or non core are.

It is good that the report brought out the issue of domestic arrears very well. When we came to this Parliament, I did raise, in the First Session, the issue of Kakumiro Union. The assets of this Union are being sold off one by one in order to meet the non-performing loans by NPART, yet Government owes the Union over 300 million shillings. All this money is in terms of lorries and other assets, which were taken in 1985, and this money is not collecting any interest, but the assets are going. And I am the target because they think I am not representing them very well so that they get their money, and yet the Ministry of Finance has not paid. I think some decisions should be made so that we calculate interest on this money, which has been lying in the coffers of the Ministry of Finance unpaid. Possibly they may give back the assets, which are being sold off.

Lastly, BAT is one of the companies in Uganda, which is paying a lot of taxes to Government. Sooner or later, BAT might pay few taxes because the farmers down there are not happy about the way BAT has bought their tobacco leaf this financial year. Farmers think that the grading system is very poor. Someone brings his tobacco leaf and he thinks it should be in grade one and it is put in grade four and goes back very unhappy. So, much as we have liberalised, as the chairman said, can’t Government come in when there is a problem and try to stop that problem, because if the farmers do not grow the tobacco then we shall not get the taxes.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS.BWAMBALE LOICE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for this comprehensive report. Before I make my observations on some areas of concern, allow me to express gratitude to this Parliament and Members of Parliament for having expressed condolence to me and the bereaved family, when I lost my husband on the 10th of July this year. It was much needed support and consolation to the family.  

Having done that, let me come to this Committee's work and the Ministry. This Ministry is very important to the economy of Uganda at this material time. The constituency I represent in this Parliament takes this Ministry very seriously.

I would like to look at the mandate of the Ministry on page 3, and I express my dissatisfaction with the general performance of this Ministry. The Committee emphasises that this is a promotional Ministry, and I would like to express my disappointment because our observation is that this Ministry has not been performing. In my view, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry should act as a catalyst for other Ministries, which are very important to the economy of this country, like the Ministry of Agriculture, for example. Last week we talked about the lack of agro-processing industries, and I thought it was the Ministry of Industry supposed to prioritise this area and ensure that these agro-processing industries are in place. It should plan and mobilise for them instead of merely promoting some. 

This Ministry should also be a catalyst to the Ministry of Natural Resources and others. I will take an example of KCCL, the Cobalt Plant that is mining cobalt in Kasese. Indeed, the cobalt has been produced, that is the part of production in mining, but there are by-products that are being heaped by the way side and are being wasted. I thought the Ministry responsible for industry should come in at this stage and see how these by-products could also be processed to produce more money for this economy. This is where I get disappointed. 

I would be pleased if the mandate of this Ministry was reviewed so that is geared towards the development of trade and the development of industry. I would like the policy on development of industry to be expedited. For the last 10 years, we have been talking about producing a policy on industrialisation. Mr. Minister, where is this policy, and when is it every going to come to this House? How are the investors investing in industry when there is no policy in place? Where is the problem? This House would like to know.  

The Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry should spearhead the development of appropriate industrial technologies. This Ministry should zone industrial areas. There are priority areas where priority industries and strategic investors should be directed. And that is where the private sector should also be directed.  But we are not seeing this in place! There are some technologies around, which could be promoted. For example, we are talking about drought but we hear about irrigation machinery. Why doesn’t this Ministry go into the fabrication and multiplication of the irrigation technology that is here in the country? This is the area I am talking about.  

Kasese is a hub for tourism, but we do not see any tourism plan on the ground from this Ministry. We are talking about insecurity, but there is no longer insecurity in Kasese District, as far as we are concerned, at least for the last six months. And why isn’t the Minister promoting tourism in that area so that we begin to see tourists coming to the area and more money comes in? This Ministry and UWA are lying to us. They have been talking about communities around the National Parks benefiting 20 per cent of revenue collection in the Park as per the Statute of 1993. My district is one of the communities that surround the National Park. Can I be informed when this Ministry started dispersing money to those communities? How much money is it and when did they begin?  We are being given blanket statements that we cannot explain in our areas.

Finally, I am concerned because I come from Kasese District, which is covered by industries, and that is good. That is why we are calling upon the Ministry to develop these industries further so that the area can contribute further to the development of this country. Kasese has got little land, but this little land can be properly planned for. The hills can be developed, and there will be more tourists both to the Uganda side and to the Congo side.  The bio-diversity and the flora are all being wasted. That is why I am finally appealing to this Ministry to be more developmental oriented, rather than merely promotional, and results are hardly felt in the poverty stricken population.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have noted the names of Members who want to contribute. Hon. Bitahwa can make his contribution now. When we resume after the lunch break, I will begin on this side

MR.BITAHWA SAMSON (Igara West, Bushenyi): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to continue with what my predecessor has talked about concerning wildlife. I think the Ministry has not paid much attention to the protection of wildlife. There are enough regulations to protect animals, but some regulations are lacking to protect the plants and trees in the wild. The report of the Committee does not indicate any intention to even make such regulations in future. This country is loosing a lot of valuable medicinal plants every year. The officials who are supposed to stop this smuggling and destruction of these valuable trees are handicapped, because they do not have rules. Presently, there are more than 4,000 Kgs of tree bark, which is very valuable for western medicine, but officials cannot act because they do not have any instrument. I think this is a weakness.  

I note that the chairman has explained to the House that one of the reasons there is a decline in tourism is Kanungu and the attack on the tourists in Bwindi. I do not think these are reason enough. I think these are scapegoats. Many people who genuinely know our country are not frightened by such incidents. Tourists still come any way. And after the attack of tourists in Bwindi, tourists continued to come. The Ministry should accept responsibility of popularising our tourist industry. There are many people in this world who still do not know that Idi Amin is no longer the President of the Republic of Uganda. At the same time, there are facilities provide very fast communication. It is possible for the Minister of Tourism to flash information to all corners of the world, if they get a site on the Internet, for instance. This has not been done. There are a lot of other methods. The Ministry has concentrated on tourism to attract tourists to go to National Parks like Bwindi. There are many other methods that they can explore so that they diversify the tourist market.  

I would like also to comment on the issue of marketing. Our market is very often flooded with external products. A lot of products, which come from abroad, flood our market. I remember we hotly debated in this House whether ebikadde clothes should continue to appear on our markets or not. I must say that this practice of importing second hand clothes has tremendously handicapped our textile industry. People are now used to buying things from abroad and this is a very dangerous trend. People are proud of wearing clothes made in England, even if the quality of that cloth is not so good. The buyer in Uganda is always attracted to buying things from abroad.  It is the responsibility of the Ministry to promote our products on our markets at home, and to persuade our buyers, especially Ugandans, to be proud of buying Ugandan products. 

I would like to end by commenting on the lack of promotion of agro-industry. This is not the first time that it has been mentioned. Every year there is an outcry because of the lack of promotion of agro-industry in our country. We seem to be betraying our farmers. The industries that have been promoted are coca-cola, beer and cigarette industries, which absolutely do not serve our farmers. The Ministry should give priority to promoting industries that can enable our farmers be more motivated in producing. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have noted the names of those who want to contribute. This is a convenient time to suspend the proceedings until 2.30 p.m., this afternoon. 

(The proceedings were suspended at 1.05 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.12 p.m, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

DR. NKUUHE JOHNSON (Isingiro South, Mbarara): I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I would also like to thank the Committee for a good job. The report is very concise and it was a pleasure reading it. I would like to make a few observations in my four to five minutes' speech. 

First of all, the Ministry is called Trade and Industry, and in actual fact, it should be called Industry and Trade because, logically, you start by industrialising then you produce products, and then you start trading them. For us, it is the other way round. 

On page 14 of the report, we read that only 0.12 percent of the available labour force is engaged in production. 0.12 per cent is a very small figure. If you translate this into the employment and unemployment rate, surely it is very low. So, following on from this, I would like to make a suggestion that either the Ministry of Labour or the relevant Ministry give us unemployment figures every year. They should give us figures just as we get figures of GDP, inflation rates, exchange rates, and rainfall, which are usually good figures. We should concentrate on job creation not just industrialisation. It is not enough to just industrialise. We have to create jobs. 

Appendix C of this report gives Uganda's exports, by values, for the period 1996 to 2004. These figures, I imagine, are from Ministry of Finance. Just look at the traditional exports. In 1996 - 432,852,000, in 1997 – they went down to 384,288,000. In 1998 the traditional exports still went down to 353,632,000, and in 1999 they also went down to 341,464,000. For some strange reason, they think that in 2000, the traditional exports are going up by 80 million to 428 million, and that they will continue jumping up and up. Surely, if the graph has been going down, who gives you the confidence that all of a sudden it is going to jump up? We need accurate figures from who ever gives us figures, because these figures from 2000, in my view, are all estimates, but even then, an estimate should be reasonable. The trend has been downward from 1996, and I do not see what miracle will shift this curve upward all over a sudden.  

Two or three budgets ago, this august House directed the Minister responsible for Finance to get a percentage of the export levy and distribute it between four statutory bodies namely, Uganda Export Promotion Board, Uganda Sports Council, Uganda National Bureau of Standards and Uganda National Council for Science and Technology.  Considering that this money would be substantial – maybe between four and six billion - if the Ministry of Trade and Industry got this as their share, then they would not be crying. The Export Promotion Board would get some seed money and then they could do their work. The same thing would happen to sports and the others. So, I think they should follow this up, because I understand all they need is some sort of resolution so that the Ministry of Finance can implement this resolution.

In other countries, some of these activities, like sports and culture, are sponsored by the national lottery. For some strange reason we do not have that in this country. I wonder when we are going to revive the national lottery so that it can actually support culture, sports and things like that. We seem to be promoting gambling, but we do not want to tax it for the benefit of our taxpayers. 

This Ministry is responsible for industrialisation. What is the big picture, what do we expect from industrialisation?  Industrialisation is based on science and technology, and research and development. If it is to be sustainable it has to be that way.  In this country, the only research and development that is reasonably well organised is probably agricultural research. Industrial research is not really that organised, if it was, we would know about it. We know that agricultural research is well organised under National Agricultural Research Organisation, but the other arms of research and development are not well organised. Therefore, it would be very difficult for industrialisation to take place because it has no roots.  

In other countries, between a university and an industry there is what they call an industrial park or a research park. Government gives money to these research parks, and people look around at the good ideas that are being generated in universities. In Malaysia, they have got what they call an incubator. An incubator is where they give you money, if you have a good idea, they can fund you for a certain number of years. They help you with office space, and they help you with technical support and business analysis. So, if you have a good idea then you can create jobs. It is small companies like this that will actually create employment in this country not the big ones. 

If you went to Coca-Cola or BAT or even to Barclays Bank now, they are laying off workers, and this is because of globalisation. As a result of this computers and modernisation, robots are doing jobs, so we do not need many people. Look at MTN or Celtel, they are what we call knowledge based companies because they can create jobs. And how much are we putting in, in terms of infrastructure?  Very little!  But you go to Coca-cola, you will find people being laid off. I heard people lamenting that Jinja is dying, Lira is dying, but even if you go to UK, all those old industrial towns are dying, it is not only unique to Uganda. The job market is changing. It is shifting from industry to knowledge based. It is a pity that I do not have time to sell this idea, but that is the way the world is going now. For those who say that we should oppose globalisation, you can not do much about it because it here. You have to take advantage of it, organise yourself, create regional blocks and have big trading partners, so that you can compete and have a chance of winning. You cannot say that you oppose globalisation, because there is nothing you can do about it. It is here to stay and we can only be part of it and try to compete, and ask hon. Nasasira to assist us with information technology, so that we can use it to compete and have a chance of winning.  
With those few words, I thank you very much.

MR.LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the good work done. However, in the sectors of tourism and wildlife, which I intend to capitalise on, there were certain dimensions lacking and I will try to point them out.  

On page 12 of the report, the Committee notes that, despite the foreign exchange attached to tourism, Government has not invested sufficiently in tourism. It is true that Government has not invested sufficiently in tourism, and yet we know that a country called Uganda, between 1962 and 1966, had a booming income per capita because of booming tourism. Tourism was second to coffee as the basic foreign exchange earner. What progress can we be proud of today in tourism? My answer is no progress. I do not see any pride that we can attach to tourism. We have progressed in some degree with regard to security, but we have harnessed that security to promote tourism. When the tourists come here -(Interruption)  

MR.SSENDAULA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to briefly inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that our per capita has moved from 190 dollars to 330 now. Unless he tells me otherwise, I see that our per capita income is increasing.  Thank you.  

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I quoted income per capita with reference to 1962 to 1966. At that time, Uganda's income per capita was the highest in sub-Saharan Africa, with the exception of South Africa. I hope the Minister for Finance is mindful about the economic history of Nations.  

When tourists come here, we can gain a lot from them. We meet people, they see our climate, they see potential markets, they report back, and the investors come. So we should not ignore that aspect. How can Uganda improve its tourism sector? The issue related to a stable economy is important. When the tourists come to an economy of beggars, they do not want to come back. When they see a multitude of street children, they do not want to come back.  They need to come to an area where there is good governance, an area close to what Uganda was between 1962 and 1966. We had a quasi-federal order, with each area having full authority in terms of freedom and independence. When they come to an area like that, they know they will be welcome and they will persuade others to come back. So, whenever we invest in an atmosphere of good governance, we are doing a service to our economy. 

They would like to see our rich traditions and culture. Today, much as we have revised the Kingdom order, Uganda has benefited from the glory of those Kingdoms. Tourists can go to Kasubi, Hoima, Kyabazinga's Jinja, to Toro, Teso, even to Mbarara, where at one time the Omugabe (Goliath) lived. All those places should be harnessed as tourism resources.  

On page 13, the Committee notes that wildlife tourism can only prosper if the unique and diverse wild life is preserved. I would like to challenge the Government, notably the Ministry in charge of tourism and wild life in this country. You all know that the crested crane is an endangered species. This is a bird that is part of our Court of Arms. Because of the continuous reclaiming of wetlands, the bird is now in danger. What have we done to ensure that the glory of our country is protected? This is an issue we must take seriously. If we are serious about harnessing our tourism and wild life resources, we should also be mindful about the need to protect an existing wetland in Kampala, around the golf course, which we are trying to reclaim. Where will the crested crane stay?   

The challenge goes to the Ministry. It is not only the crested crane that is endangered, the white rhino and black rhino are extinct, the antelope is extinct, the eland is endangered, the gorillas are threatened, the elephants are threatened, the giraffes are threatened. We have been talking about the technology that is spreading world wide, the time has come for Uganda to open up a website for gorilla tourism. Uganda harbours two thirds Of the existing 600 gorillas on earth. Once we lose Mugahinga and Bwindi, that might be the end of the gorilla kingdom. I am seriously addressing the matter, and Government should be mindful of what I am recommending.  

Finally, the tourism and wild life sector is not moving an inch because it is highly distanced from the operations of the environmental protection wing. There is need to enhance that inter-dependence, because they depend on each other. I thank you very much.

MR.KWIZERA EDDIE (Bufumbira East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the good work they did. 

On page 13, the Committee mentions sharing revenue but the Statute focuses on sharing gate collections only. The people I represent feel that it is unfair to share 20 per cent of the revenue because the gorilla tracking tourists, for example, pay 200 dollars for one hour in the park, after paying 20 dollars at the gate. The Uganda Wild Life Authority gives the people only 20 per cent of the 20 dollars and not the 220 dollars. We feel that this is really unfair. So it is not true as depicted on page 13 of the report, that we share revenue. It should actually read gate collections. I would like the Minister to also tell us how much they have sent to some of those areas so far, because we have not seen anything.  

About the management of wild life, we do not know when the animals become vermin. There are some animals that have continued disturbing our people in Bwindi and Mugahinga. There are some elephants that destroy crops and even some water springs. We are asking the Government to consider compensating the residents around the national parks whose crops have been destroyed. Before the Bwindi and Mugahinga parks were gazzetted, some people used to live in those forests. The pygmies or the Batwa used to live there. It is so unfortunate that the Government is talking about modernisation yet there is a population in Uganda who are still landless, and whom the Government just looks at as if they are also part of a tourist attraction. The Government does not care about this population. Government should not only look at Karamoja because the Karimojong have land and they have cows. Government should also come to the aid of these pygmies, because they do not have land and they do not have animals. These pygmies are left to the NGOs, and the NGOs are using these pygmies to get donor funds.  After getting the donor funds, these NGOs do not even go back help the pygmies. So, we call upon the Government to come up and see what they can do.  

I would like to comment on harmonising the policies of the forestry department and the wildlife department. We know that 15 percent of our forests are under Uganda Wildlife Authority. But some of these forests are depleted because of conflicting Government policies. We want to know whether they have started re-planting in the Elgon area. 

I do not know how much Government is putting into tourism development. We have collected a lot of revenue from these national parks. In Kisoro, we have Mugahinga Forest Park, we have Bwindi, but we do not get much from Government. If you go to Government and tell them that you have some resources, the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Works will tell you that there is nothing the Government gets from Kisoro. That is why they have kept Kabale-Kisoro road as also a tourist attraction. Unless they develop that infrastructure, we may not get tourists going to Kisoro. So, we call upon the Government to also consider investing in tourism infrastructure.  

Government should also consider security on our borders, because DRC, Rwanda and Uganda share Mugahinga National Park. We also expect the Kanungu report from the Kanungu commission of inquiry. We would like to have that report so that we know the cause of the tragedy and how we can guard against further problems.  

In conclusion, I want to call upon the Minister to put in place wildlife regulations that can also cater for game ranching. There are a number of Ugandans who would like to invest in game ranching, but because there are not regulations, they cannot do much. I thank you.

MAJ.GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (Army Representative): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Committee for their work and for the general comments and observations they have made. The observations are very good, but we have been making them year in, year out.  

I would like to lay specific emphasis on page 14, on strategic industries in our economy, which would help increase our revenues by using the raw materials available. I would like to lay emphasis on the raw materials available, in regard to the advantages that Uganda has, which include, above everything, water. Today bottled water costs 1,000/= per litre on the market. Milk is 500/= per litre on the market. I would like to consider employment based on those two examples. Somewhere in the report, it says that incentives are given to those who import the raw materials, but little is put in for those who are using the locally available materials. The number of people employed in the production of the water that we are selling everywhere, is so low, as compared to those employed by milk producers, who employ many more people. In terms of nutrition value, milk has much more value but there is no strategic approach to market milk or similar products. 

Look at textiles, on page 15 of the report, the Committee mentions specific industries that should prioritised, and they bring out areas like textiles. The other day, during the Smart Partnership seminar in the International Conference Centre, the President asked a question. He asked, ‘look at me from top to bottom, everything I am putting on is imported, who am I giving jobs and who am I denying jobs?’ I want us to look at ourselves and see who we are giving jobs and who we are denying jobs. We are denying Ugandans jobs and we are giving other people jobs! And as leaders we are not focusing deliberately, because we should show the way.  I carried out a survey on the streets, and out of every ten men, you only see one with a tie, and those either work in banks or Government offices. This does not mean that the population has actually banned suits and ties on the streets, but it is only being imposed on them by those who hold the status quo. Those who are insisting that this is the order of the day and to be civilised, you must put on a tie or a suit –(Interruption).

MR.WANGUBO: Is hon. Tumwine in order to start abusing MPs and persuading them that they should wear the clothes he manufactures here? Is he really in order to come here and start turning this Parliament into a marketing place for his business?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, we are discussing the Ministry of Trade and Industry, so I think it is relevant.

MR.ERESU: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member holding Floor has made a very serious statement. He has said that we should look to ourselves when it comes to purchasing textiles, which is correct. Whereas we can do that, we have also got to privatise and liberalise our trade. Is he therefore telling us, indirectly, that the policies that are in place, in terms of liberalisation, where textiles are coming into this country from various countries, have been misplaced? I would like clarification on that.

MAJ.GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank you for that request for clarification because it is exactly what I was coming to. Liberalisation can only work if it is focused on solving the problems of our society, one of them being employment. Another problem is the economies of scale. Can we afford the things that are being marketed in our country? 

In Nigeria, in Ghana, in West Africa the leaders took a decision to promote locally made products, and they started wearing locally made products. You saw Clinton the other day wearing an agbada, which they gave him.  They produce the raw materials, right from the thread, to the yarn, up to the finished product. We are part of their market, and I am happy that at least in Africa, some country has taken that advantage and is marketing all over the world. We produce cotton here. Our women in Mukono, and in many other areas do some weaving at home. Cottage industries are making hand-loom products, but are getting very little support from the Ministry of Trade and Industry, or even from lending institutions. They could use our cotton to make finished products, and employ many women and men in the country, and this would improve our economy. But, little focus is given to that! Instead, the leaders are emphasising imports and dress codes that are dangerous to our people.  

I ask this question to every leader in their constituencies, in their offices, but more importantly in the Ministry of Industry. Where is our country going if we continue importing? 

I will now go on to about shoes. Every shoe repairer in Uganda can make a complete shoe. We formed a leather association called Uganda Leather Industries Association. We are members of that small industry association. We use our leather to make shoes that are now competing at the international markets. Yesterday, I put on a shoe made out of nileperch leather, and people are trying to market it abroad. The international community is refusing to market it because it would threaten their market, but if Ugandans and the Ministry of Industry specifically, supported that industry, it would flourish. I talked to the Minister of Finance yesterday, and I asked him how the Ministry is supporting locally made shoes. Even the shoes I am putting on now are made in Uganda, for that matter. So, the Minister of Finance told me that the money is available, but it can only be availed to us on a commercial loan.  Now, how can we support our nile-perch leather, which we are exporting at a very low value, when all the shoe repairers in Uganda can make shoes? How are going in to strategically support those industries? I would like the Committee to raise that issue in the next financial year. And one of the reasons that this is happening is because we have refused to put the National Planning Authority in place. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, so far 12 Members have contributed to this report and they have said that the report is well written. We want to hear from the Minister and from the chairman because we have other business to take care of. Maybe, I give will give an opportunity to a few other Members to contribute.  

MS. TIPERU NUSURA (Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to start, first of all, by thanking the Committee for a job well done. I would also like to thank my Colleagues in Parliament, Ugandans out there, and the Ministers at large for having marketed this country. Today, Uganda is considered as one of the destinations you can go to for a holiday. My only worry is that much of the publicity done for Uganda has been done on a voluntary basis. I would like the Minister inform me whether there is a publicity department within the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, and if it is there, whether it is really being facilitated. If the problem is personnel, we have so many youth and graduates on the streets who could work in that department.  

We are all aware about what happened in Bwindi, but the Army immediately moved in and provided security in Bwindi. My worry now is whether the Ministry has recruited enough game rangers to provide sustainable security for the tourists and even in the parks. 

I would also like to briefly comment on the expansion of the game parks. All my life, I have always known about Murchsion Falls, Kidepo, and now Bwindi and a few others, but I would like the Ministry to consider opening up others. We have so many potential areas, even in Nwoya. There is vast land in this country. Could the Ministry consider expanding, and if possible, transporting some of the animals to some of these areas so that many more Ugandans can access them? We have always heard about the white rhino. In West Nile, we have the White Rhino Hotel, but these animals are no where to be seen today. Would the Ministry consider importing or airlifting some of these animals so that we do not only have buildings labelled ‘white rhino’ without the animals anywhere.  

This country has been blessed by God Almighty, and it has also been blessed with very hospitable people and with water. But, most of the tourist facilities in this country, though improving, are concentrated within Kampala or within urban settings. I request the Ministry to consider opening up some tourist facilities or hotels along the River Nile or along some of our lakes like Lake Victoria, Lake Albert and Lake Kyoga. Countries like Holland have developed their tourist attractions, because they harness the attraction of their lakes. If you think Holland is too far, we could borrow a leaf from Egypt, which is near here, they have mobile hotels on the lake. 

I thank Government for signing the COMESA Treaty. This has eased mobility of goods and human beings within member states. More so, there are all indications that the tariffs are coming to zero.  However, as many Ugandans, especially women, join trade and start involving themselves in business, can they be able to compete with other member states when they are not able to access loans at interest rates that are affordable? It is, therefore, my humble appeal to the Minister in charge of Finance to lobby the banks that are available to consider reducing the interest rates on the loans that they charge to our Ugandan women.  

I would like to end by expressing my disappointment with the Minister of State in charge of Finance for having bluntly lied to this House that the Ministry of Gender is still young -(Interruption).

MR.OPIO: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member to use unparliamentary language?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not in order. And that matter was settled earlier.

MS. TIPERU: Thank you for informing me, Mr. Speaker, but I would like to know how long it takes a Ministry to grow up. I actually get disappointed because that is one of the Ministries we look at – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we decided that we had a long debate over this Ministry yesterday, and the business we have before us now concerns the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, therefore, you need not concentrate on the Ministry of Gender. We settled this matter this morning. 

MS. TIPERU: I thank you very much for that wise ruling. I would like to conclude by saying that the onus is now on the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry to ensure that it at least works in conjunction with other Ministries to improve tourism in this country. I thank you.

PROF. MWAKA VICTORIA (Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to concentrate on page 13 of the report, where the following statement was made: “encroachment is, however, still a problem. 75,000 families are still living in areas gazetted as protected areas.” I request the Minister in charge to look at the other side of the coin, where animals are encroaching on agricultural land or human settlements. That is also a very important issue, especially in Luwero in Wakyato sub-county. 

We got three messages from Government, and that was the problem. The first message was from Uganda Wildlife Authority, saying these animals were supposed to be relocated to their natural habitat. The authority was given a colossal amount of money but how that money was used is still questionable, and the issue was left at that. So, we do not know how that money was used. 

The chairman of LCV suggested that they should not relocate the animals. He thought we could have a well controlled mini park so that we open up a tourist industry in Luwero. 

The President, on his part, when he was in Ngoma, said, if the authorities do not work on it, he was going to give orders for those animals to be killed. 

All that means there is no co-ordination. The Ministry concerned is not giving advice and does not seem to care. They are caring about the families encroaching on animal land, but they do not care about animals killing people and destroying houses. We need to have what we call a symbiotic relationship. In Kenya -(Interruption)

MAJ.RABWONI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. If my memory serves me right, I would like to support her view by also pointing out that Western Uganda has about 90 per cent of all the national parks and game reserves in Uganda. The former Queen Elizabeth National Park, Murchison Falls, which is Kabalega National Park, Lake Mburo National Park, Kibaale Forest Reserve are all found in Western Uganda. When you look at the problem of population explosion and pressure on land, animals vis-à-vis people, there is a very big problem in such areas as Mbarara, Kisoro and Kasese. There is already an ethnic problem between the Bakonjo and the Basongora, not because they hate each other, but because of Queen Elizabeth National Park.  The animals are encroaching on the people’s land and there is a fight over land. So, this demands a comprehensive policy, and I support the hon. Member’s suggestion that Government should come up with a multi-sectoral approach so that the problem is resolved once and for all.  I thank you.  

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much for your support. Before he gave me that information, I was saying that in Kenya, especially in Narok, they had that problem, but they just created a small buffer zone, and there are rangers there to make sure that human beings can benefit from their land, without the crops being destroyed. I wonder whether the Ministry has any plans to see that buffer zones or such zones are controlled, so that we do not lose the animals. We want the animals as tourist attractions, but we also do not want them to cross over and destroy our crops. Definitely, I will need clarification from the Minister on that. What is the final position regarding that issue?  

On page 14, under industry, there is a very big contradiction. It says that presently only 0.12 per cent of the available labour force is engaged in production. I think it should be industrial production. When you say production, it means even agriculture is not production. So, that should be industrial production. 

The report goes ahead to say that we have experienced growth of 11 per cent. We know that the industries that are proud are highly mechanised, and then these industries, the 130 that are listed in the appendix as having all closed down, are the ones that are labour intensive. So, as far as industrial labour is concerned, we will end up having nothing, because the so-called big industries like Coca-Cola have assembly lines and very few people work there. Even if there are people who work there, should an Indian own that industry, they will employ even the smallest Indian as a cleaner. 

In hotels, the workers are paid peanuts, 40,000/= per month, as salary, and we are very proud that these people are creating employment. I think we really have to support our own small industries. May I know from the Minister what caused the collapse of those 130 small industries? We wish to know. Others that are opening would learn from the mistakes of the previous ones, which have collapsed, so that they do not collapse, because we want them. Uganda is down the trench while we are proud of industries which are not ours. The money that these people earn is repatriated back home to develop their own countries and our country, which would have developed, is in limbo.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.AKIDA ALLI GABE (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for giving me the Floor. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairman of the Committee, hon. Daudi Migereko, and the Committee members for the work well done. It is a good report, precise and to the point. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister in charge of Tourism, Trade and Industry for working very hard to develop tourism in this country. 

I do observe that there is a problem in the area of promotion of tourism. There isn’t sufficient advertisement being conducted abroad. There is no lobbying. As a result, the country is not able to get the revenue that it would have got. I ask the Minister to go further and work hard at this area so that this country can benefit properly from tourism. The Ministry should set a target and they must work towards achieving it. It is very important that this should be done so that the Ministry can realise enough money for revenue for this country. 

I also want to talk about wildlife. I agree with the report of the Committee that wildlife is the main item that attracts visitors in the area of tourism. It is important that wildlife be protected and preserved in this country, but protection and preservation of the wildlife should not be done arbitrarily. The communities should get involved in the protection and preservation of the gazetted areas. This can be done through sensitisation, seminars, and meetings with neighbouring communities, so that the value of wildlife can be inculcated in their minds, and the state can derive revenue from wildlife. 

I would like to comment on Murchsion Falls National Park boundaries. There are no marks to show the boundary between the people of Jonam and the Murchsion Falls National Park in Lake Albert. This has caused a lot of problems for the people of Jonam, who are from time to time arrested in the water. It is difficult for them. If there is no mark, how will they know that they are out of boundary? How will they know that they are within a protected area? This is a very important issue, which the Ministry should work on. At the village level and at the county level, we have attempted to discuss this issue with the park authorities, but up to now, on Lake Albert and on the River Nile tributaries that pour into Lake Albert, you will not get boundaries. This deserves quick action so that the people are saved from harassment. At the moment, we are losing colossal sums of money -(Interruption)

MR.ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that the people of Gulu, in whose district the park is located, know the boundary very well.

MR.AKIDA GABE: Thank you very much for that information, but I would like to say that Gulu, in whose area the park is administratively associated, is not the only district that borders the park. Nebbi District also borders the park, and this is what I am talking about.  Thank you very much.  

Now, to go further to show that the district of Nebbi also borders the park, we also benefit out of the money accruing from the park. The problem is, the park authority releases money mostly for social infrastructure, and to me this is not sufficient. People need food, they need money, and they enter the park because they are searching for food. Therefore, it is my prayer that the Ministry considers putting in place assistance in the area of agriculture, and animal rearing. Once that is done, the community will find it difficult to go and cross into the park for food.  

I would like to say something about the animals that leave the protected areas and cross into areas where there are human settlements. This has caused a lot of problems for the people of Jonam Country. Hippopotamus and other animals leave the rivers and come out to the land. They destroy crops. Sometimes they even injure human beings. We find it difficult to discuss this matter with the park authority. We are told that, if animals destroy crops, there is no way they can compensate us. Now, what are we going to do about these circumstances? I think the park and Uganda Wildlife Authority should devise means of protecting our areas, so that animals from the protected areas are not a danger to the society, otherwise, we shall have no alternative, but to prevent them from destroying our crops and possibly injuring people. This may require some action against these animals. We shall be forced to do that. There is no other way that we can recover the property that is damaged or compensate those people who are injured. I want the hon. Minister to take this very seriously, otherwise we shall tell the people to defend themselves. If in the process they injure or kill some animals, we shall say they did it in self-defence. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR.MAYANJA MOHAMMED (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity. I would also like to add my voice to those who have thanked the Chairperson and the Committee Members for this very good report. 

The industrial sector and the business sector in Uganda are really bleeding. Businesses are now performing at their lowest, and the investment climate obtaining in Uganda is quite unfavourable. There is need for us to do something in order to sustain the investment climate. The other day, I did interact with members of the Uganda Manufactures Association, and these people have real problems, because the risk of the exchange rate alone is chasing people from business. People who borrowed money at 1000 shillings per dollar are now paying back at 1,700/=. Maybe, as time goes on, by December the shilling may depreciate up to 2,000/= a dollar. This is quite alarming. Consequently, people have not only moved out of business, some people have decided to commit suicide.

You will remember that people had started investing in flowers some few years back. Now, that sector has collapsed, and most of the people who borrowed a lot of money to invest in that area have wound up their businesses. One major investor actually committed suicide in order to escape problems.

We also have a problem with our policies. They need to be harmonised. The industrial policy, the investment policy, the trade policy are not being supported by the taxation policy. Our taxation policy is very hostile to investment and to the development of industry in Uganda. That is what has pushed many people out of business in this country.  

We also have a problem with low production. We have been pre-occupied mainly with the politics of this nation, without thinking adequately about production. We have left production to people who are not adequately oriented. We tend to pre-occupy ourselves with the political affairs of this nation. That is not bad, but I think we have over done it. There is need for us to re-focus and re-orient ourselves, as leaders, to think about how best we can increase production.

The export business is based on adequate production. You cannot break through in exports if you cannot satisfy the quantities demanded by your customers abroad. You cannot break through in exports if there are no adequate standards. You cannot have a country vibrant on exports, if your freight costs are not reduced.  You cannot adequately export if there is not enough market research. Uganda Export Promotion Board, which needs about 2 billion shillings to promote exports, is being under funded with only 500 million. Therefore, they cannot do enough market research, price surveillance, and other related duties that are paramount to the promotion of exports. Besides all that, our embassies, which are supposed to promote our products, have been reduced. Our representative in Geneva has been recalled. 

We cannot speak of an industrial state when we are still exporting cotton, which was introduced in the year 1903, and we are still exporting it in its lowest form. We are still exporting coffee, which was introduced in the 1940s, in its lowest form. Our neighbouring country, Kenya, is a tea producer. They produce tea, but they are advanced in the packaging of tea. Here, in Uganda, we export tea in wagons, and we do not even have rudimentary knowledge on how best we can pack tea - (Interruption)

MR.KAKOOZA ROBERT: I wish to inform hon. Mayanja that even for the exports he is talking about, if you looked at appendix C, you would see the trend we are following. At appendix C, you can see that for live animals, we started with 120,000, went to 26,000, then to 75,000, and so on. We are declining. Look at beans and other legumes, we started at 16 million, in 1997 we were at 11 million, and in 98 at 5 million. It is also declining! So, I think it is the policies that are wrong, not the production itself.  Thank you. 

MR.MAYANJA MOHAMMED: Thank you very much for that information.  So, you can see how pathetic the picture is. Whereas our obligations as a nation are increasing, our earnings from export are dwindling and very soon may grind to a halt.

Lastly, in our plan for modernisation of agriculture, there is nothing about commercial farming. And there is no way you can think of becoming an exporting country, if you do not encourage commercial agriculture –(Interruption)

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I just want to inform my Colleague and the House at large that it is ironical that the number of four wheel drives that we own as Government is more than the number of tractors that we have in the countryside. No wonder commercial production in agriculture is bound to be very low!

MR.MAYANJA MOHAMMED: Thank you very much.  We need adaptive and focused research from the Ministry of Agriculture so that we can put in place commercialised agriculture.  

Lastly, Government should put in place affirmative action for the Ugandan products. It does not make sense for Government to buy uniforms for the Uganda Police Force from Kenya, when we can manufacture and produce the same textiles in Mbale ATM or in Nytil. So, we need affirmative action now, and we need it now not tomorrow.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall listen to the Woman Member for Kisoro, followed by the Member for Tororo Municipality.  Hon. Members, so far, 16 Members have contributed. I think we have sufficiently contributed to this matter, and the Minister would come in after that. 

MRS.NTABGOBA JENINAH (Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to zero my comments on trade, both external and internal. The Committee observed the situation concerning external trade as being the result of poor terms of trade. It is not only poor terms, but I want to say that there are no terms at all. Why do I say this? Our planners seem not to have recognised the enthusiasm that came out of Ugandan traders after the Amin era. So many Ugandans came out as traders, but they started without any assurance of loans from banks. As they started picking up, the interest rate increased and production declined. My Colleague gave an example of the flower industry. Imagine someone has got a loan and the crop is not yielding, how do they pay back this money? That is why, as my Colleague said, some people are committing suicide. We should not take this as a joke. We should find out how to save the situation from worsening.  

Secondly, I think economic planning should be looked at. The tax rate has remained static, while the private sector is not facilitated. The Committee also observes this on point 7.1, where it says the private sector is not facilitated. How do they assist the internal traders?

The Committee also pointed out the rent factor that has made so many businesses close down. In appendix E, you will see that 130 businesses have closed down, and rent must be one of the reasons for their closing down. Two years ago, I asked about the rent control. We have a law in this land on rent control and it is not being implemented. The answer I got was that, Government was not going to interfere with the building owners when Government did not build these buildings.  Now, the question is, how are we going to save the situation if we cannot control rent? And I want to bring it out very clearly here that this money that is being paid to commercial owners is being siphoned out of this country. Most commercial owners do not live here, and they just use management.  You pay this money to the management, the next morning it is sent to the owner who is abroad. That is how we are losing money in this country. That is why the dollar has really gone wild.  The business community is failing because of that. I urge Government to look into this issue –(Interruption).

MR.ERESU: Mr. Speaker, the speaker holding the Floor has made a very serious point about capital flight from this country, with regards to rent remittance abroad. Could I also get clarification, therefore, from the Minister in charge of Trade and Industry as to whether rent accrued from buildings goes to people who are not residents of this country and whose monies, therefore, are channelled out. Are these monies taxed before they are transmitted abroad? 

Secondly, is there a method by which forex bureaux in this country are being monitored and how effective is that monitoring system? How effective is it, so that we can determine how much money leaves this country in foreign currency at any one time of the year?  Thank you very much.

MRS.NTABGOBA: I thank the informer, and I hope the Minister will kindly respond to his concern. 

With due respect to our Government, I do not want people to see the Government behaving as a mother weaning a child without any substitute feeding. If we say that internal trade will be sustained by private sector, and the Committee has observed that the private sector is not facilitated, what happens to these traders? Won’t these kids starve if there is no substitute feeding?   

I want to conclude by saying that a lot still remains to be done to alleviate the situation, otherwise, as the Committee says, next year might be worse. It might actually be the worst, because today we have got very good business people who are closing their premises because of these problems like lack of proper trade terms and lack of attention. Traders in this country do not get attention. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.ONGARIA STEVEN  (Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity. While I thank the chairman and his Committee for the work well done, I want to seriously lament over the demise of Tororo as an industrial town. As you all know, right from the colonial days, Tororo was one of the largest industrial towns in this country. Jinja was the largest, Kampala second, and then Tororo. I am speaking from a point of information. I know about all this, and I am sure you may not have known. The industrial potential and the strategic position of Tororo was realised by the colonial system well before we got independence.  The infrastructure, which the colonial system put up in Tororo, is one of the best in this country. We have trunk roads, one to the centre, that is Jinja and Kampala, the other one to the North, that is Mbale, Soroti, Lira, and to the East, to Bungoma, Eldoret and Nairobi, the capital city of East Africa. 

Tororo’s potential is still there up to now, but to my surprise, in spite of all these wonderful facilities that exist within Tororo, Government is currently looking on as Tororo is dying in our hands. What you see in Tororo today, is a graveyard of industries, dotted all over the town. The Jute factory was the only factory we had to produce gunny bags for the farmers in this country. You will be surprised to find that the machinery for this factory was re-exported to India.  The factory is now dead –(Interruption)

MR.CHEBET MAIKUT: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving way. I would like to inform the hon. Member and this House that, annually, close to 30 million US dollars is wasted on importing a substitute for gunny bags, which we use in this country.

MR.ONGARIA: Thank you very much, hon. Member. There was a mabati factory in Tororo called Steel Works. That factory has been re-located to Kampala. We also had two oil factories in Tororo and a soap factory, but all those are now dead. The only factory that is now operating effectively is Tororo Cement Factory. All those closures are to the disappointment of my Constituents, the people in the East who were benefiting from the employment opportunities in these factories. 

Tororo Cement Factory, which is now operating, perhaps benefits this country more than even the factory in Hima. If you went to the stores here, you would probably find that Tororo Cement is the most popular cement in the country now. So, if we had other factories working hand in hand with the Tororo factory, I am sure Tororo would benefit a lot, in terms of employment and in terms of per capita income for the people.

My other point is on the competitiveness of our products. It is true our products are very expensive, but what makes our products very expensive, especially in comparison with other products on the regional markets. I think it is the fact that the production costs are very high. The unit rate of electricity, which goes to industries, is very expensive. Water is very expensive, and fuel is very expensive. You cannot escape using one of those things in order to produce. That is why our products cannot compete with other countries’ products in the region or on the world market.  The only medicine to this is to sort out our strategic industries. Identify industries that are orientated to export and give them a rebate on taxes, on electricity, on water and on fuel. Our products will come down, the prices will come down, and they will be competitive.  I used to manage -(Interruption)

MR.MOHAMMED MAYANJA: I would like to inform my hon. Colleague that, whereas what he is suggesting is very good, because of the World Bank/IMF conditionalities, it cannot be put into effect, because it is the World Bank and the IMF that dictate. Thank you.

MR.ONGARIA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I used to work in UDC, and at that time, we had strategic industries, those industries that were producing for export. One of those industries was Uganda Spinning Mill. I managed it myself, and at that time, all Kenyan industries were depending on Uganda. I used to export yarn to United Kingdom, Italy, Germany and Russia. So, there was a lot of foreign exchange generated from that factory alone. Now, this factory is dead, and we are doing nothing about it.  It is all lost, unless the Minister of Finance, whom I can see nod his head, and whom the Investment Authority is under, gives guidance. He must give guidance and a sense of direction to Uganda Investment Authority.  You cannot just abdicate your responsibilities because of liberalisation of trade. You cannot! You must come forward and give a sense of direction to Uganda Investment Authority, so that these industries that are strategic are brought forward and known, and are treated specially by the Government. Unless that is done, we are going to continue suffering from lack of foreign exchange forever and ever.  Amen.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Akaki Ayumu): Mr. Speaker, I would like to most sincerely thank the Members of the Committee, and indeed the whole House, for the questions, recommendations, proposals, remarks, and in some cases, advice given to the Ministry. The Ministry will take serious note of all this and study it with a mind to improve performance in future. 

So many issues were raised, and as I said, many of them were genuine, so, responding to them one at a time might take slightly more time than we have. So I will handle matters in general terms, and I hope that at the end of it all, I would have responded to the main concerns of the House and of the Committee.  

It is true, as observed by speaker after speaker, that there is need to reconsider looking seriously into the industry of the country.  It is true that a number of industries have closed down, and this is not a secret, there is a long list attached to the report. The important thing is that the Ministry is not simply sitting back and lamenting, as some contributors seemed to indicate. 

The Ministry has come out with a very comprehensive study in a document entitled Need to Intensify Efforts towards Industrialisation. This document has been translated into a Cabinet paper and Cabinet has actually discussed it and passed it over to the technical staff of the Ministry of Finance for technical input and advice. This paper addresses, among other things, the industrial development fund, the industrial and agricultural bank, strategic industries, which include textiles iron ore and others. In this paper, we also tackle the issue of unemployment and what must be done about it, through an industrial intervention. We thoroughly discuss rural industries, and the question of second hand clothes and second hand products. Validation is treated very comprehensively, export promotion is considered, tax administration is dealt with, and many other issues. I mention this in recognition of the fact that, despite the problems we seem to have in industry, Government has taken serious steps to try and address them. So, these concerns, which have been raised, have actually already been addressed. 

I would only like to mention one or two specific issues, in respect to industrialisation. Concern has been expressed about lack of research. Only recently, the Uganda Industrial Research Institute was commissioned. The Institute sets about to develop, generate and adopt, and actually disseminate appropriate technologies. This institution had started developing appropriate technology in the area of industries. It is located in Nakawa, for anybody's viewing.

The issue of whether tourism is being promoted or not, was dealt with at length. I wish to thank those who recognise that, after all, some work is being done. Some work is actually being done through promotion. After the Bwindi incident, for example, a very high level Ministerial committee was set by Government to deal with repairing the damage already caused, and that committee did some good job - (Interruption)     

MR.ILUKORI: Thank you much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Minister for giving way. We have a country that is yearning for revenue. Revenue is the outcry all over. We have a country where tourism has a very well placed potential to tap revenue and yet we cannot have this. I seek this clarification with a heavy heart, and with due respect to the hon. Minister on the Floor. I seek clarification in respect to security vis-à-vis tapping revenue through tourist structures like parks.    

One, after the occupation of Kidepo Valley National Park by Kenyans and Sudanese pastoralists, how can I be sure that after their withdrawal, there will be an adequate security arrangement put in place, so that we can also get revenue through that institution.

Two, the hon. Minister has just talked about the pronounced tourism development sector, and it was alluded to by the Committee, but when shall I see all these promises on the ground? I did fly with hon. Rebecca Kadaga to Kidepo Valley National Park, and very wonderful pronouncements on developing the park were made, but to date, there is nothing!

Three, the infrastructure in that institution has gone to the dogs! Two journalists died at the road leading to the park due to lack of bridges. When will these structures be built so that we can have revenue? Thank you. 

CAPT.GUMA: Mr. Speaker, I would like the Minister to clarify the cautious Government effort to promote appropriate technology for sustainable development, and the cautious Government effort to sustain industrialisation. It is enshrined here in the mandate of the Ministry.

MR.ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I would the Minister to clarify some statement in point 5.0 of the Committee report. It statement refers to Uganda being a founder member of the World Trade Organisation and therefore being part of the globalisation process.  I would like to know what Uganda's specific preparations are, in view of a declining industrial sector. What specific steps are in place to address this problem, so that we can adequately participate in this organisation with an advantage?

Secondly, not too long ago, our fish had been banned from the European Union. Thank God, we now hear that the ban has been lifted, but may I know from the hon. Minister what specific arrangements are in place to ensure the standards of our products at the world market.

Thirdly, on page 10, minute 7.3 of the Committee report, we are told somewhere that, Ugandans have preference for imported consumer goods. It is common knowledge that, for any country to develop industrially there must be an internal market, which acts as a propellant for industries to produce, improve quality and then later venture into the external market. In view of the circumstances - Ugandans preferring consumer goods from foreign countries - how is Government going to address this situation so that our industries also have market? May I conclude, by saying that I wish I had more time. Thank you very much.

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, could I seek clarification from the Minister on the question of small-scale industry? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MR.MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Many developing countries that are trying to become industrialised have concrete policies and programs for development of small-scale industries. In this report, these industries are hardly treated. Does the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry have a policy on the development of small-scale industries?  Thank you.

MS. BAKOKO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like clarification from the hon. Minister on 3.0(c). One of the Mandates of the Ministry is to promote conservation and sustainable use of the country's bio-diversity and national heritage. 7.0 of the report focuses on Uganda Wildlife Authority, and it has the same mandate.  Today I read in the New Vision that the executive director of the Wildlife Authority has resigned for personal reasons. Would that affect the functioning of the board?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the issue of the loan has to be dealt with today because there is a deadline as to when we can deal with this issue. So, please take into account that important point. I understand if by 31st August this is not done, then the whole issue will abort.  

MR.AKAKI: Mr. Speaker, I had started telling the House what the Ministry is doing to promote tourism, which was a concern of Members of the House. The barrage of points of clarifications, therefore, will be dealt with at the correct time. I would like to continue with the line of argument I was already presenting. I did mention that a high level committee was set up. I also now wish to mention that, as a measure to promote tourism in this country, we have set up not only one website, but also two. There is web-site being visited by hundreds of people everyday, set by Uganda Tourist Board (UTB) and Uganda Wildlife Authority. Through this, any person who is interested in the kind of tourism we have in Uganda would get to know what tourism facilities we have. And indeed this site is producing results. The Ministry itself has even started another website in the Ministry. We have already received the equipment. All this is going to be used to promote tourism.  

We are participating in various trade fairs countrywide, to promote tourism. And I must say, this is producing results. We do give literature to our missions abroad, literature in respect to the industry, and this too is producing results. But I would like Members to observe that, it would be expecting too much, if you expect us to compete at the international level at this moment in our history.  

The Uganda tourism industry has undergone a number of problems.  Tourism is a very sensitive industry, and it takes time to recover. Efforts have been made, and if no serious incidence takes place within this area, things would turn out much better. We have programmes to promote local tourism. We have weekly programmes on UTV. You only have to tune to TV and you will see how much information we are actually decimating. We have got strategies.  

I remember you asked what plans we have for developing the industry. The 10-year tourism master plan is actually being reviewed, with a plan to take into consideration the recent developments in our country. We have got the Protected Area Management Sustainable Use (PAMSU) programme, which is doing the hotel classification, which has already been mentioned, and it is progressing very well. We are strengthening the tourism training schools and Wildlife Education Centre through this project. We are supporting institutions that are dealing with training tourist experts. Actually, we are now harmonising the curriculum. We are doing a number of other things. I would not like to take too long on this.  

On the issue of the policy of the Ministry, suffice it to say that policy is there and is constantly being revised to suit our participation at the regional and international organisations. 

Before I conclude, I will answer questions that arose, starting with the latest. The issue of an employee resigning should not cause unnecessary concern. Resignation is part of any operation.  We only hope that the man give convincing reasons. His term of service allows him to resign if he so wishes. If he resigns, he will definitely be replaced with another equally decent person.  

There is a policy for promoting small-scale industry. In the paper I referred to, small-scale industry is one of the areas being handled comprehensively.   

On preparation for the World Trade Organisation meeting, a member observed that, when Uganda was being represented, it was actually the United States of America that was putting across the case for Uganda. This weakness was recognised, and later on, through the support of the international community, some training was initiated and our people were trained. We have now started training even the other people who are participating, like business people, our technical people, the stakeholders, so that they know what we are in for. This training is going upcountry, we started from Kampala and now we are moving upcountry. Indeed, Members of Parliament were invited for a session, and many of you attended and we were extremely grateful.

A Member asked whether Government is consciously promoting industrial matters. I do not know whether I should only say, yes, because all that I have been labouring to say is an indication that indeed conscious efforts are being made. The institute they referred to was a Government plan and it is already operating.

Now, our attention has been raised to the Kidepo-Turkana problem, but it is comforting to know that these Turkana pulled out after some negotiations. I only hope that they will not come back to cause any more havoc.  

Having said all this, we must also know that the Ministry is operating under the general policy of environment, which was approved by this very House. Some of your recommendations would call for total policy reversals, and these would need studying, I think for sometime.

I now wish to appeal to all of you to support the budget proposals for the Ministry.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairman, do you have anything to say?

MR.MIGEREKO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Given the facts in our report and the presentations from the Floor, I had only hopped that the Minister of Finance would honour the discussion and say something, but I realise it is his right to respond or not to respond. I also know that it is your prerogative to call upon him to say something, but I fully realise that the Committee on Finance and Economic Planning will be presenting something, and I hope that at that stage -(Interruption)

MR.ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Chairman for allowing me to ask for this clarification. The Minister has just stated that some of the recommendations that the Committee and the House made, if implemented, would lead to policy reversals. I wonder whether, in your discussions with the Minister in the Committee, he did point out these areas that we should not look at because they would change Government policy. We are now being asked to approve your report, but we do not know which areas the Minister is objected to. He did not tell us what areas would result to policy reversion. So, what happens if we approve your Committee report? That means the Ministry is not going to take any action.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Minister made a policy statement, which he presented to the Parliament, and Parliament sent it to the Committee to deal with. What we are dealing with is the decision of the Committee. So, what we are dealing with is the Committee's report rather than the Minister’s statement. The Minister merely contributed to a debate, but the debate was on a report that was presented by the Committee.

MR.MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for that guidance.  I would like, at this stage, to thank the Members for their observations and pertinent input in regard to what is happening and what should happen in the tourism, trade and industrial sectors.

It is also the earnest hope of the Committee that the Executive has taken note of the concerns of Members. We hope they will take advantage of the ideas generated here to save the sector and come up with strategies and programmes that will lead to the promotion and sustenance of this buoyant sector.

Lastly, I thank the Minister for the response, and we hope that the approach and interventions that we have suggested will help the Ministry register better results in regard to its mandate. I thank the Members once again, and you too, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, the Motion before this House is to consider the report and adopt it, and in particular to support the Motion to approve Vote 208, Head 128, which the chairman elaborated, when he was presenting the report.  Now, it is time for us to decide on this. 

(Question put)

124 Members voted for the adoption of the Motion

1 Member voted against

2 Members abstained

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Motion has been carried. I thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO APPROVE A LOAN OF FIVE MILLION SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS, APPROXIMATELY US 7 DOLLARS, FOR THE TELECOMMUNICATION SECTOR OF NORTHERN UGANDA RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAMME.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move a resolution to request Parliament for authority Government to borrow from the Nordic Development Fund for the telecommunication's component of the Northern Uganda Telecommunication Programme (NORUP). The resolution is as follows: 

Whereas a credit agreement for special drawing rights for five million SDR is to be concluded between the Nordic Development Fund and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the purposes of financing the telecommunication's component of the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme; and 

Whereas, under Article 159 Section (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions; and 

Whereas, under Article 159 Section (2) of the said constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament; and 

Whereas, in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated credit for their approval and authorisation.  

Now be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is here by authorised to secure the said credit from the Nordic Development Fund upon the terms and conditions stated.  

Hon. Members, you are aware that the Government launched the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme (NORUP) in 1992, to restore basic and economic infrastructure in the region, including telecommunication. Telecommunications is one of the areas to be restored. Some of the damages to this sector were inflicted during the 1979 war and the years after. The Government therefore saw the need to restore and expand the telecommunication services in the north, and we are here to request Parliament to guarantee the loan, which will help us restore the basic infrastructure with respect to the telecommunications’ systems in the north.

We know that part of the telecommunications have been privatised, and because of that, we have a second Motion to request Government to guarantee a loan to UTL. The terms and conditions of these loans are as follows, in brief: The loan is five million SDR, and the interest rates will be 0.75 per cent on the dispersed loans. We will have a commitment fee of five per cent, when we enter into the contract. We also have a grace period of ten years, after we have concluded this loan, and we have to pay this loan within 40 years.  

These terms conform to our agreed position of borrowing money on concessionary terms. I would like to state that this loan, if approved, is going to improve a lot on the telecommunication system of the northern region. I beg to move. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Capt. Mukula Mike): Mr. Speaker, we have a nine page report here, that I am very sure that hon. Colleagues have received copies of the Committee's report. I wonder whether we should not go through the whole report or the whole report could be adopted and I make a brief summary?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think hon. Members have read the report. He can summarise.

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, hon. Members the Committee on National Economy proceeded to examine this report under Article 159 of the Constitution and Rule 128 of our Rules of procedure. We had an interface with the Minister in charge of NURP, hon. Omwony Ojwok, the Minister in charge of Transport, Works and Telecommunications, hon. Werikhe, and the Minister in charge of Finance. We were able to come to a very effective understanding that the telecommunication's link for the north is a major requirement for the people under the Northern Uganda reconstruction programme.  The component will encase, as the report states, a digital microwave link. 

We examined this loan request placed before Parliament to seek for the authorisation for Government to borrow the seven million dollars or five million SDR. After examining this report, the Committee came up with the following recommendations: 

Having considered the background of the project, the need to connect northern Uganda to telecommunication services, in view of the last extension and grace period, which is due to expire tomorrow the 31st, the Committee's recommendations were as follows: 

(1) Government be authorised by this Parliament to borrow seven million US dollars from the Nordic Development Fund, and equally be authorised to on-lend to the Uganda Telecommunications Limited (UTL), to finance the NURP telecommunications component. 

(2) Government makes a separate project implementation agreement with UTL as the implementation agency of the project, and the said agreement be brought to Parliament for ratification within 60 days from the time of the ratification of the credit.  The Committee felt that having the seven million dollars go to UTL without a separate agreement being undertaken between the Government of Uganda and UTL, it would be difficult for you to monitor and evaluate this loan agreement.  

(3) A project monitoring team be established to oversee the implementation of the programme, and the scheme should include the Uganda Communications Commission. This was to make sure that we have a watertight agreement between the Government of Uganda and UTL. The terms that have been specified in the agreement, which Government would have entered into, would then be followed to the letter. 

(4) A separate bank account for the project be opened for the purposes of monitoring, and to ensure transparency. The fear was for this money to go into the account of UTL, which has recently been divested as a liability company where Government owns only 49 per cent. It would not be possible for Government, which is a minority shareholder, to monitor the use of the 7 million dollars in the UTL account. So, for this purpose, the Committee recommended that a separate account be opened, so that there is accountability and transparency, and so that we do not have a possible repeat of some of things that we had in the past, for example in UCB.  

(5) The project be implemented within one year from the date of ratification of the loan. That is quite clear.  

(6) The Minister in charge of NURP should make quarterly reports to the Committees of National Economy, and Works, Housing and Communications on the progress of the project. This is in keeping with Article 90 0f the Constitution, where the Minister in charge of this project will have to interface with Parliament on a regular basis, so that we can be able to monitor the progress of this project. Members, who have signed and endorsed this loan, can be kept informed of what is happening. 

Considering that this is an ongoing project aimed at serving the north with telecommunications, the Committee recommends that Parliament ratifies the credit of 5 million special drawing rights, the equivalent of 7 million dollars from NDF, to finance the telecommunications component of NURP. This is so that the eight districts of Gulu, Apac, Lira, Nebbi, Arua, Moyo, Adjumani and Kitgum can be served with this telecommunications service.  

The Committee has satisfied itself, having evaluated this loan request. And we had a joint evaluation of this project with our Colleagues in the Sessional Committee on Works, Transport and Communications. May I kindly request you, Mr. Speaker, to let my Colleague, the chairman on the Sessional Committee on Works, Transport and Communications, under whose portfolio this falls, to come in and give a brief outline.  I thank you.

Mr. Katwiremu: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Mukula for the opportunity.  I just want to add some information that will put this project into the proper perspective.  

This Parliament has, in a way, already approved this project in principle. Last year, we considered the policy statement of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications and on page 63 of that policy statement, we were told that NURP II would provide transmission links and exchanges to Arua, Nebbi, Moyo, Lira, Apac, as it has just been mentioned. Government has secured a grant of 120 million Belgium fancs as well as a 7 million dollars soft loan from the Nordic fund to facilitate the project. The money will only be lent to UTL on terms yet to be agreed. So, in a way, this House has already passed this idea, we are now dealing with the details.  

This year, this issue came up in the policy statement, which I am sure all Members got, under UTL, on the Short Term Investment Programme (STIP-2). There are projects, which were pending under UTL before it was privatised, and these projects were declared to the new strategic equity partner. There are very many projects, I will not go through all of them, but they also include NURP phase two. 
The Ministry informed us, in their statement, that a credit agreement in regard to the financing of the project has been signed, and approval by Cabinet has been obtained. Ratification by Parliament is awaited, as this is a Government project and UTL is the implementing agency. Of course, as you know, we have not brought our report here, but I just wanted to put this in context. This has been a consistent project within the policy of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. Initially, we had to pronounce ourselves on it.  Thank you very much.

MR.BUTELE ANTHONY (Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I support the resolution. I thank the Minister and the chairman for quoting the relevant sections of the Constitution. I would like to quote the relevant sections of the 15-point programme and H.E the President’s state of the nation address this year.  

What does number 6 of the original ten-point programme say? It talks about the restoration and improvement of social services and rehabilitation of war ravaged areas. What are those war ravaged areas?  Mbarara, Masaka, Mubende, Luwero, Madi, Karamoja, Lira, Soroti, e.t.c.  Special programmes will be made to address these issues. This is why NURP was created. We now go to 15-point programme, point number eleven. Number eleven talks about the financing of public infrastructure using internal borrowing and creation of employment in the country. The Movement has a vision to change Uganda into a country that will enjoy reasonably basic infrastructure in a form of schools, health centres, clean water supplies, electrical power, tarmac roads, libraries, telecommunication throughout the country, preferably at the lowest level at the parish. I want to repeat that, telecommunications throughout the country preferably at the lowest level at the parish. This is point eleven of the 15-point programme.  

In the state of the nation address, the President clearly said that attached to NURP II is a telecommunication compliment to link the north with the rest of the country, and phase one of this component, of US dollars 8.9 M, will begin as soon as Parliament approves this project. And this thing we already approved -(Laughter) - so, it goes without saying, I urge you to approve this. If you do that, these districts will be promoted from A.O.B districts to fully-fledged districts of Uganda - (Laughter). So, I urge you to support this. We should it so that we do not waste any more time.  Thank you.

CAPT.GUMA: Mr. Speaker, in light of the detailed explanation from the Member of Parliament of Madi Okollo in West Nile, I move that you put the question to vote.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Motion has been tabled. I will now put the question to it.

(Question put)

111 Members voted in favour of the Motion

3 Members voted against

5 Members abstained

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Motion has been supported by 111 Members, so I will now put the question to the Minister’s Motion. 

(Question put)

128 Members voted in favour of the Motion

4 Members voted against

1 abstained

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is an announcement about the African governance forum. I would like to inform you, hon. Members, that Uganda is hosting the fourth African forum from 1st to 3rd September. The theme of the forum is ‘contribution of the parliamentary process in strengthening Governments in Africa’. The African governance forum series is undertaken by United Nations Development Programme and United Nations Economic Commission for Africa under the Broad United Nations Systems’ World Special Initiative on Africa. 

The above forum is due to be opened by His Excellency the President on Friday 1st September at 9.30 a.m. I would like to let you know that, since the forum is very relevant to the functioning of Parliament, it is important that we attend this forum on the said day. It is on the basis or this conviction that I wish to announce that the forum is open for Members of Parliament to attend. So you are invited to attend this forum on Friday.  With this, I adjourn the House until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.  I thank you.

(The House rose at 5.32 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 31st August, 2000 at 10.00 a.m.)

