Wednesday, 31 August 2011

Parliament met at 10.42 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, thank you very much for being here early enough for us to start and with a fairly good number. I have heard reports from the public that there is a complaint about the speed at which we are moving to try and finish this budget process. 

I want to take this opportunity to assure the people of this country that the budget process is on course. What is happening is that we now have to work within a timeframe that has been restricted by law. It is a new Parliament and the transition has eaten into the time; the policy statements did not all come in time; the committees were new and when the policy statements came, there were delays in handling the reports and policy statements that has resulted into an overrun in the period within which we should have finished the budget.

But I can assure the public that the committees have done their work; they have gone into every detail of what is required to be done in the interest of the public of Uganda. So, there should be no concern at all that we are trying to go quickly to finish the business of the budget.

After the committees have made their presentations, of course we will still have the Finance Committee, which will now come and brief the House and the public about the specifics of what the government has requested this Parliament to approve. We will then have more opportunity and ample time to deal with those matters again.

After that, again there will be the Bills; the Finance (Amendment) Bill, the Stamps (Amendment) Bill, the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, and the Appropriation Bill.

They will all come again and we will have time to go into details of what we need to do. So, the public should rest assured that Parliament is on course and is not rushing through anything to undermine public interest in the budgetary process. We are just doing our best to make sure that at the close of our discussions, the salaried people of Uganda are ready to be paid and the ministries, which require money, are ready to function, and if we delay, we will be holding this entire process. Thank you for listening.

10.46
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The budget process is one of the major activities, which Parliament has to work on and we should do it with maximum care and with due diligence so that the people of Uganda can get value for their resources.

As we speak, no Government department can stop because we have already given them money to a tune of a third of the entire budget, which is for four months, and which will expire on 30th October of this year.

In that regard, if the ministries delayed the process to come and bring their policy statements, I do not think Parliament should be blamed. We should do our work in such a manner that we satisfy the owners of the money, who are the taxpayers of this country.

Mr Speaker, if we try to hurry this process, as soon as we say the ‘Ayes’ have it, those people who have prepared a bad budget will be happy and mismanagement of public resources will take place. That is why we should be very careful with whatever we take on.

I would propose that since you have the powers, Mr Speaker, we could be given more time to handle these reports very well. You can use these ones, which are about to come and which are the basics. I have just come from Western Uganda and if you look at the medical facilities of our people, they are the worst. We had thought Western Uganda was better off, but I have seen that it might be even worse off than the other people. So, if we are badly off in the East and North, and Western Uganda looks like that, it confirms that there is a big problem.

So, Mr Speaker, I would plead with you that time is given to this noble cause so that we do a good job. I thank you.

10.48
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of urgent importance - (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Today, I note that there are six committees to present their reports on the Order Paper, covering almost nine to ten ministries, and as the Leader of the Opposition has already indicated, Parliament requires to do judicious surgery on those reports. 

Regarding the way we have proceeded, in my opinion, very limited time has been given to the chairpersons of committees to present these reports, and yet the committees have done due diligence on those ministerial policy statements, and have salient issues that would be of benefit for all Members to make an informed debate.

I would, therefore, like to appeal that you use your prerogative under Section 22 of the Budget Act, to extend the period for us to complete this business. Therefore, it would be proper for us to see how to allocate ample time to the committee chairpersons and the shadow ministers, to present their reports in detail so that Members are all brought on board in the debate. Otherwise, if we give only ten minutes to committee chairpersons to make summaries of committee reports, it will have watered down the efforts of the committees in doing their work and yet they put in a lot of time and energy in scrutinising these ministerial policy statements. So, I really plead that we try to adjust the time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Epetait. Last week, we had a meeting with all the chairpersons of the respective committees with the exception of two committee chairpersons who did not attend, and the issues were very clear. Some reports are 70 pages, others are 50 pages, but that is not what Parliament is interested in. Parliament is interested in the specific issues that should be brought to their attention so that they can make observations and debate on them. 

We had asked from the big reports that you have presented and which you will be required to lay on the Table of Parliament, to give an executive summary that should highlight the issues of concern that should come to the attention of the House and not the entire report. That is what we agreed and that is what we are doing.

We even agreed on the timeframe. The issue is that we use that time properly because this is also parliamentary time. If you take one hour presenting a report, that means we are going to debate it for four or five hours. Will it still be value time in that kind of debate? So, what we are trying to do now within the timeframe that we have, is to make use of the time we have. 

So, I may use my discretion to enlarge the time I am going to give to chairpersons, but I will not relent on giving a timeframe within which they should finish presenting their reports; from 10 minutes, I will go to 15 minutes; for the shadow ministers, from the initial 10 minutes, I will go to 15 minutes. I do not hear any cheers coming up and yet I am being – (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, that is very good, now that the chairpersons will have more time to present reports. But for future records, I hope the entire report is being captured on the Hansard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we have asked the chairpersons to lay the reports on the Table, then they can make their summaries, so that it is captured in the Hansard.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, if the entire report is being covered in the Hansard, then we have no problem because that will be a record for future reference. Then after the budget process, we should be able to discuss it. This promise has been on since the previous Parliament; hon. Ssekandi would say, “We shall discuss after the Budget.” But after the Budget, you would never see anything of that nature. I hope there is a change in the system now. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: With you as the new Leader of the Opposition, there is definitely change. Hon. Members, let me put the record straight. We asked the chairpersons to lay the reports on the Table before they make their presentations. In the event that some chairpersons have not done the same, I will direct at the end that all reports that have been laid on the Table should be captured in the Hansard. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I plead with you to allow chairpersons to present basically observations and recommendations for the various votes. Under the Budget Act, Section 9, it requires that: “There shall be presented to Parliament by the sessional committees, the reports on the Budget estimates that fall within their respective jurisdictions by the 31st August.” But of course the Budget Act allows extension of this period.

Mr Speaker, I am pleading with you on this matter because just before we started discussions of these reports, we suspended one of the Rules of Procedure which requires a committee to present a report at least three days before debate. Now, if Parliament is to have full consideration of these reports, we need to have the full reports before us – but at least the observations and recommendations.

I see on the Order Paper, and in the way we are moving, that tomorrow the business to follow includes the Supplementary (Appropriation) Bill, 2011. I note that the Minister of Finance to-date has not laid on Table the Supplementary (Appropriation) Bill and yet it is one of the issues, if we are on schedule, which should be discussed tomorrow; now the Budget Committee needs time to consider the Supplementary (Appropriation) Bill. 

I would like to know, through you, from the Minister of Finance, when this document will come so that the Budget Committee can have ample time to look at it and we consider and present the report here before we go into the Appropriation Bill for this financial year. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, is it true that we do not have the Supplementary (Appropriation) Bill in this House yet?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, it is quite true that the process is not yet completed, but I will inform this House this afternoon where we are.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The kind of information I would like to have this afternoon – 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I will provide it, Mr Speaker, this very afternoon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. 

10.57
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): I am raising an issue of urgent importance. Over the weekend, I travelled to my constituency and found that Enterprise Uganda had organised training for the youth and women. They invited youth and women from Agago and Pader District. 

On Monday, when the training started, 2300 participants were at the venue and the situation was terrible; the number of people could not be managed. There were women with babies who had come along with baby sitters and at the time of providing meals, it is alleged these baby sitters were not provided with meals since they were not catered for. 

When I got to the training venue, a hall that is meant to accommodate 1000 people, the participants were packed without any breathing space left. Some participants were standing outside in the sun and when I interacted with some of them about the accommodation – because this is a five-day residential training – they said they had nowhere to sleep. This is a terrible sight and I am requesting the ministry concerned to immediately intervene and save the situation because our people are suffering. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Lowila for giving way. Mr Speaker, the issue of concern my colleague is raising is really very serious. It is true that the people of Agago were invited to Pader for training without the knowledge of the district leadership. As I was walking in today, I received a call from one of the youth who had accompanied one woman with her child in a very bad condition to a clinic in Pader. This woman comes from Adilang sub-county in Agago District, and the child seems to have symptoms of pneumonia, according to the information I got. 

I also understand that the people of Agago who have gone to Pader have not been provided with proper accommodation – actually all of them have nowhere to sleep. Some are sleeping outside and others on the bare floor. So, this child could have developed this sickness because of the cold. The situation is very bad and as a representative of the people of Agago, I do not recognise this training. 

The youth of this country have had enough dose of frustration from fake programmes that are sprouting now and then. I do not want this to continue; if this Government does have a programme for the youth of this country, it had better not give it to Enterprise Uganda, who are dehumanising our people. 

As I speak today, my people are languishing in Pader and I am going to order them to go back to Agago. If Enterprise Uganda has a programme for them, they will go to Agago District, but not to bring my people to be dehumanised.

MR EKANYA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleague. I remember when hon. Kadaga was chairing a debate last week, the matter on youth came up and the House resolved that this matter be deferred until we handle the report of the committee on Finance where the money is located. But nonetheless because we already appropriated a third – may be in future we may need to amend our Budget Act so that we pass the entire budget at once because once Government is given 1/3 of the Vote-On-Account, they can do anything and during the Vote-On-Account, Members do not have the leverage or opportunity to discuss detailed implementation and any programme. 

So, for the future, through your office, hon. Speaker, we need to review the way we handle the budget. But on this matter, the Speaker ruled that this matter be handled. But now I do not know what we can do in this circumstance; maybe the matter should be deferred –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What we are dealing with is a problem of 2,000 people crowded in one little hall, sleeping in conditions that are not bearable. That is what we are dealing with now and that cannot wait for a committee report. Can it? - No, no; let her finish up. Is this under Finance? Hon. Minister, you need to make a clear statement on this.

MS LOWILA: When I interacted with the Executive Director of Enterprise Uganda to find out why they invited such a large number of people to come to one place, he could not even give me any clear explanation. So, our concern now is about the large number of people suffering in Pader District. Something has to be done immediately because as I said, that training is supposed to take five days and we cannot allow our people to continue suffering for five days. Last week, the Youth MP –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay I think the point is made.

MS LOWILA: I thank you.

11.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): I thank you very much. Enterprise Uganda is a private entity, but with the approval of the Minister of Finance. This compliant of their poor performance is not the first. Some two or three weeks ago, something similar to this happened in Hoima –(Interjections)- no it was not in my constituency. My constituency is Buyanja in Kibaale District, but in the Kingdom of Bunyoro. 

I want to promise this House that if Enterprise Uganda does not correct their actions, then they will lose the job and I want to make it very clear. We cannot tolerate this kind of shoddy work. They are supposed to call people whom they can be able to look after and if they cannot look after them, then they should not call them. 

I want to promise this House that I am going back to the Ministry and we shall call Enterprise Uganda to order for them to do a good job.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we have 2,000 people stuck in one place –

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Well, I was not aware of the specific incident in Pader. I will instruct my officers to find out what is happening and we shall come to this House tomorrow morning and tell you what is going on.

DR BAYIGA: I thank you. Money was appropriated and the project under consideration is going on. We do not think that this is just shoddy work perse. We want the leadership and the ministry concerned to tell us what kind of design they agreed to take on with Enterprise Uganda? At the implementation stage, we are seeing 2,000 people crowded in one place as if this is a rally. That is a very big rally – I think it should be a presidential rally –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not stay at a rally for five days.

DR BAYIGA: It is not just a matter of – we want to know the design of the programme under implementation and I think the minister should be in position to tell this Parliament that we agreed, for example, on 1,000 per sitting for five days.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe you just hold on. Let us clear – just two more Members, please. 

11.05
MS FLORENCE NAMYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): I sit on the Committee on Gender. We were recently discussing the report and the minister told us that the guidelines for implementation of that project are being formulated. I am now wondering under what arrangement this project is being implemented because with guidelines laid on Table, it would also help us follow the implementation of the programme. I am wondering how this project is being implemented.  

11.08
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): I thank you. I would like to give some good information in regard to Enterprise Uganda. Hon. Members, I first have to be very clear; I am a product of Enterprise Uganda. I have been following the work of Enterprise Uganda for the last five years and they have done a credible job, and if there is a simple challenge in Pader, then that can just be rectified. 

I want to give an example. In my own district of Ngora, they trained 2,500 people and today as I speak, about 500 of them are doing small businesses. So, the credibility of Enterprise Uganda should not be questioned right now. The issue is -[Ms Franca Akello: “Order.”]– No, I am giving information –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, you guided this House in your wisdom that this issue has been brought up over and over again and you have directed the Minister of Finance to take immediate action especially on this specific issue of Pader District, because over 2,000 people are being packed in one classroom like nsenene packed in a bottle, and the honourable from Ngora is actually saying it is a simple mistake made. I do not really understand. Is she in order to describe what is happening in Pader as a simple mistake?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we should handle this matter with the seriousness it deserves, please. Can I have the honourable minister make a clear statement on what is going to happen in Pader? I am now being informed that you are actually just developing guidelines on how to implement this thing and it is already being implemented.

11.10 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, let me repeat myself. I have said this is not the first time I am hearing a complaint from the population. Two or three weeks ago, something similar happened in Hoima and we thought it was an oversight on the part of the organisers, but this now seems to be the trend.

I want to make it categorically clear that as far as the incident taking place in Pader – let me promise this afternoon that I will come back to tell you exactly what is going on and the corrective measures that the Ministry is going to take with Enterprise Uganda on what is taking place in Pader.

On the question of the future, I have said shoddy work will not be allowed and I have made that very clear. I have also mentioned that Enterprise Uganda is a private institution hired by the Ministry of Finance, and if they do not live according to the details – and I have heard the honourable from Masaka asking about the guidelines or arrangements. Those guidelines were complete, but the Enterprise Uganda does not seem to be following them. All we want is to make sure - in the past, Enterprise Uganda has done an excellent job; why are they not doing an excellent job now? I do not know. Mr Speaker, I will come back this afternoon to tell you what is going in Pader and what corrective action we are taking.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I.	THE REVISED REVENUE EXPENDITURE  ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012

II.	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you have 20 minutes.

11.12
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Stephen Kagwera): Mr Speaker, before anything else, let me lay on Table the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. I beg to lay.

The mandate of the committee is on page 1; Members can read; the scope is on page 1; methodology page 1 and the meetings we held on page 1.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please circulate the copies.

MR KAGWERA: Mr Speaker, we have highlighted issues on the key sector achievements for the financial year 2010/2011 on pages 3 to 5; financial performance 2010/2011 on pages 6 to 9; key planned activities under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives 2011/2012 pages 9 to 11;key sector challenges on page 11; observations and recommendations on pages 13 and 36; Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage mandate on page 37; sector review on page 37; key achievements in financial year 2010/2011 on pages 37 to 40; planned outputs 2011/2012 on pages 40 to 43; sector challenges on pages 44 to 45; and observations on pages 45 to 52.

Initially, this was one Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, but recently, the ministry was split into two to form the ministries of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, and Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage. There are salient issues in the report and this is what we have tried to highlight.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in its implementation of the directive by the line ministry to all government ministries, departments and agencies to effect cuts of 50 percent on advertising, and 30 percent - this is the summary - on allowances workshops and seminars; travel inland and abroad; fuel and vehicle maintenance; printing and stationery; welfare and entertainment; books, periodicals and newspapers; special meals and purchases for selected ministries and agencies; and freeze the purchase of Government vehicles except for critical areas such as hospitals, Police and security services as provided for in the budget speech.

The committee notes that the Ministry of Finance did not follow its own instructions, thus making some activities of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to be cut beyond the acceptable levels of 50 percent and 30 percent, respectively. As a result, the ministry has lost Shs 265.9 million that would have been instrumental in funding some of its activities in the specified areas -(Interruption)

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have been given a document of 62 pages. I am trying to follow, but I have failed to get which page he is reading from. I guess he is reading the summary. So, I want to request, if I could also get a copy of the summary he is reading so that we can follow. Otherwise, can we proceed the way we are proceeding, when we do not have a copy of the summary, and yet this document is 62 pages.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I thought you would be able to take your notes on what he is saying and then debate, because the report has been given. More copies of the report are coming. Just take your notes based on what the chairman is saying then we proceed like that.

MR KAGWERA: Mr Speaker, this is why I had to make a summary of the issues I am going to raise before I even started reading the summary itself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR KAGWERA: Thank you. Whereas the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage has inherited the problems of its predecessor Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry in terms of funding, the committee notes that the resource envelop to market Uganda as a tourist destination has not increased. It has been given only Shs 660 million. When you compare it with Kenya that has US$ 33 million and Tanzania about US$ 8 million, we have underfunded our ministry.
 
The committee further notes that the current budget of the new ministry is what used to run the associated departments in the former Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. The budget is, therefore, inadequate to finance and execute the mandate of the ministry.

Emerging policy issues and recommendations 

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives: Construction of an Ultra Modern Building at Uganda Museum

The committee observed that there was change in the structural design from 10 storeys to a 60 storied building.

There was change of ownership of the project from Government of Uganda to a foreign investor footing the entire cost of construction believed to be between US$ 500 million and US$ 1 billion through a public-private partnership arrangement.

The funds for consultancy services in the financial year 2010/2011 were Shs 1 billion and Shs 1.7 billion, budgeted for this financial year.

The terms of the agreement are not clear.

The committee recommends that the project implementation is halted until a legal framework of the public-private partnership has been passed or put in place, and clear accountability of the previous funds provided is given.

The home under which the property belongs should be sorted out. This project is being competed for, I would say by two ministries; the one of trade and the one of tourism. So, before we sort out that problem, as a committee, we recommend thatwe halt the project.

COMESA Free Trade Area

The committee observed that Uganda joining the COMESA Free Trade Area is a good idea and it will be beneficial to the country, especially when its major trading partners like the New Republic of Southern Sudan and Kenya are members of COMESA, and would be benefiting from that Common External Tariffs and free mobility of capital and labour across the countries, while our goods to those countries attract taxes.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, and Ministry of Foreign Affairs, quickens the ratification to COMESA Free Trade Area membership.

Contribution to international bodies

The committee notes that the contribution to international organisation and contractual obligations in arrears under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, has accumulated so much. This budget has not catered for this; no compliance to the obligation has been made to COMESA and COMESA has as such withheld $ 4.5 million equivalent to Shs 10.57 billion in compensation trade to Uganda. In fact, it is embarrassing to note that all other East African partner states have received their compensation because they met their obligations. The committee recommends that Government pays COMESA.

Institutions under other ministries, departments and Agencies 

The committee notes that the activities of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives are being stifled and crippled by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who have gone into the implementation of programmes and activities of the ministry. 

The committee recommends that all the institutions and projects that fall under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should be relinquished by the Ministry of Finance to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

Non-Tariff Barriers

Uganda business community continues to experience non-tariff barriers to trade with its neighbours, particularly through Kenya, which is Uganda’s access to the sea. One such hindrance is the distinct difference in transit fees. Kenya transits into Uganda pay only $ 43 million when Uganda’s transits to Kenya pay $ 200 million. This discrepancy increases transport costs for a Ugandan trader. 

The committee further notes that Kenya Transit Law, Clause 2, restricts Uganda’s licensed transit trucks from transporting exports into Kenya for fear of dumping. However, Kenya’s registered trucks are permitted to transport goods back to Kenya after delivering goods to Uganda. This encourages unfair competition in the East African transport sector.

The committee reiterates its recommendation that the East African Community Member States expedite the process to implement agreed policy decisions by all partner states and remove non-tariff barriers. 

Border Markets

The committee notes that the ministry plans to open four border markets at a cost of Shs 2.8 billion in the financial year 2011/2012 starting with the one in Bibia, in order to consolidate the Southern Sudan Market. Others are the one of Mpondwe in Kasese District, Malaba in Tororo, and Nimule on Adjumani Border and Oraba in Arua District. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives expedites the negotiations with the district councils in the identified areas, to provide land for these markets before the funds are released.

Creation of the Directorate of Micro-Small Medium-Scale Enterprises in the Ministry 

The committee notes that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives needs to establish a directory of micro-small medium-scale enterprises to coordinate the activities of the ministry in providing leadership and technical support to micro-small medium-scale enterprises. 

The committee recommends for the creation of this directorate with fully-fledged staff if we are to realise the benefit of job-creation and poverty reduction in the country. 

Vote status

The committee notes that the issue of vote status for statutory institutions had been recommended by the committee in the financial year 2007/2008. That all statutory institutions be given their own vote status. The committee reiterates this position that Uganda Export Promotion Board and the Management Training Advisory Centre, be given independent votes with immediate effect, given their core importance in the private sector-led export strategy for Uganda.

Land for an Export Development Centre at Bugolobi 

The committee was informed that the development work on this project has already started with the excavation of the site, and materials to start the construction are expected in the country on 20 August 2011. 

However, the challenge at hand is that Government had earlier agreed that they would waive taxes on the construction materials, and it is now four months since negotiations have been ongoing between Ministry of Finance and UEPB to reach an agreement on the Government commitment. 

If granted, the construction of an Export Development Centre is expected to be complete in twelve months. The committee recommends that Government keeps its earlier commitment and expedites the process. 

Value Addition

The committee notes that the issue of value addition/industrialisation needs to be handled comprehensively and monitored under one body such as Uganda Industrial Research Institution (UIRI), which has become a regional centre of excellence in value addition with a commendable track record. 

The committee recommends that instead of Government scattering money for value addition in non-mandated sectors like the Ministry of Finance, local government and NAADS, it would be prudent for the Government to empower and channel all these resources through UIRI, which has the capacity and the mandate to industrialise the economy through small and medium enterprises through a strategy for industrial development.

In relation to maize exportation in raw form, the committee recommends that Government provides the farmers with capacity to add value than to export maize in its raw form. 

Non-functional projects 

The committee observed that the Uganda Industrial Research Institution has achieved a number of its targets in the financial year 2010/2011. Some of the projects, however, have turned out to be white elephants such as the Nabusanke Fruit Juice Facility in Mpigi and the silk processing plants distributed in Bushenyi and Kabarole districts. This is because most of these projects were politically established without adequate feasibility studies and research, and they are now non-functional.

The committee recommends that Government should always do adequate research before investing in such ventures taking into considerations the economies of scale. 

Recruitment of Staff and Employment 

The committee notes that Uganda Industrial Research Institution is understaffed by 104 employees, thus affecting the delivery of services. The committee recommends that Government should provide funds to fill the vacant positions to improve service delivery and efficiency. 

Pre-verification of Conformity 

The committee recommends that Government should revisit its stand on the issue and reinstate it as soon as possible to avert the current effect of radiation in Japan from infiltrating into the country through imported cars that were heavily affected during the earthquake or tsunami. 

The committee shall further take up this matter and do a comprehensive study in neighbouring Kenya and Tanzania to find out how this activity has been handled in order to come up with a comparative analysis. 

On page 32, Uganda National Bureau of Standards’ (UNBS) home at Bweyogerere. The committee notes that Government committed Shs 10 billion towards the construction of a home for UNBS over a period of four years from 2009/2010 to 2012/2013, and UNBS has so far received Shs 5.2 billion in the last two financial years and work has started. However, due to the increasing cost of materials, the project cost has gone up to Shs 16.2 billion for the first phase of the project. And since there is need for UNBS to have a home, it has flouted an idea of borrowing Shs 13 billion from NSSF to be paid in 13 years at an interest rate of 14 percent fixed on the ten-year treasury bond and renewable after ten years. 

The annual repayment is estimated at Shs 2.278 billion against the MTEF allocation of Shs 2.5 billion, which gives a saving on the development at a rate of Shs 3.276 billion for the Financial Year 2012 up to 2016 and Shs 3.96 billion in the years 2013/14.

The committee recommends that Government continues providing funds for construction of the home for UNBS this financial year and the subsequent years till the project is finished. Therefore, we should not allow UNBS to acquire this loan as per the tripartite meeting that we held on the 17 June 2011.

Employment and recruitment

The committee notes that Uganda National Bureau of Standards is understaffed by 240 employees, thus affecting service delivery. The committee recommends that Government allocates funds to fill the vacant positions to improve service delivery and efficiency.

Training

Youth Training

The committee notes that there is deliberate effort by Government to frustrate its own mandated institutions in performing their mandate. For instance, Management Training and Advisory Centre (MTAC) has been neglected by Government, especially in form of funding. For example, this financial year, MTAC has been provided with only Shs 700 million to achieve its objectives.

The committee recommends that Government finds funds to enable MTAC fulfill their mandate as other players like Enterprise Uganda and other institutions are brought on board. Because of the good and commendable work of Enterprise Uganda in changing the mindset of the youth towards entrepreneurship and aim of job-creation and poverty eradication – (Interjections)

The committee further recommends that Shs – Mr Speaker, protect me. Members are excited about something. (Laughter) The committee further recommends that Shs 3.5 billion meant for training 10,000 youth this financial year be provided to Enterprise Uganda and more resources in form of support of Shs 1 billion be provided to MTAC to carry a parallel training in entrepreneurship as was promised by the Ministry of Finance. (Interjections) The committee wants another Shs 1 billion to be provided for the restructuring of MTAC and these funds be provided through the ministries of finance, industry and cooperatives. 

The committee also recommends that - (Interjections)- the additional Shs 1 billion for business development skills clinics meant for imparting technical skills to the youth using non-formal vocational training programmes be allocated to the Management Training and Advisory Centre (MTAC) through the mother ministry.

The committee further recommends that even the Shs 16.5 billion meant for the youth and other small-scale manufacturers under the job stimulus programme be channelled to UIRI through -(Member timed out_)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two more minutes.

MR KASAIJA KAGWERA: The committee notes that the poor infrastructure around the wildlife protected areas and water bodies have hampered tourism. The committee recommends that swift action should be taken to improve the infrastructure in these areas.

Compensation of land-owners with land titles

The committee recommends that the ministry be given Shs 1 billion for compensation of communities and land-owners with titles in protected areas. 

Resettlement of communities

The committee notes that there are communities living in protected areas such as Benet, Kapsekek, Teriet and Yatui in the Mount Elgon National Park. Other communities are in the East Madi Wildlife Reserve, Queen Elizabeth and Semliki Game Reserve. The committee recommends that Government finds a long-lasting solution for the issue of resettlement.

Cultural sites

The committee notes that most of the country’s heritage and cultural sites have been abandoned. 

The committee recommends that that Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage liaises with the traditional leaders and encourages them to revive their traditional and cultural practices in order to promote and revive our culture that is being overridden by Western influence.

Marketing tourism

The committee notes that the resource envelope to market Uganda as a tourist destination has increased by only Shs 660 million. When you compare it with our neighbours, we are the least.

The committee further notes that Uganda’s embassies abroad have not done enough in promoting Uganda as a tourist destination. The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government should provide funds for the marketing of Uganda tourism.

Operationalisation of the Tourism Act 

The committee notes that much as the ministry has undertaken an institutional review in order to realign the functions of Uganda Tourism Board; the funding available to the sector does not equitably help in fulfilling its mandate. 

The committee recommends that Shs 1 billion be provided for operationalisation of the Act, which is the main document to drive the development of tourism. 

Joint promotion and marketing

The committee notes that the ministry is committed to joint promotion and marketing of tourism between the three bodies: Uganda Tourism Board, Uganda Wildlife Authority and Uganda Wildlife Education Centre, to achieve efficiency and exploit synergies and institutions.

The committee recommends that the initiative should be implemented in order to cut costs of promotion and marketing by the different institutions, which leads to duplication of duties and saves the limited resources. (Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, can you just read your figures.

MR KASAIJA KAGWERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives 

·	Uganda Industrial Research Institute
·	Uganda National Bureau of Standards

We beg that Shs 47,202,023,000 be allocated to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and related agencies and departments.

Vote 015 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage

Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board 

We beg that Shs 13,419,133,000 be allocated to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage. I beg to move Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman; very good and in good time. Can I have the shadow minister who is going to deal with two dockets, trade and that one of tourism? I will give you 20 minutes.

11.39
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Kevinah Taaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you said, I shadow two ministries; tourism, wildlife and heritage; and trade, industry and cooperatives.

I am happy to present our response as Opposition to the Ministry of Tourism. The tourism sector in Uganda has enormous potential to earn foreign exchange and finance development programmes. This is drawn from the rich endowment of natural resources, wildlife and landscape.

Uganda is home to the largest number of primates, including the mountain gorillas, which are among the rare animal species on earth. It is also the source of the mighty River Nile which offers the best –

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The chairperson of this committee gave us a report and we were able to follow what he was presenting. The shadow minister is going ahead to read her report, but as Members of Parliament, we do not have a copy of the report she is reading. Is she procedurally right to continue the way she is doing when we do not have copies of the report in order to refer to it during the debate? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, take note and make responses appropriately. We have already ruled on that matter. Proceed.    
 
MS TAAKA: Uganda is home to the largest number of primates including mountain gorillas, which are among the rare animal species on earth. It is also the source of the mighty River Nile which offers the best White Water Rafting in the world. It has the highest mountain range in Africa, the Mountains of the Moon. It has wonderful waterfalls, beautiful scenery and one of the richest varieties of bird species in the world. Its people are hospitable with a rich culture never seen elsewhere. 

In spite of the enormous potential, Government has not made the necessary interventions so as to reap the gains that wait to be tapped from this sector that has the potential to employ the entire labour force of Uganda, directly or indirectly.

It has the potential to earn over $ 1 million annually, which is about a third of Uganda’s national budget. Instead, the ministry is targeting a modest average growth rate of 8.5 percent per annum for the tourism sector, which earned only Shs 1.660 billion in the financial year 2010/2011. The sector is also reported to be losing over $ 100 million per month in tourism revenue as a result of leakages in the sector.

In his reply to the State of the Nation Address, the honourable Leader of the Opposition informed this House that Uganda ranks last in the region, in terms of travel and tourism competitiveness, courtesy of the lip service to the sector. Looking at an extract on the Table, Members will see that Rwanda ranks seventh and it invests $ 5 million; Kenya ranks eighth in the region and it invests $ 10 million; Tanzania is the 11th and it invests $ 8 million; Uganda is the 13th and it invests only $ 0.35 million.

The tourism sector suffered the greatest effect of budget cuts last financial year. While the tourism sub-sector was allocated about Shs 1.2 billion, actual disbursements were cut by over half of the amount, leaving no opportunity for the crucially needed marketing, product development or the upgrade of the Hotel and Tourism Training Institute at the Crested Crane Hotel in Jinja. Such cuts have undermined budgeting and downgraded hope for any growth in this sector.  

The gazetted tourism development fund levy cannot be enforced due to an overlap in tax regimes. While local governments were empowered to levy local service taxes to the hotels in their respective areas, at the same time these hotels suffer Corporation Tax, which is levied by the Central Government on the same income.

Mr Speaker, this sector has suffered marginalisation by Government, and has been marred by unending squabbles for decades. The ongoing inquiry in the Uganda Wildlife Authority is the latest in the line. This Ministry has also failed to rein order in this sector, making observers wonder if the leadership in the ministry are not themselves involved in the ongoing squabbles. 

The residents of Manafwa District have occupied and deforested Mt Elgon National Park, leaving the slopes bare. In Amuru, the residents are reported to be up in arms with Uganda Wildlife Authority officials over rights of stay in the protected areas. Funds were also embezzled in the project for the construction of Cloud Community Lodge in Nkuringo, Bwindi Impenetrable National Park.

We are concerned that the report of this investigation that was ordered by the then minister in charge of the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry, has remained a secret in spite of the inquiry having been done in public and using public funds. We demand that action be taken against the perpetrators named. The probe report into alleged mismanagement of gorilla-tracking permits by Uganda Wildlife Authority should be made public.

Recommendations

The ministry is now requesting for the unfunded gap amounting to Shs 19 billion to be met; and that with that funding, they would be able to generate over Shs 640 billion in the financial year 2011/2012. The money would go to the tourism circuit, renovation and mitigation of human-animal conflict, as well as 1.7 billion for consultancy on the Kiira Road project. 

We recommend that Government develops a master plan for the sector. The plan should include how to revive Uganda Airlines; completion of the so called planned Uganda Wildlife Circuit as well as building capacity for the sector.

By this, we do not mean endless training of hotel staff, because we are aware the sector was already a beneficiary of some CHOGM funds amounting to Shs 1.374 billion, which the ministry paid to UNISIS in association with Utalii to carry out training of hotel staff in operations, housekeeping, food and beverage preparation, way back in 2007.

In addition, the proposed master plan should comprise mainly strategic interventions for long-term returns, as described, including revival of Uganda Airlines. 

We should revive Uganda Airlines, which was the flag carrier of Uganda, and which was left to die in 2001 owing to mismanagement and failure to successfully privatise the carrier as had been planned. 

We note the report of the minister, that 190,000 visitors visited the national parks, of which 51 percent were Ugandans, and that 209,000 visitors visited UWEC, of which 95 percent were Ugandans. Whereas we appreciate the contribution of local tourism in this regard, we believe that meaningful and sustainable dollar flows will accrue more from international tourism than local tourism. Whereas local tourism brings revenues, it does not add any new money into the economy.

International tourism must, therefore, be purposively developed. It is imperative, therefore, that direct access into Uganda is reactivated and facilitated - this new policy stiff. Government must, therefore, open our borders to international tourism that will earn us foreign exchange. 

Whereas our counterpart, Kenya Airways underwent similar challenges as the Uganda Airlines it was successfully privatised in 1996 by way of PPP, with KLM taking 26 percent and the Government of Kenya taking 23 percent as the major stakeholders.  

Boost Local Connectivity

Having opened up the international connection, complete with the national carrier, we recommend that Government further develops internal connectivity to ease local travel needs of the tourists while in the country, because tourist attractions are spread across the country. A deliberate decision has been made to enable aerial mobility between the major game parks and waterfalls with a view to providing at least four local airports or aerodromes.  

Small aeroplanes and helicopters flying to these airports should be placed on these routes for that purpose. These will be supplemented with local roads as they gradually get worked on and become more motorable with time. If investments are largely there as we recommend, that will greatly ease the life of the international tourists while in Uganda. 

We recommend the development of luxury tourist hotels. We cannot talk of marketing tourism abroad as the minister proposes, before developing international and local connectivity, and branding and investing in luxury accommodation here at home. As you are aware, a few hotels were put up during CHOGM for purposes of encouraging and stimulating tourism. The multiplier effect of this has, however, not been seen as had been anticipated. We do not believe that the hotels constructed then are the type of hotels that would augur well with tourism, which is associated with national parks, wildlife reserves, waterfalls and mountain ranges.  

We believe the Uganda tourism industry requires luxury hotels located within the proximity of the tourist attractions, in addition to the traditional hotels in Kampala and other towns. In this regard, we recommend that Government enters into the PPP arrangement with strategic investors to put up luxury hotels and lodges in key areas of the parks. 

Mr Speaker, we recommend that Government rethinks the Kira Road project. Over the past couple of months, the Uganda Museum has come under debate regarding its impending destruction and upgrade. Government wants the land sold to an investor under a PPP arrangement as opposed to remaining - as the site maybe renovated to preserve the museum as a historical heritage in itself.  In this regard, Government now seeks Shs 1.7 billion for consultancy studies alone to redevelop the museum, which was founded in 1908. 

The main argument being pedalled by the enemies of heritage and preservation is the purported need to consolidated office space for the mother Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives,  and sister agencies. 

Give Inquiries meaning

Mr Speaker, under perpetrators of fraud and corruption we have exposed, the vice will continue haunting this sector. Reports of previous inquiries in the sector should be made public and the demonstrations be made on how culprits were held accountable. That will pave the way for a cleaner account of the tourism and wildlife activities.

Conclusion

Unemployment and poverty are self-inflicted in Uganda in as far as the potential of tourism remains largely untapped, and in as far as corruption prevails in the sector. All you need is strategic thinking and strategic investment. The flora and fauna terrain are all God-given and are here to stay, except for climate change only. It is, therefore, imperative that we redevelop tourism by revitalising direct access into Uganda through our national carrier complete with local flights connectivity and service as the main tourism attractions. 

Our heritage must be viewed above economic considerations because Uganda is unique in its own way and cannot be found elsewhere. In every endeavour in this regard, we should know we are endowed and should be reminded by the words of Winston Churchill: “Uganda is live by itself. It is vital and in my view in spite of its insects and diseases it ought to in the course of time become the most prosperous of all our East African possessions and perhaps the financial driving wheel of this part of the world.” I thank you. That is tourism, Mr Speaker. 

Mr Speaker, I am also the Shadow Minister of Trade. I, therefore, make a response to this ministerial policy in that capacity as the Shadow Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry that combines all functions of the new derivative ministries.

We believe in a lean Government and we see no good reason why the split was made. Indeed the new ministries are yet to live with the fact of the split, and that is why their budgets overlap, with each of them budgeting for the same items such as the planned state-of-the-art building on Kiira Road. 

It must be noted that even the structure of the new ministry has never been approved by the Ministry of Public Service. This means that any budget allocated to funding the staff structure of this ministry may lead to financial loss, as the Public Service may decline to approve the proposed structure. 

Mr Speaker, for one to put the role of the ministry in perspective, one needs to reflect on the ministry’s vision and mission.  Vision: “Sustainable competitive trade and world class industrial products and services.” And the mission: “Develop and promote competitive and export-led private sector through accelerating industrial development, trade and sustainable member-centred competitive cooperatives of wealth creation and economic growth.”  The key objective of the ministry aims to improve the ease of doing business in Uganda and to nurture and grow the private sector. It also aims to nurture and develop SMEs by creating a full directory for the purpose. 

They aim to promote agro industries and competitiveness of local businesses. They also seek to promote cooperatives and their governance through creation of new cooperative unions and revitalisation of the old ones. 

The trade sector - ease of doing business and competitiveness; Uganda still ranks 122 out of the 183 economies rated by the World Bank with the ease of doing business, representing a major decline from the 11th position registered in –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up in two minutes. 

MS TAAKA: In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the way to national development is not through conversion of departments into ministries such as this, without enabling them to perform their functions. It doesn’t help citizens if we continue to scramble over the available resources, misallocate responsibilities and cause public money to be wasted and swindled. We want a vibrant economy driven by an agro-based industrialisation strategy. But as long as you continue to sing industry and services without the link to agriculture, we, as a country, are as good as dead. 

We recommend that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives develops and implements a single strategy for removing the untold suffering that Ugandans are going through. We have suggested that the Uganda Institute of Research concentrates on relevant industrial research. We have also suggested that any industrialisation effort that did not position agriculture as a source of raw materials will take this country nowhere. 

We have discussed and made recommendations for re-energising the private sector and dealing with the constraints thereof as well as the cooperatives sub-sector. We have no reservations in making our policy recommendations in the hope that when they are adopted, the lives of citizens will improve. I thank you for your kind attention. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the papers on Table for both my responses on the ministries of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage; and Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. I don’t know whether they have finished printing them. This is just a draft. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, please join me in welcoming our people in the public gallery. This morning, we have a group of representatives of teachers from all parts of Uganda under their umbrella body, the Uganda National Teachers Union, whose headquarters is located on Bombo Road. I am sure you all know why they are here -(Laughter) 

Hon. Members, also join me in welcoming, on this side of the public gallery, pupils and teachers of Kalongo Girls Primary School, represented by hon. Amos John Okot, Member of Parliament for Agago County. They have come to witness the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. Thank you. (Applause) Hon. Members, the general debate will take one hour. Each Member will use three minutes. 

MS NAGGAYI SEMPALA: Mr Speaker, I have a procedural matter. I am a member of the committee and there is one pertinent issue that I have not seen in my report, and it concerns the warehouses. We are supposed to build warehouses for people on land – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you first consult with the chairman and then raise it later, please?

12.08
MS VICTORIA BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for that detailed report, but I have two observations. One is emanating from page 31, where they mention 114 vacant posts in the Uganda Industrial Research Institute. This is too big a gap. We know very well that Uganda has lost money in projects as the committee has also observed; sinking a lot of money in projects that have not been adequately researched. 

I want you to allay my fears like the committee informs us, that there is money earmarked for compensation for the loss of lives and crops to our dear citizens who deserve protection and the right to eat and live, which have been tampered with and abused for a long time. I do not know what plans and what detailed feasibility study is on the ground, deep down to the common man to establish the extent of damage. I don’t know how they determine these billions without a proper report and I know we have made reports about the loss of lives in our constituencies. I have over six parishes affected.

Secondly, when they talk of money to support the tourism sector, I still have fears that without a feasibility study, some of our people that are trying their best to engage in tourism trade may not be considered. So, it is my sincere recommendation that the research be taken care of. These vacant posts should be filled if Uganda is to stop the misuse of money and sinking it into projects that won’t work. 

I don’t know how the committee established that the projects that they labelled white elephants – the silk and juice projects in Nabusenke - were politically established. If there is that kind of record, then it is unfortunate. But I don’t know if the committee has more information. I beg to end here, Mr Speaker. 

12.11
MR WILSON ASUPASA (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have issue with most of the issues raised, time allowing, and I will begin with trade. It is now than ever that the need for foreign exchange is required in this country and the biggest means of getting it is through and by trade.

In my view, the Export Promotion Council should come up strongly at this moment to do its work to promote exports, to inform the country, to source, to market and to do everything possible that we should have exports to bring in the much needed foreign exchange.

I do not know how the Export Promotion Council works, but in my view, it only works when you approach them. It is my appeal that they should really come out. Maybe they should have a mechanism of informing the country through Parliament, almost on a monthly basis, what is marketable where and what can be sold where. How do we bring in money and what can we do for this country?

Another point is on standards - the standard of the goods that we consume; the standard of the goods that come into this country; and maybe the standard of the goods that go out of this country has a question somewhere. One wonders whether the goods that we consume on the market have passed somebody who has really examined them. Up to today, there are shoes that you wear and before you walk two kilometres the shoes are almost worn out. We do not know how they find market in this country. 

When you look at the cement that we use, almost every floor is cracked. My old mother makes a lot of fun about my house. She built a house about 50 years ago and her floor is quite intact. My floor is cracked and I thought it was only my floor, but I have visited most of my friends and their floors are cracked. Is it the cement? Is it the workmanship? Mr Speaker, we should do something about the standards of the goods that are on our market.

I also have an issue on the training of youths. I happened to contact Enterprise Uganda sometime back to have youth in Namutumba trained, and they told me they want to train at least a thousand youths. I told them it was impossible - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that on this subject, hon. Member? 

MR ASUPASA: It is in the report, Mr Speaker. We failed to agree on the number of the youths to be trained in Namutumba and because of that youths have not been trained in Namutumba. (Member timed out_)

12.14
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report and the subsequent response from the shadow minister. 

Mine is on youth training. The chairperson of the committee highlights on page 25 how the youth are being requested to pay money before the training. We thank Government for having come up with this initiative of relieving the youth from the unemployment problem. But like you are aware, Mr Speaker, our youth cannot manage the Shs 55,000 because they have nowhere to get it from.

Secondly, I see a problem in our country; that we are killing our own departments in the guise of public-private partnership. We are giving money to Enterprise Uganda, which is okay, but I would imagine that it should not be at the expense of our own training centre, MTAC. I would have been more comfortable if this money was given to our own institution so that it carries out the training work. 

Another issue is the issue of our own ministries being left idle at the expense - maybe I do not know - of proper lobbying. You are aware that the youth fall under the Ministry of Gender. I do not know whether they felt Gender was not capable of receiving this money, hold it on behalf of the youth and, therefore, liaise with the training partners to ensure that the youth get their money through the appropriate channel. 

I would be glad if the training was managed under the Ministry of Gender because then, the youth would know they are in their home and are receiving the service from home. There would be no problem. (Hon. Boaz Kafuda rose_) I accept the information.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you, the Opposition Whip, for giving way. Even when Enterprise Uganda is training the youth, they do not involve the youth leadership which was elected recently. That is the information.

MS KIIZA: That is why I was saying that we are neglecting our own institutions - the institutions we put in place for a purpose. If we have training centres, the training centres go without funds and then we give the funds to the private institutions, and we kill our own bodies which we are supposed to look after; which are supposed to mentor, and which we are supposed to use as a country to make sure our services are being delivered.

Mr Speaker, I would not feel shy to say that possibly there is a reason why we feel happy to use the private sector other than use our own departments. Possibly we get kickbacks from them. I would not feel shy to say so. Much as we encourage the public-private partnership we should also look at empowering our own departments.

There is an issue with the SACCOS on page 55. I am finding a problem understanding the difference between increasing capacities and possibly the strengthening of capacities. (Member timed out_)

12.19
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have concerns on page 22 where the committee says, “Compensation of land owners with titles in the protected areas.” I would like to find out from the ministry, how does the government give the land titles to people in the protected areas? I have a case in point in my district. The Uganda Wildlife Authority is claiming over 90 kilometres of land saying that the land belongs to the Uganda Wildlife Authority. And as I talk, they are burning people’s huts; they are cutting down people’s crops; and they are chasing away people in that particular area, yet the owner of that particular land has got the land title. Mr Speaker, this is the problem that we are having currently. (Hon. Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, be informed that if you allow a point of information it is part of your time. It is not outside your time. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to finish my point. (Laughter)

As we talk, our people are coming back into camps as we made mention sometime back, because the Uganda Wildlife Authority is claiming that the land belongs to them, yet those people have the land titles. 

On Friday last week, the honourable minister went to that particular area and informed the community and land owners with the land titles that that land belongs to Uganda Wildlife Authority. He was given the lease offer for 99 years in 1873, and when the minister went with the soldiers - and I was told that the minister himself put on Army uniform - they started firing teargas. As I talk, 12 people in that particular area with the land title are hospitalised. 

Mr Speaker, we are now seeing that this is one of the tricks of grabbing our land in Amuru District. In Amuru District, there are so many agents going around and claiming land. It is not only Uganda Wildlife Authority. We have National Forestry Authority claiming over 60 kilometres of land. They are saying the land belongs to them. We have never heard of that since time immemorial. Mr Speaker, this is the trouble we have in Amuru District. They are playing tricks and they want to grab our land. I think the community is so annoyed and you would not want to incite them.

The moment we tell them what they are supposed to do, it may be more dangerous. So, the issue of protected areas, where the government goes and says this area belongs to Uganda Wildlife Authority or a national park, I feel this needs to be looked into very seriously -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if you know you have answered a phone call inside this Parliament, do not waste your time standing up as I will not pick you. I have been seeing all of you. (Laughter)

12.22
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wanted to bring to the attention of the House the issue of advertisement in the Tourism industry. I know that we are going through budget cuts, but I would like us to take it very seriously that advertisement in tourism is a core activity, so it should not be neglected. It is a core activity and without advertisement, there is no tourism; so let us really push to make sure that we have money put aside for tourism, as that is very key.

I would also like the Minister of Tourism to bring on board the Opposition. We need the Opposition to appreciate the role of tourism in as far as national income is concerned. When there was the Walk-to-Work, we lost a lot of money. So, we need to work hand-in-hand to see how best we can safeguard this precious business, because it is extremely essential that we keep Uganda safe for everyone to enjoy.

If we are going to advertise, then we need to harmonise -(Hon. Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, you are out of order.

MR RUHUNDA: Members, I am talking as a lover of Uganda and I know you are also equally concerned, and that is why we have to work together - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I had already ruled you out of order, but you can -

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect to the presenter, I am standing on a point of order pursuant to the words which he has uttered, namely, that the Walk-to-Work is procedurally wrong. The point of order I am raising is that Walk-to-Work is a human right, which anybody can exercise. As if that was not enough, all cases related to charges on Walk-to-Work have been won in courts of law. So, in the absence of an apology to this honourable House, is it in order for the honourable member to continue speaking?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, the honourable member was trying to assess the impact and show his own opinion on what happened. I had actually ruled you out of order before you spoke properly.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much. For sure, we appreciate the role of the Opposition and you have submitted something very good for the government. So, it is only on that part where -(Interruption)

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are considering the budget of the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry. We have been told, at least by the report of the committee that, that whole sector has been provided with only Shs 13 billion. Uganda Police Force is being provided with Shs 250 billion and among other things, the Presidency is provided with Shs 13 billion for inland travel. People who are supposed to provide money are giving the sector only Shs 13 billion and they are providing Shs 250 billion to Police to buy more tear gas to give us bad publicity in that sector. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to accuse the Opposition of undermining tourism when actually the managers of tourism are giving it peanuts?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member was simply saying you are adding insult to injury. Please wind up.

MR RUHUNDA: As I conclude, we need to bring on board all Ugandans -(Member timed out_)

12.28
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerere County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The ministry we have is Ministry of Trade, Wildlife and Antiquities. I do not know where the committee got the name of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage. At least if we consider that we are not supposed to change it right here on the Floor, we should wait for the government to do it and give us a response - (Interruption)

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, recently, Government re-aligned the ministry formerly known by my colleague and put it to Ministry of Trade, Cooperatives and Industry and also separated it from the one of Wildlife, Heritage and Tourism. Is it in order for the honourable member to stand up and give mention of a name that existed in the past?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is information, please proceed.

MR KATOTO: Mr Speaker, I do not have it officially put the way he said. I do not know, you can guide me, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please take that as information and proceed.

MR KATOTO: Okay, thank you for the information. The other thing I would like to talk about is the money got from wildlife gates, which is distributed to the people at LC III level. This money is used inadequately and it is not beneficial to the people who have been faced with animals from the national parks, which destroy their crops. They have not been compensated and I do not know whether the committee considered mentioning this in their report, because people have lost a lot of crops and money.

I would suggest that the Tourism Sector uses the people-park approach where immediately someone becomes a victim of circumstances, say animals come and destroy his or her crops, the sector concerned should go and assess the impact of that instance and compensate the farmer adequately. That would be considering the population of Uganda.

More so, we have seen a lot of farmers working tirelessly to bring up the economy of the country, but again, considering that the national parks are also the major income earners of our country, how will these people protect those animals if they are not compensated when animals come and destroy their crops? Thank you.

12.32
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I have been trying as much as I can to communicate to the committee chairperson to help me with some information, which I have failed to see here. If there is nothing to do with the fruit factory in Soroti in this report, then it is a misplaced report. For years, we have been told about the fruit factory, but I am not seeing any information to do with it. If it does not appear in this year’s budget then we are going to make it a political matter in the East – because we have been promised; people have grown oranges, but I am not seeing anything to do with it here. Even during the Presidential campaigns, it was promised and that was the more reason for zoning this country. So, I would like to get a clarification from the chairperson; maybe I have not seen it and it is in the report. But if it is not here, he should give me a clarification accordingly.

Mr Speaker, on page 11, about the challenges of these sectors; there is a continuous inflow of counterfeit goods into the country. What is the Uganda National Bureau of Standards doing? What is happening at the border points? It has become impossible to buy a genuine spare part in any shop because whichever you buy you will be told it is “kicupili”. Even when it comes to medicine, there are counterfeit drugs. Where are we going as a country? Everything has its counterfeit; yesterday I was buying conduits for electricity -[HON. MEMBER: “Condoms.”]- (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member shall pronounce words properly. (Laughter)

MR OMOLO: Mr Speaker, I am very sure of my pronunciation; I talked about “conduits” and if that Member is interested in the use of condoms then it is up to him – maybe he is a good user of condoms. 

On page 17, about the border markets; it was in the last year’s budget and I see the recommendation here. But as a Parliament, we would like to know what happened to the money we appropriated for the building of the market. Unfortunately, it was being built in the Sudan. Here, they are talking of markets, which should be on the Ugandan side of the border. But the other one was being built on Sudan soil; I wonder who is going to collect revenue from that market. Up to now, we do not know how far the market has gone; has the foundation been constructed or has the site been cleared? We need this information from the chairperson because we would like to know what has happened to that money; because if they have not weeded the area they are going to build a market, then we should have been wasted money. What is the point of injecting more money in the building of markets before we see that one materialising? 

Mr Speaker, on the youth training, I listened attentively the other day when the issue of the Shs 44.5 billion was being presented here. Somehow I got shocked because people behaved as though the youth were only found in towns. Shs 16.5 billion was given for the building of markets in Kampala; are there no youth in rural areas? There are youth in Arua, Moroto, Soroti – we should have spread this money all over the country to make sure the youth are uplifted everywhere. In any case, we are in an economic problem because we do not have enough production –(Member timed out_)

12.36
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Mr Speaker, I have three points. The first is on tourism. Everyone recognises it as an important sector that earns the country a lot of foreign exchange. Even the President has talked about it. However, my worry is that we are always stopping at words without putting our money where our mouth is. 

You find that tourism promotion has been allocated only $ 0.35 million. That is inadequate to promote the country. When you look at the neighbouring countries, they allocate tens of millions of dollars to promote tourism. It is, therefore, important that the Ministry of Finance considers increasing the amount because we need to improve the country’s image for more foreign exchange and more employment. We know that tourism has a big potential for employment.

The second item concerns shelter for the Ministry of Tourism. Apparently, rent for the ministry is one of the unfunded priorities and yet this is a basic requirement for a ministry to operate. How does the Ministry of Finance expect the tourism ministry to operate if they do not even have where to operate from? This is a fundamental issue which needs to be addressed.

The third issue is about the lack of tourist facilities along the tourist trails and along the major highways. I have travelled in other countries including Tanzania and Kenya, but facilities like toilets and restaurants are provided by the private sector. So, the tourism ministry should involve the private sector; identify the places where you need the facilities to be put and the private sector can then do it. 

In Kenya, when you are travelling by bus, at particular hours you stop at particular places where you can use a toilet and go to a restaurant and also buy items which are tourist souvenirs. So, it is business and should be looked at that way. Thank you.

12.39
MS SARAH KATAIKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. However, on page 30, the committee mentioned that they are concerned about the scattering of funds for value addition to different departments and ministries like finance and so forth. But immediately on page 31, the same committee reported that UIRI, who they were recommending to handle value addition, lacks the staff. So, I got confused whether the committee really feels that UIRI is the right place to carry out the mandate of value addition. I appreciate that UIRI has the potential, but it has to be assisted to be able to do that work. If they lack the staff and structures, we cannot relegate the activities of value addition that are needed throughout the country to them.

My second concern is about the function of marketing; colleagues, we have a big challenge as a nation, that our markets, particularly of the food crops like maize and other cereals, are wide open. So, our neighbours like Kenya are buying them including those in the gardens. We should note that this is escalating the problem of food insecurity and even failing other value chain activities like the poultry industry, which is now suffering because there are no feeds.

Hon. Members, I am again very concerned about the issue of the warehouse receipt. This is a programme which was pioneered by the Ministry of Trade and Cooperatives, but it has up to now not taken off, and yet other countries like Malawi, which copied from Uganda, are enjoying. I feel that in this budget, such issues should be given priority since it would also solve the other marketing issues whereby our neighbours are taking our food at give away prices. I thank you.

12.42
MR PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): I want to thank the chairman and the committee for the work and recommendations. My concern goes to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. We are disturbed by the standard and quality of the goods on our market. As it has been echoed by some Members, we have a problem of standards and quality of our building materials. Even the petrol and diesel we consume from the petrol stations - the mixing of diesel with paraffin and giving us less litres of fuel – you buy 10 litres, but they give you eight, and I think this is very bad as it affects us in the Movement as well as those in the Opposition. (Laugher) (Applause)

When it comes to farm implements, it is painful to see someone sell a bag of charcoal at Shs 15,000 and he goes to buy a hoe, panga or axe and it works for only one or two days and then breaks down. That situation occurred one time in Gulu when they sent those items from a ministry under the Prime Minister’s Office and they could not serve the purpose. Are we not really forcing our people into real poverty if they are able to part with the little money they have and they end up getting nothing?

When it comes to electronics, go and see the radios, microphones, wires and etcetera. They will tell you that this will last longer and the other will not last longer. How can the Uganda National Bureau of Standards allow such in our market? This is very bad. 

When it comes to dressing, for example, shoes, it has been mentioned. Somebody has come all the way from Mukono to buy a pair of shoes made in China and while at a party or wedding, it tears –(Laughter)– this is painful, Mr Speaker. It even extends to vehicle parts. I thank you.

12.45
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): My concern is about SACCOS and how they are doing a disservice to our people, because previously, I thought SACCOS were supposed to help people who come together, do marketing and discuss their problems as SACCOS. But when you go deep down into the villages, you find that SACCOS are composed of various people, and they do not mind about whatever is coming up. 

Therefore, the SACOSS should be revisited such that if it is a cooperative or SACCO for matooke, let them be a SACCO for matooke. In Sheema where I come from, people have failed to fight the banana wilt because SACCOS are scattered. We no longer have SACCOS for coffee to market it and get real export earnings for this country. SACCOS were previously marketing their products as organisations of like-minded people.

Where do the youth of this country belong? The Ministry of Trade wants them; the Ministry of Gender wants them; the Ministry of Finance wants them - no wonder people are complaining about Enterprise Uganda; maybe they are overwhelmed. They do not have proper guidelines. If we have other stakeholders on board like the Ministry of Gender, which has the mandate to even know how these youth operate - I think we should clearly define how the youth should work. Who holds the youth enterprise accountable? Who does monitoring and evaluation? Who conducts the needs assessment of these youth? I think we are doing a disservice to the youth of Uganda by just leaving them laissez-faire. Where do they belong? I thank you.

12.47
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to draw your attention to page 14 of the report where the committee states very clearly that non-compliance to the obligations that this country undertakes in the trading arrangements, has cost Uganda $ 4.5 million and it is embarrassing that our country has not remitted about Shs 5.9 billion as our commitment. 

It is good that the ministers of trade and industry are present. I wonder what this country is up to, because you have more debts than you can afford and you want to join more of these trading arrangements. What is the problem, ministers? Because, if you are unable to pay Shs 5.9 billion, which has cost you $ 4.9 million, what are you doing? Where is Uganda heading? Besides, what has Uganda gained in trading terms when it comes to real regeneration of forex within, and what is the portfolio of Uganda’s external direct investment? It is nothing to come here and say we have trained a number of these - we have done this and yet actually you are not trading, but doing petty trade internationally and domestically. This means your entire ministry is a petty ministry, because I do not see real business here. (Applause) Your undertakings are almost illegitimate when you cannot find money for your obligations and at the same time you are indebting the country.

I want to draw your attention to domestic tourism. In this country, people assume tourism means a number of white or yellow people coming into the country. Do you know how much potential Ugandans have to do internal tourism? How many children for example can you ferry from Arua to see the dam in Jinja and even children from within Busoga? Do you do these kind of things or you imagine tourism means a collection of white people through Entebbe to Uganda to see Mabira anyway –(Laughter)- is that it? So, I find it wanting, but we have ministers seated in this august House and they cannot tell us the amount of revenue generated internally when Ugandans are travelling within the country and that is unfortunate.

Finally, I want to draw attention to the way traders are treated in the region. Uganda is known as one of the friendliest countries on earth, but when the same Ugandans are out there, they are treated like lizards and crocodiles. When Ugandans are in Sudan, you would imagine that they never even helped that country to get Independence. You last saw what was happening during the riots, where Ugandans were mistreated, but when these foreigners come to our country and they are trading with us, we give them the ample and very excellent environment. You ministers, what are you doing about Ugandans being treated out there? (Member Timed Out_)           

12.51
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): I thank you very much. I wish to thank the committee for the good work and I go straight to page 3 of the report. I also thank the shadow minister for the good presentation. 

On page 3, the committee made some recommendations on industrial development and I quote, “The Ministry has started on the implementation of the National Trade Policy.” You can imagine that they are just beginning to work on the textile industry to make it a priority. I think this Government has succeeded in killing this country. We had a very vibrant textile industry. We had a textile industry in Jinja; and we had some in Mbale; where are they at the moment, and yet we are talking of lack of jobs and employment for our youth. 

Where do you expect the non-skilled labour youth to go; where they do not qualify to work in big offices? At the end of the day, you are just beginning to work on the textile as a priority. Isn’t this just committing suicide? How many of our youth are not working? You would have the textile accommodating all the cotton we produce in this country and this would market - most areas of this country produce cotton. At the moment, all this has been put to waste. It is time you gave priority to areas where we would be getting market.
 
The uniform materials that are being imported would be made locally here. Even the blankets that we are importing downtown in Owino and in the rest of the downtown streets, we would be making locally. You would be creating employment for our youth and you would be creating business here in Uganda, instead of importing inflation, and then we have dollars running out of the country and becoming very expensive for everyone to afford. So, this should be looked at as an important area. 

Then the other issue, in the Eighth Parliament, we had a motion that was brought here, moved by hon. Kubeketerya and supported by hon. Akello Franca. This was related to waragi; there was a fight between the Ministry of Trade and Industry and the Ministry of Health. Industry was promoting waragi packaged in sachets. We are slowly killing the youth! Go and conduct a meeting - the youth are very busy sipping on the sachets of waragi. They have very many names: Latest, Officer, Signature, Horse, Tyson, Coffee spirit, Zebra mention them. What are you doing to the youth of this country? You are killing them slowly! Will you move and do something. The majority of MPs in the Ninth Parliament are in the youthful age. We want this motion brought back -(Member timed out_)

12.54
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a few comments on the cooperative sector. For as long as 80 percent of our people are in agriculture and the bulk of them are living on subsistence, there is no way we can talk about Prosperity-For-All unless we have cooperatives. I want to say that the NAADS of 15 people cannot have the capacity to produce, to add value and sustain markets without cooperatives.
 
Government on many occasions has said that they will support formation of cooperatives at parish level. I would like the minister responsible for cooperatives to tell us how far Government has moved in achieving this objective. 

This matter of talking about URI as a vehicle for value addition, I do not think that is a right approach. The cooperative movement has the capacity to achieve value addition because they have the capacity to mobilise the quantities, to look for markets and to store, but not these small units of 15 NAADS people. If you are talking about coffee, or cotton or tea, the vehicle for promoting and sustaining these commodities is through the cooperative sector.

The second point is about the SACCOs. It is a government policy that we should have SACCOs in all the sub-counties in the country, and we have committed money in billions to have these SACCOs put in place. I want to hear from the minister - it is now three, four, five years down the road; how many of these cooperatives are working now? How much value have we got for this money? It goes back to what hon. Kiiza was talking about; financing private institutions and leaving Government institutions in limbo. Why don’t we finance the ministry of cooperatives? Why don’t we give it sufficient capacity in terms of manpower and in terms of funds so that they can supervise and audit cooperatives that are supposed to be set up at that parish level; so that we do not have farmers losing money in the SACCOs that Government has put in place -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, my one hour is up. I am going to allow three people, and I already know them. I am going to reduce the time to two minutes to try and accommodate all of them. I will allow the hon. Akol, hon. Katwiremu and the Leader of the Opposition.

12.58
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last financial year, we allocated Shs 1.7 billion towards the construction of a market in Southern Sudan, Juba in particular. We would like to know the progress of this market because the statement here is silent about it.

Two, the Soroti Food Factory. In the last two financial years, we as Parliament have allocated Shs 10 billion, five per year, but to-date, I do not see anything on the ground and yet Shs 10 billion has been allocated. This financial year, the national budget framework paper had Shs 5 billion allocated to this factory, but I am surprised to see that it has been reduced to Shs 2billion. I would like an explanation, first of all, on what the Shs 10 billion has done on the Soroti Food Factory, and why the allocation for this year has been reduced from Shs 5 to Shs 2billion. 

Thirdly, on the issue of the youth. The criteria for qualification to get a loan. According to the report of the chairperson on page 25, you need to have a certificate from Enterprise Uganda and yet this report also acknowledges that, actually, these youth get training even from other institutions.
 
Mr Speaker, I want to recommend to the minister that for the time being, let the activities of Enterprise Uganda be suspended until we have clear guidelines on who qualifies for this money, and how they are going to conduct this training. This follows what the minister stated here that actually, the training is haphazard. He has given evidence to this fact and even what is going on right now in Agago and Pader. That is my recommendation. I conclude.

1.00
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman and his committee for this report and I want to comment on three issues.

On page 11, there are key sector challenges and there are some agencies, which are named, which should be under the Ministry of Trade and Industry, but they find their homes elsewhere, for example, UDC, Investment Authority, SACCOs and cooperatives, and so on. I think there are various functions scattered all over various ministries and this is where we need a function for long-term planning. We could consolidate agencies and functions, which are of similar nature, under relevant ministries for easy supervision. For example, UDC; there has been times when Government wants to help out on some starting industries because the investors may not want to go into that sector - maybe it is expensive and Government may consider it of a strategic nature and you can use UDC as an investment vehicle; you grow an industry and when it is of age you can offload either to the stock exchange or hand it over to people who can roll it over at a commercial rate. 

So, I think it is important for us as Government to debate this matter and rationalisation these agencies under the relevant ministries. There is another agency, which does a similar job to Uganda Industrial Research Institute, that is National Council for Science and Technology, and this council is under Ministry of Finance. If you read the Acts which brought these two institutions into being, they are almost the same. So, one wonders what the council for science and technology is doing under Ministry of Finance -(Member timed out_)

1.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg for some extra time because I know cooperatives well and I know that there is no country, which has developed without using cooperatives. In that regard, I would request for some more time. 

Hon. Members may recall that the war in Luwero was funded by co-operatives and without them, the war would never have been won: West Mengo, East Mengo, Masaka and even the Cooperative Bank, Banyankore Kweterana and so on. These were the funders of that war. It is very unfortunate that when we came to power, we destroyed them instead of nurturing them –(Interjections)– maybe because they can finance a war, that is why Government feared them.

I have a live experience from Bugisu Cooperative Union. When I read the papers recently, there was compensation to Banyankore Kweterana of Shs 1.2 billion. Who took that money? I am sure there are people who belonged to Banyankore Kweterana. Have you taken interest to find out who took that Shs 1.2 billion? 

The commissioner for cooperatives exists for only one cooperative, which is Bugisu Cooperative Union, which he wants to destroy as soon as possible – even hon. Kamuntu knows what I am talking about. We have been with him in the struggle for cooperatives; he knows where we began and where we should end. The only problem is that he is not telling the truth. 

When you look at page 55, No.2 is Soroti Food Factory in 2010/11 received Shs 5 billion and now you are proposing Shs 2 billion. Hon. Members, I want you to go to Soroti Food Factory to see if you can see the  Shs 5 billion in it. 

MR OCHOLA: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. The information I want to give is that there is only a signpost of that food factory. I have been chairman of the Soroti district local government and we have had a number of meetings on that matter. So, I request the minister to tell this august House what plans they have for that place. Down there, it was portrayed as if the local governments of Teso were given Shs 5billion and they failed to utilise it yet they never received that money. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you can see for yourself that before you appropriate this money, at least we should know who took the Shs 5 billion. 

Establishment of SACCOs in sub-counties cost Shs 20 billion and another Shs 10 billion is needed for this year. Increasing the capacity of SACCOs cost Shs 13 billion and then there is another one called, “SACCOs Capacity Strengthening”. What kind of English is this? We really need to dissect this budget –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Give him some more two minutes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We passed the budget under fisheries; we included money for Ministry of Fisheries and for agriculture - you remember the loan of SDR 34 million? Where is this money? So, unless we wake up, we are finished!

Mr Speaker, there is no way you can form cooperatives from the top; cooperatives should be formed from the bottom (Applause) If you want to start them from the top, then you have failed from the first step. That is why Bugisu Cooperative Union, which the minister wants dead - when I became chairman, I found that the union had debts of Shs 1.7 billion and we paid them within that year and we generated cash of Shs 2.5 billion. 

You can ask anybody you want. When the President came there he asked, “Where is Bugisu getting all this money”? And they resolved to sack Nandala immediately. Imagine, instead of coming to support me, they choose to sack me. They instituted a commission of inquiry and the commission had nothing to put up. They only stated that there was politics in BCU and that is the reason Nandala should be sacked. 

Let me tell you the history of Bugisu Cooperatives Union. Since the 60s, the leadership of the union has always been that if the political leadership is of UPC, then you would get a member of DP as the chairman; but when we are dealing with BCU matters, we keep our politics out of the union.

So, if President Museveni thinks that it should be NRM Members to lead it, yet they are the ones who have been pulling it down, then there is a problem. The report said that I should be sacked and the reason I was being sacked was that the union was doing very well (Laughter) 

One of the recommendations given is that Government should come in and help BCU to move to the next stage. The Bagisu are saying, “Why don’t you support Banyankore Kweterana, Teso Cooperatives and West Mengo, which are dead, instead of supporting one which is alive and moving on?”

Instead of fighting us, you should come to Bugisu to learn how we have sustained it. Prof. Kamuntu, you know the history and you can tell how we did it. First of all, we have commitment; two, the farmers can be talked to. In fact, the people have no bargaining power, they will always be cheated. And that is the gold of Bugisu; we call it black gold, just as the Bunyoro has oil. West Nile has tobacco; that is their gold. Buganda has Kibooko; that is their gold. Some of you have tea and cotton - (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank very much, hon. Members, for the general debate. It was very light; I enjoyed it.  I now revert to the ministers. I will give you 25 minutes to share as you wish. Twenty-five minutes in total then I will come to the chair. 

1.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr David Wakikona): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Trade for what he has submitted and my colleague that side, for the responses. 

Most of my responses will be on trade. Wildlife and antiquities will be handled by the responsible minister. We have divided trade, industry and cooperatives into two aspects. I will answer one aspect of trade and cooperatives. My colleague will answer the industry aspect. 

The first one, where the youth training was brought forward. Obviously, these fees you raised or indicated in the policy statement of Shs 5,000 and Shs 50,000 - I think this is an idea which the Ministry of Finance will answer to because obviously, they are the ones handling Enterprise Uganda; for us we handle MTAC. The Minister of Finance is here. I have already told him to give a polish-up on this aspect of Enterprise Uganda charging money and he is willing to clarify.

There was a statement concerning Uganda Export Promotion Board, which was to inform Parliament regularly on what they are doing in order to promote the business. I have noted this and we are going to direct Uganda Export Promotion Board to be informing Parliament regularly concerning what you have suggested. 

There was a question concerning silos and warehouses. We have already indicated that we are going to put up 10 silos in various areas -[Hon. Members: “Where?”]- I will begin with Mbale -(Laughter)-  There is one in Mbale, one in Masindi, one in Hoima and - all these we are going to put in the 10 areas which produce grain.

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. Is it in order for the honourable minister, to come and inform this House that they are going to put up silos on land which we do not know? Whose land? Where are the land titles? Is it in order for him to come and inform this House that they are just going to dump warehouses and silos? 

MR WAKIKONA: I was counting areas. I had not gone to lands. But we shall put one in Gulu, one in Arua, one in Soroti, one in Mbale, one in Iganga, one in Mityana, one in Kyenjonjo, one in Bushenyi and one in Kabale. Those are the silos. But associated with these, in every region, we are going to put warehouses. These will total to 180. We have a branch in each area. For example, Mbale will cover most of the Elgon, Kapchorwa area. Every area will have warehouses. 

The Warehouse Receipt System, which you talked about, is already working in some areas. It will continue working in all the warehouses because we believe – like now, there is no way of getting somebody and you say, “Give us the produce and we save our people” when you do not even have a place to keep it. Upon completion of these warehouses and silos, we will have strengthened the use of the receipt system. We are going to make sure this increases capacity in all areas where the farmers will use the system to approach lenders for funding to make sure they continue production.
 
Other markets; obviously, these are things we liberalised ourselves. There was this query concerning buying of gardens and we are trying to fight it. But even last time when I was a Minister for Northern Uganda, it was a very common thing there and people would come in and buy gardens. There was no way of telling a farmer that, “Do not sell a garden,” because he would ask, “What do I do with it?” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you do not finish all the time.  

MR WAKIKONA: That is what happened; but now we are trying to stop it.

How are SACCOS doing their work? They are scattered. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives answers -(Ms Alaso rose_)- Mr Speaker, can you allow me to allow her?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is your time –

MR WAKIKONA: Okay, time. Sister, sit down. (Laughter) All that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives does is to certify the SACCOS - but we monitor them! All the financing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, point of procedure.

MR WAKIKONA: It will increase on my time. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really appreciate you sparing these moments of the House. Just help me understand what is going on. The House is about to make a very important decision; a decision which has a cost implication of about Shs 100 billion to the taxpayers of this country. Those warehouses the honourable minister is talking about have that cost implication. I am reliably informed that the committee asked for the land titles and the procurement plans, and they were not availed. This House is being moved to a point where it is going to allocate Shs 100 billion of taxpayers’ money to an institution over whom Government does not even own the land titles.

I would like, for the record of this House, if it is procedurally okay, that the minister is put on record that he has the land titles so that we do not end up spending Shs 100 billion on ghost - you know, anybody’s anything like we did with the Civil Service College! Mr Speaker, I was in this House when Parliament insisted –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the point is made.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. 

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, sister. I do not see the Shs 100 billion, but we have Shs 2.1 billion for buying land. These are the areas I have counted. That is what we are going to do so that we put these buildings there. 

Where do the youth belong? The youth belong everywhere. You cannot say I am doing this for the elderly in a ministry. You have to deal with the whole group - the disabled, the youth. So, you find youth in every ministry; they are considered and are handled in that manner. 

The contribution to international organisations. Obviously, this is handled centrally by the Ministry of Finance. You said we have not contributed 1.5 million and, therefore, we have missed 4.5 billion. Obviously we are aware of this. We have taken it to the Ministry of Finance and they have assured us that they will contribute the money soon. 

What are we doing about Ugandans in Sudan? We have just formed a group; it has started working. Ours is to make sure that we put these people together; Sudanese and Ugandans working together to make sure that whatever happened in the past does not happen again. This committee was put up a week ago and work is ongoing.

Hon. Members you should know that we are new people; we begin by handling matters, which have been pending. Hon. Wadri knows this. 

How many cooperatives are working now? There are over 2,000. When you talk of cooperatives, talk of SACCOS and the major cooperatives like BCU. From the handover report I got, the registered ones are 11,000. However, 2,000 are active and we follow them up.

The market in Southern Sudan; this was handled by foreign affairs. They will report on it soon. 

The fruit factory; five billion was allocated under PRDP; we gave it to Ministry of Finance. Ministry of Finance, you will give the details on how this money has been spent. (Laughter) They told me to allocate the money to Teso for a fruit factory, and when I allocated the money, Ministry of Finance held it. So, now if the signpost is there - (Laughter) 

Somebody brought up the matter of BCU. I am a member of BCU and I didn’t want to get involved, but there is confusion in BCU. If we are to avoid the confusion by all the producers, we must find a neutral place. There is no reason as to why we should have one section fighting another. We members – the one who said he was chairman knows that I am a very good coffee producer - have told them that if we have confusion within our organisation, we shall not move. 

But I am surprised you have details of a report which I don’t have. (Laughter) The chairman must go - you are using a method which is very funny. I don’t have that report, but I will find out where you got it from. We were told that when The Red Pepper wants you to say something, they write saying they have seen something and then you tell the truth. That inquiry report was supposed to be out on the 17th August and the general meeting was supposed to be on 25th August, but the ministry cancelled the annual general meeting because BCU lost a former senior worker, the late Wanendeya. So, they did not want to meet when people were mourning. It was the same day they buried Wanendeya that we were supposed to have the annual general meeting. 

May I now call upon my colleague to answer the industry issue? Thank you very much.

1.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (Mr James Mutende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to be very brief in my responses. A few issues came up regarding Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI) where we talked of the staff level being short; 105 staff. 

First of all, let us understand the mandate of UIRI. UIRI’s mandate is to do with research and development, and sourcing appropriate technology and enabling business to grow. One of the things they are doing right now is business incubation. 

That is a big mandate. In fact, in other countries, institutions of their nature have a lot of staff. At UIRI we are less than 100 right now. But if you look at South Africa, they have 700 employees. Our neighbour Kenya has 400. Tanzania has 150. So, it is necessary for us to build the capacity of UIRI and that is why we are asking for more staff. This also answers the question that was raised by a Member who said UIRI should be involved in value addition. UIRI cannot be involved in value addition. UIRI innovates and develops the product and then rolls it out, and that is why we talk about business incubation centres. 

On the issue of UNBS - this came up twice, but in the interest of time I will combine my responses. Uganda National Bureau of Standards is supposed to check the quality of goods manufactured locally, and those that are imported. 

Most of what was raised concerned imported goods from China where shoe soles fall off while you are walking. However, there are issues which are even more serious than that. For instance, the report touches on the issue of imported cars from Japan. 

Right now we are endangered because of the cars that are coming in en masse, when we know that they came from an area where there was a nuclear spill over. That is extremely dangerous! It is much more dangerous than the shoes you are talking about. That is why we are proposing for the pre-verification of conformity project to enable UNBS outsource this pre-inspection from the countries of origin so that we can protect ourselves from importation of some of this.    

They also have a capacity problem. As a matter of fact, UNBS is supposed to be all over the country but they are only represented regionally. Even at the ports of entry, out of 54 ports of entry into this country, UNBS is only at about 18 of them. So, it is about capacity. And smugglers are very smart. Some goods come through the lake and we don’t have the capacity to police all of them. 

So, we are talking about a capacity problem. Otherwise, UNBS has the competence; it has the capacity but the numbers are fewer now. We are conscious of this but we need to be helped on some of those. 

Still on UNBS; on the issue of adulteration of fuel; again, this is because of capacity. In Kampala alone, even if we deployed UNBS staff as they are right now to carry out only one function of monitoring petrol stations, they cannot manage. That is why we are talking about increasing their budget and enabling them to employ more staff, and also to have appropriate equipment. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I remember that in the last financial year, we gave Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) US$ 7 million to build its capacity. That was when we raised issues of lack of standards. At that time, the honourable Minister of State was not in the House -   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural point? 

DR EPETAIT: Is it proper for us to proceed with a misinformation from the Minister of State that UNBS has no capacity, and yet we gave them enough money to build the capacity? In fact, it was the amount that they required. How can we be misled? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister. 

MR MUTENDE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are many aspects of capacity; human resource is only one and equipment is another. Certainly, in terms of equipment, they have upgraded quite a bit and they can test this fuel which they couldn’t do earlier on. But I am talking of being available in terms of human capacity, and that is why we are talking about recruiting more staff; we are very thinly spread.  So, that is regarding UNBS. 

Now, someone mentioned the issue of the textile policy. Right now our ministry is developing a policy for every product that is on the market, including a cereals policy. We have recently finished the sugar policy; we are working on the leather policy. So, all products must have a guiding policy. That is our principle. So, when we say we have begun implementing the National Textile Policy, it is not as if it is a new thing that textile is being considered for the first time, but we are simply saying right now, do we have a policy to guide the  production and increase productivity at farm level? We are talking about emphasising value addition where we shall even have jobs created for the youth, and we are talking about guiding Government on procurement to emphasise procuring local materials so that we boost the local industry. So, it is not really misplaced. 

The last one is to just give a compliment to what came out on UDC. I think at cabinet level we have more or less agreed that UDC is going to be the intervention vehicle for strategic investment in sectors that are strategically important for our economy, but which are not very attractive to the private sector, so that the government can co-invest by initially putting down the upfront capital investment and then invite the private sector to participate. In point, for instance, are the phosphate industries in Tororo and the ironore in Muko, which is not attractive right now to the private sector because initial investment is very heavy. But Government can put the initial investment and then divest itself out in a systematic manner.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prof. Kamuntu, they have finished all your time. I will give you seven minutes.

1.35
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief and precise.

I would like to thank the chairperson of the sessional committee on our sector, for presenting the report of the committee on our ministerial policy statement. And I would really like to thank the entire committee Members because the meeting we had with them was very constructive and we agreed with even the hon. Kevin Taaka, the shadow minister. We appreciated because we agreed that Uganda is a country gifted by nature; a country which Churchill referred to as the “Pearl of Africa” and it is a country where the Ministry of Tourism should be central in its economic transformation. 

I concur with the committee’s view regarding the funding challenges of the ministry. We inherited a situation where, as pointed out in this report on page 37, allocation of budgets was 0.7 percent of the national budget over the years -[Ms Alaso: “You were the Minister of Finance, now what are you saying?”]– (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister, proceed.

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Mr Speaker, you will protect me from –(Laughter)– because I am just responding to a ministerial statement and I don’t want to be diverted.  

Now, as a separate ministry, the budget for the ministry is now 0.14 percent of the total budget. Because by the time the ministry was split, budgetary discussions were too advanced and the budget they gave to the ministry was simply the allocation of a directorate of a department within the ministry. Once you separate it without additional funding, we end up with 0.14 percent of the total budget and this level does not clearly reflect the ministry’s contribution to the economy, and we agree with the committee that this thing must really be changed. 

The committee has rightly highlighted key achievements of the ministry during the financial year 2010/2011. And we agree with the observation made by the chairman and the committee, and we welcome the committee’s recommendations including, among other things, the need for additional funding for the ministry and the ministry welcomes the committee’s recommendations on areas that require follow up, and we will take necessary measures where possible to implement the recommendations of the committee. 

Now, Mr Speaker, the ministry was split and the budget we have is clearly not adequate. The creation of a new ministry requires, as we would expect, additional members of staff; it requires administrative structures to be separated from the original ministry; it also requires more space, which we are currently sharing with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, and it is absolutely necessary for the ministry to have its own home. This will require renting a building, having furniture and associated costs.  When we do this, there is additional Shs 4,670,275,000 that we have indicative figures that would require us to move from where we are to a new home as a fully-fledged ministry.

Accordingly, several measures have been proposed and if we are going to deliver quality services, which we are really committed to doing, the budget statement that freezes the purchase of Government vehicles et cetera, except for critical areas as hospitals, Police and security, should be re-examined for a new ministry which has just come into existence - if you use a blanket cover on this statement of the Minister of Finance, we will have a problem. 

I want to make one point clear that should put to rest the importance of tourism because even in the national development plan of the country, tourism is identified as a primary growth sector for the economy, as a driving force for socio-economic transformation of the economy. Tourism has a multiplier trickledown effect. Every tourist who arrives in the country pays a visa fee at the entry point, and that visa fee is an income to all sorts of people at the airport. The moment the tourist moves into a vehicle to a hotel, all the drivers, tour guides and tour operators get an income.  The moment he stays in the hotel, accommodation, food, drinks, entertainment all that is an income to Ugandans. The moment you buy food from the local market, even the local producer has an income. In fact, the calculation we have is that for every tourist job, you create 13 other jobs for the rest of the industries. That is just to show the Members the importance of tourism to the development of our sector.  

Well, due to time constraint, I would like to conclude by addressing the issue of encroachment on protected areas and mitigating conflict between human beings and wildlife. Protected areas are a heritage for us as the human race and we must really protect them. 

Hon. Gilbert Olanya has made a comment on my recent visit to Amuru and Adjumani. I want to confirm to you and this House that the situation we have in Adjumani and Amuru is a historical one. But the protected area is rightly located in Adjumani District. We went with GPS; this is a machine that helps you measure where you are and you can transpose where you are standing on the map –(Laughter)- and when that was done, it just showed the truth of where these reserves are located. We have had a little difficulty with hon. Gilbert Olanya because he seems to have mobilised women. When some people begun to speak, the women almost stripped naked as –(Interjections)– yes, I am describing it.

In my recent field visits to these counties, I advised the two communities that it doesn’t matter where the protected area is; if it is where it is, the boundaries of each district must start where the boundary of the protected area starts. So, I am not going to engage in inter district boundary conflict of any nature. My interest and mandate is simply to protect the protected area as provided for by law. Therefore, when people from Amuru settle in a protected area in Adjumani District and they continue to maintain loyalty to Amuru, it is the business of Amuru to settle. My interest, and I am sure the interest of this House, is that these protected areas must be defended and they must be protected.

In conclusion, I want to agree and commend this august House for the constructive discussions and comments and I want to pledge before you that we are single-minded in our commitments to move this country to the next level; from the third world to a middle income country, using tourism as one of the driving forces. I, therefore, concur with the committee for the approval of the budget of the ministry and its associated institutions for the fiscal year 2011/2012. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you have three minutes. Make your prayer for adoption and we conclude. 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I understand there are issues of finance, but that is not my business. There are issues that Members raised – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, allow the finance minister to make a short statement. 

1.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, this issue of the Soroti Fruit Factory was handled in full detail with the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and it will come. So, I pray for the indulgence of this House that we handle it when that committee brings its report. 

Secondly, Enterprise Uganda; I want to beg this House to allow me come with a full comprehensive statement on this animal called Enterprise Uganda so that we do not handle it in piecemeal. 

As for the issue of what is taking place in Pader, I promise you, Mr Speaker, that I will be coming back to the Floor of this Parliament this afternoon, to tell you what is happening up there and what corrective action is being taken. Thank you. 

1.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Stephen Kasaija) Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are issues that Members raised and the minister has responded to them. But on the issue of border conflicts of UWA and the citizens, the minister has talked about it briefly, but I can assure you that the committee is moving because we have cases where UWA has overstepped its boundaries. We shall move as a committee. 

On the Sudan market, the foreign affairs ministry will have to answer, but the information we got is that this was given as a donation to the Government of Southern Sudan. 

I thank the Members of the committee, the ministers and staff for work well done and allow me, Mr Speaker, to make some changes. I am reliably informed that for the ministry of tourism, wildlife and heritage, the correct name should be the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities but we were misguided during our interactions. So, we cannot vote under a wrong ministry. Hence, I request that we put it under the right heading. 

I conclude by moving under Rule 177(2) that the report of the committee be adopted. Thank you. 

MR EKANYA: I have an amendment on the recommendation on page 17, on border markets. Mr Speaker, with your permission, I can read what the committee has stated. “The committee recommends that the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives expedites the negotiation with district councils, in the identified areas, to provide land for this market before the funds are released.” 

I wish to move an amendment in addition to that that, “The committee recommends that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives expedites the negotiation with the district councils, in the identified areas, to provide land for these markets or negotiates with the Uganda Land Commission and the government departments that own land in this area before the funds are released.”
 
The justification is that I come from Tororo County and in Malaba, where we have thousands of acres of government land that Government can acquire to build this border market. This market was a directive of the President, as a result of the September riots in 2009. 

I have talked to the Commissioner General, Uganda Prisons and he allowed part of the Uganda Prisons land, which is on the border, to be used to build a border market to create employment for the youth of this country. I beg to move. 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Hon. Speaker, we cannot just move like that. We shall take the matter to the committee and hon. Ekanya came to the committee – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you have the prerogative of the committee, you are reporting and concluding. Take a decision. 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, if it is an agreement, let us accept and move by that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Further amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, on the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, on page 3, which talks about the dissemination of the Cooperative Societies Act. The Cooperative Societies Act is in conflict with the Constitution and we need them to urgently bring an amendment Bill. I will give you an example - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, they are proposing a review of the Cooperative Societies Act. Doesn’t that accommodate what you are saying?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, yes you are right, but what they are saying is that the approval and dissemination of the review of the Cooperative Act is ongoing. This is overdue. I think the cooperatives are still delaying the process because they are the beneficiaries. I will give you an example. A commissioner of cooperatives sits on all boards of cooperatives. He draws allowances and whatever, and he is the same person who comes and even investigates what he has been doing. He wants to delay the process so that he benefits. So, we are saying, this Act should be amended as quickly as possible. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what is the amendment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The amendment is that within one month -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The review of the Co-operative Societies Act, which is ongoing should be -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Should be brought within one month - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman.

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, there is another clarification on page 17. It should be Adjumani in Adjumani District and not Nimule. It was an oversight by our clerk. It should be Adjumani on page 17 on the border markets.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, come back to page 3 now. Do you agree to one month?

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I think we need time - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Or maybe we could take the opinion of the Government -

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: And we give time maybe through you, Mr Speaker, to the Chief Whip and –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the government respond. 

1.54
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Mr Chairman, I think the Leader of the Opposition is very much familiar with the process of legislation. You cannot tie a period for an amendment of such an Act without considering the stages it goes through right from drafting, through to Cabinet, to the committee and this House. I think what is important is that we need an amendment of that Act and the committee should state it accordingly -(Interjections)- whether it is in this session or not, so that it becomes part of the business rather than tie the government on something that you cannot afford.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we say within this financial year?

MR NASASIRA: Yeah.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you are aware of the law called the Anti-Money Laundering Bill. It has taken years and so, if you are talking about cooperatives thriving, the earlier you work on this the better. If Government believes it cannot do it, then we should bring a Private Member’s Bill. For one reason, it has no implication –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it does not preclude you, does it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yeah. So, what we could agree on with the Government Chief Whip is that, at least within the next six months we should have the law in place.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is six months fair? 

MR NASASIRA: I think we can do it in terms of the session and we put it on the business of Government - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Within this financial year?

MR NASASIRA: And this law is not going to affect the report on these cooperative unions, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, no, jokes aside. We will have it within the session so that we have time - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question to the report as amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

Congratulations, Mr Chairman and the ministers! Hon. Members, it is coming to 2.00 O’clock and we have lots of businesses to transact and the people in the gallery are interested in a few of them. So, we should be doing that quickly. We are suspending this House to 2.45 p.m. We resume business with the rest of the committees remaining. House suspended.

(The House was suspended at 1.57 p.m.)
 
(On resumption at 2.48 p.m. _)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The only communication is that I am amending the Order Paper, to bring forward the Committee on Social Services to come immediately after Presidential Affairs so that the teachers, who have been here, can be able to listen to what brought them here also. I hope they are still there. After that, we shall return to the Order Paper. Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I get a copy? We have already ruled on the issue of copies, that you take note and make references from your notes, if you have not got a copy. The copies are being run.

2.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Barnabas Tinkasiimire): Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, start by laying the big report on the Table and then you proceed to give an extract of your summary from it. If you have no extra copy, you can still lay it on Table and pick it back.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Sessional Committee on Presidential Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2011/2012.

I hope they are giving honourable members copies. I do not intend to take a lot of your time by reading my summary.

The Committee on Presidential Affairs is mandated by Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, to examine critically, Government recurrent and capital budget estimates, and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House.

In accordance with the above rule, the committee met and discussed the ministerial policy statements for the following votes:

•	Vote 001 - Office of the President
•	Vote 002 - State House
•	Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister
•	Vote 107 - Uganda AIDS Commission
•	Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity
•	Vote 159 = External Security Organisation
•	Vote 122 = Kampala Capital City Authority.

In the main report, details are highlighted. I will beg the indulgence of honourable members that for purposes of time, I only read areas containing performance of various votes for the previous financial year.

Financial year performance of the previous budget for Vote 001 with exception of development expenditure category, which underperformed at 40 percent; and wage and non-wage over performed at 107 percent and 148 percent, respectively.

The over performance of the current expenditure was mainly due to supplementary funding of Shs 16.6 billion that was approved for Vote 001 under Supplementary Schedules No.1 and 2. This is on page 4 of the main report.

On the performance of Vote 002, the development and current expenditure categories for Vote 002 - State House, significantly over performed at 222 percent and 138 percent, respectively. The above over performance was mainly due to supplementary funding for the Shs 15.8 billion development and Shs 79.14 billion recurrent, which was released to State House during the period under review. This appears on page 12.

The performance of Vote 107 appears on page 16 with exception of the non-wage component, which performed slightly above programmed at 109 percent; and development and wage component under performed at 59 percent and 64 percent, respectively.

The substantial under performance by the development budget was mainly due to non-release of the donor component of development budget. The under performance of the wage bill was attributed to some staff that left the institution, creating gaps in human resource, while a slight over performance by the non-wage category resulted from virements and reallocations within the vote to cater for the unforeseen shortages.

Vote 112 - Its performance appears on page 19. All expenditure categories for Vote 112 under performed. Wage, non-wage and development under performed at 57 percent, 62 percent and 39 percent, respectively. Under performance under the wage budget was due to the difficulty and failure to attract key technical staff, due to low pay offered and the risky nature of employment.

Similarly, the zero release to the directorate during the third quarter explained the under performance of the non-wage and development budget.

Vote 159, whose performance appears on page 22 of the main report. With exception of the wage budget that performed satisfactorily at 100 percent, other budget lines performed below the programme. Such budget lines include non-wage and development categories that performed at 91 percent and 40 percent, respectively. The above under performance was mainly attributed to non release of funds to ESO as approved by Parliament.

The performance of Vote 003 appears on page 25 of the main report. The wage and development budgets underperformed at 80 percent and 91 percent, respectively, with non-wage over performing at 118 percent. The under performance in the wage bill is explained by the vacancies that remained unfilled during the financial year, and those that had been filled, but had not yet accessed the payroll. The development budget underperformed due to non release of Shs 9.4 billion balance on the development budget as approved by the Parliament, while non-wage over performed due to supplementary funding of Shs 5 billion that was released to the Office of the Prime Minister under Disaster Management to cater for the Bududa landslide disaster.

Vote 122 appears on page 37 of the report. You will realise that we could not ascertain the performance of KCCA, because it came into place this year in March and according to the Act creating the authority, we could not have any review of the previous performance. Hon. Members, you can read some of the achievements that have been attained on page 38 and planned outputs. 

Mr Speaker, I beg that for us to move faster, allow me to move to the general observations.

The committee was concerned with the unending supplementary requests by State House. Year in and year out, State House has submitted supplementary requests to Parliament that far exceed the amount appropriated. The committee observed that most of these activities are neither emergencies nor unforeseen activities that should always be budgeted for during the budget process. When you go to page 15 of the main report, you will see a number of requested supplementary budgets over a period of time.

Provision of office accommodation to RDCs and their deputies remains a challenge in light of rising rent charges and absence of rentable premises in very many localities. There is also a shortage of transport facilities for RDCs, which affects field monitoring and mobilisation programmes. This appears on page 8 of the main report. 

The committee observed that whereas Article 203(2) provides that for a person to be appointed as a residence district commissioner, he or she shall be a citizen of Uganda, and qualified to be a Member of Parliament. RDCs have continued to be appointed, in some instances, without regard to this provision of the Constitution. As a consequence, their role of monitoring the implementation of Government programmes has been constrained.

The committee also observed that ISO has outstanding arrears, which have been accumulating over the years due to inadequate budget funding. For instance, arrears increased from Shs 7.0 billion in the last financial year to Shs 10 billion this financial year. Operations of ISO were being bogged down because of combining them with other votes’ functions. 

Our committee also observed that some intelligence officers at all levels were increasingly becoming undisciplined and untouchable, doing this with total impunity. Some were getting involved in politics and writing biased reports. All this is on page 9 of our report.

The committee also observed that DISOs and GISOs were not well facilitated and they lived in poor conditions, which forced them to use illegal means for survival like blackmail. This could compromise the country’s security since they had a lot of information on how the country’s security is handled.

The committee also observed that there are 62 Presidential Advisors and their assistants who are paid under U1 scale. However, their job description, academic qualifications and expertise were not clearly defined and could not be linked to performance output.

We also observed that there is apparent weakness in monitoring, coordination and timely detection of external threats. Inadequate funding to the security agencies has impacted on these operations.

The committee also observed that the recruitment method in the Ministry of the Presidency was not clear; people were being handpicked and their outputs were difficult to measure. There are 505 unfilled posts, with a workforce of only 335 personnel out of the approved 860 posts.

The committee also observed that the Uganda Media Centre is understaffed with only 22 members of staff. It was unable to procure technical equipment required for effective execution of its functions due to non-availability of funds, leading to a funding gap of Shs 0.15 billion. The Media Centre does not have branches upcountry, which makes it hard for it to disseminate information.

The staffing structure of State House still had unfilled posts, which equal to 273 as opposed to 766 approved. Some key posts still remain vacant as opposed to the committee’s previous year’s recommendation to have them filled, given the sensitivity of these jobs such as the senior engineering technician in the Flight Unit Department. 

Our committee also observed that various students were sponsored to various institutions by State House. However, the selection criteria followed were not clear.

On the Uganda AIDS Commission, our committee observes that there was an upward trend in the prevalence of HIV/AIDS in Uganda among married couples and the youth, especially boda boda riders. The commission is underfunded and donors were not providing funds on time, which was hampering their work.

The staffing level of the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity is still lacking despite the committee’s recommendations in the last financial year. Since 36.5 percent of the approved posts were still vacant, the directorate needs to fill all these posts. 
	
The Directorate of Ethics and Integrity lacked basic utilities and could not operate, thus inhibiting it from fulfilling its mandate. The directorate also needs its own offices in light of the increase in rent.

The committee observed that Government had set up a cabinet sub-committee to handle the Anti-Homosexuality Bill, whose findings were not yet available to the committee. 

Our committee observed that on 8th June, His Excellency, the President created four new portfolios under the Office of the Prime Minister, namely: The Office of the 3rd Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business; Minister for Karamoja Affairs; Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs; and Minister of State for Teso Affairs. However, all the operations of the above offices remain unfunded to the tune of Shs 4.31 billion, as if they were created to hoodwink voters. (Laughter)

Our committee observed that the resettlement of the final IDPs is long overdue given the fact that relative peace now prevails in the region. It also noted that the country was continuing to suffer from natural disasters such as drought, which could be prevented through better disaster preparedness policies.

Our committee observed that there are numerous posts in the Office of the Prime Minister, which are still unfilled.

The committee also observed that the tractor hire scheme was not efficient since the tractors provided are poorly managed and insufficient to satisfy the needs of the public.

Whereas the committee agrees that digital migration is important and that the Government should fund it to beat the 15-months regional deadline, there are many irregularities that the committee noted in UBC -(­Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please close in four minutes.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Our committee noted that His Excellency appointed the executive director for KCCA and she is doing a lot of work. For instance, she has successfully evicted the former mayor from Plot 1 Sezibwa Road –(Laughter)- and also, Gen. Tinyefunza from the KCCA House –(Laughter)- on Plot 2, Mabua Road in Kololo. The committee also noted that KCCA inherited several problems from the former KCC.

Please allow me to go straight to our recommendations. You will discover that the recommendations are within, but my summary is at least - if you have a pen, you can note our recommendations.

Our committee recommends that State House should lead by example and stop this habitual financial indiscipline and spend within the confines of the appropriated funds, especially given the current bad economic situation. (Applause)

The committee recommends that there should be better facilitation for RDCs and their deputies. 

In light of the many graduates flocking the streets looking for jobs, the committee recommends that RDCs and their deputies should submit their respective academic papers, verified by UNEB and the National Council for Higher Education, to the Minister for the Presidency for onward transmission to the President. This should be done within a period of three months, and those who shall not have done so should be laid off to give way for qualified persons. (Applause)

The committee recommends that the Government should expedite the process of clearing the outstanding arrears for ISO.

Our committee also recommends that ISO should have an independent vote status like ESO to enable it fulfil its mandate. 

The committee recommends that the minister responsible for appointing security officers should endeavour to take appropriate action to address the ever increasing indiscipline.

The committee recommends that the GISOs and DISOs should be well facilitated, bearing in mind the fact that they work hard to maintain security in the country. 

The portfolio of various posts of Presidential Advisors should be re-evaluated with a view of scaling down the number, as a means of reducing on the costs on public administration while ensuring the quality of personnel in services offered by them to the President.

In addition, the government should streamline its recruitment policy for Presidential Advisors in order to rationalise roles and terms of service.

The committee recommends that the government should prioritise the security sector during its budgetary allocations in order to strengthen it by recruiting more personnel, procuring modern equipment and being vigilant at all times. There should be a clear method of recruiting people in this ministry.

The Uganda Media Centre should be revamped and expanded to have branches upcountry.

The committee recommends that given the high unemployment rate in Uganda, the vacant posts in State House, Office of the Prime Minister and the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity for which finances are appropriated, should be filled.

The committee recommends that beneficiaries of State House sponsorship should be published, indicating names, constituency and district. For purposes of equity, selection should be done bearing in mind constituency representation.

The Uganda AIDS Commission should encourage strategies like ABC and male circumcision that will address all age groups, if the rate of new infections is to be reduced. 

There are many more recommendations. 

For Office of the Prime Minister, we wish to recommend that they should resettle the remaining batch of IDPs. They should also buy and distribute tractors to organised groups, such as the youth and women groups.

Our committee also recommended that an investigation should be carried out by our Committee of Presidential Affairs, on irregularities in UBC with regard to the digital migration project, the capacity of UBC and their properties, and a report be presented to the House within two months.

Our committee recommended that funds should be prioritised in the budget of the Office of the Prime Minister for barazas. The committee recommends re-allocation of Shs 6.3 billion from various vote functions within the PM’s office, cut from workshops and buying new cars, to be re-allocated to fund barazas operations.

Our committee also strongly recommended that Parliament should strongly support the executive director of KCCA with all necessary facilitation to help her perform her duties efficiently and effectively.

The President should also appoint the remaining 10 directors for KCCA and Public Service also quickly approves the KCCA structure and recruits the required staff, to ensure effective and efficient implementation of its programmes.

Our committee recommends that Shs 58 billion, that was discovered on various ghost KCC accounts, should be utilised by KCCA to fund the outstanding obligations that were genuinely incurred by the then KCC.

Our committee also recommends that KCCA should carry out an inventory of all its assets within six months, and a report be submitted to Parliament. 

Our committee recommends an investigation into the current friction between the political and civil servants at KCCA, as well as irregularities in UTODA, and report to the House within a period of four months. 

We had also proposed re-allocations. We proposed that one billion be re-allocated from Vote 001 to Uganda AIDS Commission -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wind up.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Yes, Mr Speaker. Our committee would wish to request that Parliament approves the following estimates for the respective ministries and departments for the financial year 2011/2012: 

Vote 001 - Office of the President
Recurrent expenditure 	Shs 55,309,048,000
Development expenditure	Shs 16,379,571,000

Vote 002 - State House
Recurrent expenditure 	Shs 57,764,526,000
Development expenditure 	Shs 8,880,079,000

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister
Recurrent expenditure 	Shs 26,140,847,000
Development expenditure 	Shs175,451,200,000

Vote 107 - Uganda AIDS Commission
Recurrent expenditure	Shs 5,947,155,000
Development expenditure 	Shs 227,800,000

Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity
Recurrent expenditure	Shs 1,448,882,000
Development expenditure 	Shs 2,210,596,000

Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority
Recurrent expenditure	Shs 63,674,019,279
Development expenditure 	Shs 82,053,499,000

Vote 195- External Security Organisation
Recurrent expenditure	Shs 9,275,270,00
Development expenditure	Shs 442,000,000

I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. You have done a good job! As we agreed on how to proceed, I am going to give 26 minutes to the Opposition ministers to make their rejoinders to the ministerial policy statements. See how to share the 26 minutes.

3.25
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I thank you so much for this opportunity. I would like to thank my honourable colleague and my Chairman of the Presidential Affairs Committee, hon. Tinkasiimire, for his eloquent presentation which I agree -[Mr Amama Mbabazi: “Who are you?”]- Mr Speaker, if the Prime Minister does not know me, then he is in a wrong place. He is what he is because I am; so he should really be able to know me. (Laughter)

I am going to be very brief because my chairman has done a very good job -(Interruption)

MS BUSINGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for a Member to stand up and even refuse to introduce himself for the purposes of the Hansard?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. shadow minister, for the purposes of the Hansard, you could state your portfolio. (Laughter)

MR MPUUGA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Since the Prime Minister has asked, I will answer that I am Shadow Minister for Presidency and Anti-corruption. I think he likes to hear that and the last bit of it especially. 

As I said, my chairperson has done a very good job, so I will be very brief. I know that Article 99 of our Constitution spells out the mandate of the President, which includes, among others, promotion of the welfare of the people of Uganda, as well as protecting the territorial integrity of the country. 

The objectives of the 2011/2012 budget were pro-people on the face. Indeed, it had a lot of slogs about economic growth, job creation and improved service delivery. But while I agree with the recommendations we made as a team in the committee, I made some personal observations on the observations of the committee, which I subscribe to and to which I appended my signature. 

In the previous financial year, we observed some key achievements of the Presidency and the Office of the President in particular. Clearly demarcated were the beautification of Kololo Ceremonial Ground, which was given a very magnificent look. The Presidency organised celebrations for three national days, namely, the 49th Independence celebration, the victory celebrations and the Heroes’ Day celebrations. They supported and financed the National Secretariat for Patriotism Clubs and coordinated patriotism clubs. 

The President procured 60 pick-up vehicles for RDCs and their deputies. They held five investiture ceremonies and awarded medals for various reasons. They renovated several state lodges and maintained them; and procured 113 support vehicles and furniture for state lodges and disseminated the national anti-corruption strategy. 

Hon. Members, I am trying to re-echo the key achievements of the Presidency and struggling to link them to the key objects, for example, of the NDP. I would like to note that –(Mrs Ssentongo rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssentongo, you are ruled out of order. Please continue. 

MR MPUUGA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I wish to report that the same activities have been variously reproduced in this current budget and billions of money has been earmarked for the same. The key achievements of the Presidency for me do not at all rhyme with the constitutional mandate and obligations of the President. Little wonder that last financial year witnessed one of the most historical abuses of executive authority by the Presidency. We witnessed wanton abuse of public funds through procurement that were never sanctioned by Parliament, not forgetting the raiding of the country’s strategic reserves in the name of security among other issues, which occasioned the current economic meltdown.

While Parliament has a duty to facilitate the Presidency and ensuring that the President, as a Fountain of Honour, is portrayed and represented with a befitting image, it is equally important that the President lives by example. In the face of the current economic meltdown –(Interruptions) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member for giving way. Did I hear him use the word, “raiding” of state coffers and if so, may I kindly seek clarification of what he means by raiding and who raided and under what laws the raiding was done?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. Will the time you have given to the shadow ministers to make their responses be compensated if they entertain clarifications now, or we would allow for general response to all those matters at the point when the debate is opened up to the Floor? I just want to be sure that the shadow ministers will have an opportunity to make their statements uninterrupted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This applies to all Members; Backbench and Frontbench. If you are allotted your time and you allow information or points of clarification within your time, that is your time taken.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I was continuing that in the face of the current economic meltdown, we would like to see the Presidency leading by example. It is my considered view that honour comes with responsibility, and as such the Presidency should exhibit sensitivity and responsibility. The bulk of the activities, to which the Presidency seems inclined to, do not in any way promote the welfare of the people of Uganda. It is indeed these very misplaced engagements by the President and the Presidency that have contributed to the worsening welfare of the Ugandan populace. 

For instance, while the President is opposed to salary increment for teachers, he is willing to pay RDCs handsomely; including those whom my chairman talked about, who lack the qualifications. We have been informed in advance that very soon an additional list of advisors is coming to add on the 62 that we know. 

We are not saying that the President should not exercise his executive powers and authority; we are talking about usage and proper allocation of the little resources that we have as a country, so that key national objects are served, especially in the face of the challenges that our people are facing.

This financial year, the Presidency is going to spend Shs 351 million on Presidential awards and of that, Shs 76 million is going to be spent on travel abroad by the Presidential awards committee. What they are going to do abroad, heaven know! This is the kind of waste we are talking about. 

The national budget lays down a number of measures to improve the effectiveness of Government in order to deliver quality services. The following actions were supposed to be effected in relation to the provision of the budget: Fifty percent cut on advertisements, freezing purchasing of vehicles, 30 percent cut on allowances and workshops, seminars and so on. I would like to assure this House that if the Presidency had indeed obeyed this creed, we would have saved Shs 8.4 billion by reducing allowances, workshops, inland travel and all that money wasted that we are talking about.

I would like to submit that while the Presidency has a number of unfunded priorities enlisted in the budget, amounting to Shs 174 billion, out of which Shs 63 billion is planned to implement phase I of preparations for the golden jubilee celebrations for Uganda - we would like to advise that some of these unfunded priorities could as well wait. On this note, Mr Speaker, as I try to wind up, I would like to lay on Table these documents: 

One, is a response to one of the unfunded priorities implied as implementation of the digital migration project amounting to $ 74 million. This project is bedeviled by a lot of problems. I am laying on Table, a letter from the Ministry of Finance, to the effect that the project and the intended funding source/agent has problems and, therefore, is under investigation by the IGG. Also, there is a letter by the Leader of the Opposition, querying the procurement for this project and comparative costs for this project by different bidders. 

On this note, as I lay on Table these documents, I would like to seek the indulgence of this House to strike this project off our budget until investigations are complete in the fraudulent award of this project -(Applause)- including a fresh advertisement for bidders, such that proper procurement guidelines are followed. I know for a fact that a loan can be sought at any one time. Therefore, we should not be in a hurry to borrow at usurious rates, especially procuring a project of this amount when the guidelines for procurement were abused; including, but not limited to the failure of the same company awarded to undertake the national broadband project, which was abused. 

I thank you and I beg to submit. (Applause)

3.42
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have a short time. I am Shadow Minister for Information without National Guidance. I am also speaking as a retired journalist.

I will start by expressing my worry about the siege the media are suffering from the government. Every official of government who speaks has been attacking the media. The President did, the Prime Minister did in this House, and the Minister for ICT did. The media is under siege. The media are referred to as an enemy; as subversive. The media in Uganda are not an enemy, are not subversive and are partners in the development of Uganda. The media are partners in the development of our country. So, we beg our honourable members in Government to treat the media as such. 

I would like to quote a famous American freedom fighter, who was also a president in 1801 and 1809, Thomas Jefferson. He said, I quote: “I would rather live in a country with the media and without a government than live in a country with a government but without the media.” America has been built on that philosophy. That is why America is great. The media should be let to be free so that they can do their work. 

When the NRM Government was in the bush, the media were very supportive of them. Personally, I was one of those who supported the NRM Government very much as a journalist. I even risked my life to go to the bush, to Busunju area, to cover them and the regime of Tito Okello nearly had me. But it was because we supported the NRM. When they came, the media supported the NRM. They sold it to the public; they were partners. Now, they are strange bedfellows. This is because the NRM has changed; because the NRM does not support the interests of the people of Uganda as they used to do. They are serving the interests of a few people. That is why the media are telling them, “You are driving your ki-bus off the road.” 

The media do not create what they report. The media report what they see and what they hear. The media do not create Arinaitwe and a hooded man who goes to Wandegeya and brutalises Dr Kiiza Besigye. It was done by the Police. The media only captured that. You cannot criminalise activities of the media because of capturing what has been seen by everybody. (Applause)

We talked about tourism this morning. You cannot enjoy your tourism if you do not have good governance because the media will expose you, report the wrong things you are doing, and once you send policemen to brutalise people on the streets, destroy the cameras of journalists, including foreigners, then know, you are going to have a bad press and, therefore, the tourists are not going to come.

So, the solution is, be good governors. Follow the rules, be democratic and you are going to enjoy a good press. You will never read about Mauritius, Botswana, and now Ghana, with a bad press. They enjoy a good press because they have good governance; because they are democratic; because they respect the media; and because they value the use of the media. Here, we do not. That is why you will get a bad press. Whether you like it or not, first do it well and the media will support you.

The media have got shortcomings. The journalists are not well-trained; they are not well-paid. Government had a school for media training at UMI, removed it and left it to the private sector. The private sector is doing some work, but the government should return training for postgraduate diplomas in journalism at UMI. It is important for the country to have a good media.

Ownership of the media

The government takes pride that Uganda has many radio and television stations. Granted; but who owns them? (Interjections) Mr Speaker, Wafula Oguttu owns a radio station, which he got before Government changed, when he was still a very good supporter of the Movement. 

Today, Wafula Oguttu cannot get a license for a radio station. Most of the radio stations are owned by people on that side. I can count many of you here who own radio stations, including the Prime Minister. Fortunately, the radio I own allows everybody to talk. But the radios of our colleagues in NRM that are scattered upcountry will not allow us to speak freely even if we pay for airtime. (Interjections) During campaigns you did not allow us. 

Therefore, you cannot say we are proud of having a liberalised media which is owned by a few individuals on one side, who do not allow all to use the media as the law requires. 

Ownership of radio stations is very important. Seventy percent of Ugandans depend on radio as a source of information and news, but radio stations are owned by only NRM people.

We also do not support UBC to be the sole distributor of the signal. We must liberalise. The practice in the region is that there are other players. Kenya has three; Rwanda two; Tanzania three. We should also not have one, but two or three. 

I would like to urge the Minister of Information and National Guidance; let us run UBC as a business. UBC can make money, but it is run as a department of Government and it is not useful. It is not making money. It takes money from the taxpayer when it should be making money on its own.

Access to information

A few of us in this House know that Uganda has a law which operationalises Article 41 of our Constitution that we have access to information in Government hands as and when we want it, unless that information jeopardises the security of the country. That law was made several years ago, but it has not been operationalised. People cannot access information. There is no organisation which has been given that responsibility to make sure the law is operationalised.

I would like to ask Government and the Minister of Information to please operationalise the access to information law, so that people can get access to information and help the President with tackling corruption. Why should our President go to Rwanda and cry about thieves in his Government when the media could stop them by accessing such information? Hon. Minister, we want you to operationalise this law. 

We, the Opposition, do not recognise the function of national guidance and patriotic clubs. National guidance and patriotic clubs are partisan issues. In this budget, they are asking for Shs 10 billion for patriotic clubs and national guidance. National guidance is partisan because there is nobody in FDC or in the Opposition who is going to attend those patriotic clubs and national guidance of yours. 

We want national guidance and patriotic clubs to be taken to the NRM Secretariat. It is an ideological thing. Let the NRM brainwash their own people in their own party, using their own funds. They should not use my taxpayers’ money. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I had given you 26 minutes and the 26 minutes are now over. 

3.53
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much. When I talk about special regions, Mr Speaker, your constituency in Northern Uganda falls under that category. This is the Opposition response to the ministerial policy statement on special regions in the financial year 2011/2012. I will try to go through it briefly. 

I thank you, for this opportunity to table our views and proposals in respect of special regions. The NRM Cabinet today, includes ministers in charge of the following special regions: Northern Uganda, Luweero Triangle, Karamoja, Teso, Bunyoro and Kampala.

Each of these special regions is represented by one minister of state for Government, except for Karamoja which has a state minister as well as a full cabinet minister. So, you can see the portfolio I am carrying and yet there are many ministers on the other side.

It is these special regions that I am responsible for as shadow minister and all these regions, except Kampala, have presented their ministerial policy statements to the Office of the Prime Minister.  

I want to touch on very few issues because of time.  Policy No.12 provides for balanced and equitable development and requires the state to adopt an integrated and coordinated planning approach; to take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas; and to take special measures in favour of development of the least developed areas, the special regions. 

I only want to go to the conclusion and then lay the report on Table.
 
In conclusion, I feel Government should recommit itself to these special regions and provide the necessary funds rather than relegating funding to foreigners. Without this, we have little faith that Shs 145 billion requested for by the Office of the Prime Minister for special regions, will touch the hearts of the intended locals in a meaningful way, because of our memories, which are still very fresh, of endless financial scandals involving public funds meant for special regions that are being mismanaged in the Office of the Prime Minister.

Mr Speaker, we also have new portfolios which were created recently, and which do not have a budget line. They do not have funding. We are saying, why not bring all of these portfolios into one, under special regions, such that we do not have duplication? Because, some of these ministries, like my committee chairman said earlier on in our report, we do not see why they were created. If they cannot do anything for the people at the grassroots, what is the meaning of having them if they do not have a budget line?  

I recommend to Government to have only one minister, who will be running all the affairs of special regions. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will allow the Shadow minister in charge of disaster preparedness three minutes to lay his document on Table and make a brief statement.

3.57
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR REHABILITATION, RELIEF AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT (Mr Deusdedit Ogwal): Mr Speaker, permit me to lay on Table the alternative statement in response to the Rehabilitation, Relief and Disaster Management ministerial policy. However, I would like to state a few facts:

1.	For the financial year 2011/2012, the Opposition feels that although there is a clear national disaster management policy, there is no systematic implementation plan to operate it at national and local government levels. 

2.	There is poor and inadequate budget allocation vis-a-vis the number of disaster incidences.

3.	There is lack of reliable information and effective early warning systems for determining the trend of disaster occurrences forecasting outlook and planning mitigation measures. 

As the Opposition, we would like to register our disappointment for the financial year 2010/11; we raised a number of critical issues and it is very disappointing and disheartening that the following issues have not been addressed:

1.	The compensation of the Amuka and Arrow Boys has been pending for years now.  These Amuka and Arrow Boys played a great role in the pacification of the Greater North and they have not been compensated up to now. We call upon Government and the ministry concerned to do this as soon as possible.

2.	There are inadequate storage facilities for relief commodities.

3.	There is delayed establishment and operationalisation of the disaster contingency fund. 

4.	There is also inadequate funding of the National Meteorological Centre. 

The Opposition would like to call upon the government that it is its duty and responsibility to compensate victims of war for the deprivation and loss suffered. However, we have noticed that the NRM Government has not been fulfilling its obligations to war victims. Payments of compensation to war claimants have been done selectively only for people affected by the Luweero War at the whim of a few powerful people. Very many victims of other wars have been ignored and neglected unfairly and immorally, particularly the victims of the war between NRA and UPDF on the one hand, and Lakwena Holy Spirit Movement and Kony’s Lord’s Resistance Army on the other hand. 

All war victims deserve humane treatment and equitable compensation for the deprivation and the loss they suffered regardless of the cause and justification of the war.  (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, one additional minute. 

MR DEUSDEDIT OGWAL: We recommend that there is great need to enact a war victim and claimants law that stipulates humane treatment and regulates equitable compensation for deprivation and losses suffered by helpless non-combatants caught in the armed conflict.
   
Two, we also recommend that there should be a reliable single source data and information centre, which can be used for forecasting the imminent incidences of disaster.  

Finally, we also observe that there are dubious methods of instituting inquiries when disaster occurs, but the reports of those inquiries never see the light of the day. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, lay the report on Table. 

MR DEUSDEDIT OGWAL: Thank you very much.
 
MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, excuse me, I did not lay my paper on Table.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay it on Table. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I wish to lay my paper on Table as the Opposition’s alternative statement in response to the ministerial statement of the Minister of Information and National Guidance. Thank you very much.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will open the general debate, which will close at exactly half past the hour. I will be giving two minutes to the Members that will rise to contribute. 

4.02
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga South, Kampala):  Mr Speaker, about a month ago, I raised a matter of public concern on the Floor of the House, which directly impacts on the budget we are about to pass. Therefore, I insist that until I get a response, the Presidential vote should not be passed. What did I say? 
 
With reference to a publication which I laid here on Table, The Daily Mail of London, I reported that it was alleged in June this year that the President of Uganda had diverted a sum of £30 million out of the money Britain had given Uganda to address poverty alleviation in Northern Uganda, to purchase his personal plane. Those in charge of the Government side did not answer me. I demand an answer; is it true the money was diverted? If so, did Parliament know? If Parliament did not know, where did he get the powers to misappropriate that big amount of money? Thank you. I need an answer before the budget is passed. (Applause)

4.04
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to quote page 23 on the Patriotism Secretariat where it is stated that it is underfunded. Sincerely, we do not need the Patriotism Secretariat at all. You see what happens when you take a child to school. First of all, let Government provide that service and after the child has gone to university, let Government provide that service. When the child graduates, let him get a job, other than patronising him.  Take an example; if my father or mother sold their land to cater for my education, when I qualify and do not get a job, even if you try to patronise me, it will not work at all because I will already have known the source of my suffering. 

Then also in regard to press freedom, sometimes honourable ministers tend to restrict the press and leave themselves free but end up messing up. It is on record here that within the President’s Office there are people who continuously abuse  ministers and Members of the Opposition and yet they are the same people who continuously restrict the press.  What do they gain from that? So, it is very important to take care. I am in the Opposition, but when I see a minister, I respect him. If somebody from Government comes out to underrate ministers and restricts them from attending radio programmes, it is very dangerous. So, as I wind up, it is your role as Government because tomorrow, I will be in Government, but what is the President under this government? 

Finally, Mr Speaker, what is the use of Presidential advisors?  Are they going by the years in power by the President; so that the longer he stays in power, say for 25 years, the more advisors he needs? I would think that whenever you stay longer, you would need less advice because you will have gained more experience. (Member timed out_)

4.07
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. My concern is on page 13 of the report under State House. I have looked at the activities of State House and I wonder how enhancement of household income through provision of improved crops and animals, and training, is one of the activities of State House. What does NAADS or the Ministry of Agriculture do? 

Also, see “promote trade, tourism and investment,” and yet we have a full ministry to do that. So, we want to know what the specific roles of State House are? Maybe we do not need these ministries in place, since State House can do the work. 

On the committee recommendations, they had proposed to allocate Shs 4.5 billion for construction of RDC blocks. Mr Speaker, today in my constituency, I have pupils who still study under trees. What do we do about them? The RDCs are accommodated under the district headquarters blocks, and now you want to build for them separate blocks, yet we have areas which are underfunded that are greatly needed in this country. 

Let us talk about health. How many health centres do we have in the country? Women cannot reach Health Centre IVs to deliver babies. We do not have equipment in these centres and now we are building RDC blocks. I want to oppose this; not because I do not want RDCs, but because we should have priorities when planning and when using our resources. 

My last point is under the Prime Minister’s Office. When we had the September riots, the President established a special Cabinet committee on youth and unemployment. They held several meetings that were chaired by hon. Janat Mukwaya and money was allocated for that business. Up to now, we do not know the strategies they have put in place. Today, I heard the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness saying that youths are everywhere. So, I think everything is everywhere. We want to know what this committee came up with and how we are are going to address the youth unemployment –(Member timed out_)

4.09
MS MABEL BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for its report, but I want to address myself to the State House scholarships. While State House scholarships are a good idea, I think to avoid preferential allocations, Government should change its scholarship system to a bursary scheme for all university students. 

The Government of Uganda operates a policy of giving full scholarships to the best students that have performed well at A’level. This is normally done without taking into consideration the conditions under which these different students have studied; for example, taking into consideration the location and facilities which these students could access. This gives undue advantage to the students that come from urban areas, over those from rural areas. If this system stays as it is, there is likelihood that there will be a big gap between students from urban areas and those from the rural areas. For example, this sit-down strike will mean that students from rural areas are affected because in the urban areas, we have many private schools.
 
Mr Speaker, although Government has pledged to introduce a loan scheme for university students in the hope that it will help these disadvantaged students, I want to assure you that very few of these disadvantaged students will be able to pay back. I thank you. 

4.12
MR RWAKAJARA ARINAITWE (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on the issue of patriotic clubs. I support the issue of patriotic clubs because these patriotic clubs will help us to lead Ugandans into loving their country. If you see the corruption that is in this country, you will realise that people do not love their country. Ugandans are planning wrong activities that will destroy the economy and their country. I think these patriotic clubs should be supported and the money should be passed such that they are established, so that we have a generation that loves this country.
 
I wish we could even include some public servants who have diverted from their noble cause into these clubs; those who are doing wrong things that we do not want to mention here. I think that is why most of the sectors of the workers that I represent are complaining because some of our Ugandans are diverting resources and there is a lot of waste in this country. I request that these clubs take place and we support them and have solidarity for this country. I thank you so much. 

4.14
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson for presenting this report. I am concerned with page 18 where it was observed that the prevalence rate of HIV/AIDS has gone up and one of the planned activities is to develop and disseminate monthly prevention messages through electronic and print mass media. I would like to emphasise the recent message concerning male circumcision. 

I would like to ask the AIDS Commission to come out openly and assertively, and explain to the population the advantages of this male circumcision and the scientific research that has been done so that we know which percentage, in terms of prevention of HIV/AIDS, is going to help our population. There are confusing messages about it. Some people are giving wrong messages to our population. I would like the AIDS Commission to come out openly and save our people concerning this message. 

Secondly, on ARVs, I wish to thank the AIDS Commission for what it has done so far. However, I would also like to hear a message about post-exposure prophylaxis. This is a message for those who need to be saved within 72 hours of having been exposed to the virus. This message is not coming out clearly. Some people could be saved if they knew that within 72 hours, they can be given this treatment. It does not come out clearly in our messages. 

On disaster preparedness, I would like the ministry to urgently carry out a survey in the country to find out which mountains are cracking. It will save us money and time if we move people before the accidents happen and I think money can be provided for a survey across the country if we budget for it. 

Finally, my district belongs to the Luwero-Rwenzori development programme. This programme has been running for two years and I would like to know if anything has been done in my district with regard to expenditure on this programme. 

4.17
MR GABRIEL AJEDRA (NRM, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on the matter of KCCA. KCCA was allocated a budget of about Shs 30 billion for the road sector in the city. During our deliberations with KCCA, we were informed that KCCA is using the contracts committee of URA, which is not a technical institution. 

The committee was concerned that the award of tenders, particularly by the contracts committee of KCCA, which is also the contracts committee of URA, is likely to jeopardise the award of tenders because we believe they are not technical. So, we would like to know from the minister when they are going to fully constitute the structure of KCCA, particularly to deal with procurement. 

The second issue is the issue of the safety of buildings in the city and the unplanned manner in which buildings are cropping up in the city. This part was also extensively discussed by the committee. You recall, just about three or four weeks ago, there was a building that collapsed in Bukoto. 

We went and inspected that building and we found that there was negligence on the part of the owner who ignored the advice from his engineer. He designed it and an engineer was provided. The building materials that were used were substandard and that could only have been detected if KCCA had inspected. KCCA admitted that they do not have enough personnel, first to do monitoring and secondly, to do inspection. So, we would like to know from the Minister for the Presidency in charge of KCCA -(Member timed out_)

4.19
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on the point of the mandate of State House and the Office of the President with regard to the fact that they exist to facilitate the effective and efficient performance of the Presidency as well as take care of the security of the Presidency. On this point, there is a serious concern about the security of the President at Nakasero. How secure is that Nakasero State House? (Interjections) 

I am raising this, hon. Members, because as you approach Nakasero, that house used to belong to His Highness, the Kabaka of Buganda, but he was persuaded to cede it over to the state -(Interjections)- then on the east, lies Okello House. He was also in one way or the other told to leave that house. But as you go there right now, you find the entire State House hemmed in by cottages of private individuals. 

I want us to really be honest. The security of the President should not be compromised by persons -(Interjections)- it is not a personal matter, Mr Speaker. Once we say these premises are for the Presidency, so be it. They should remain as such. But recently, there were media reports to the effect that the President was intending to move away from Nakasero and the State Lodge at Nakasero was going to be sold -(Interjections)- but nobody came up to dispute this. Is it because the President is overwhelmed? (Member timed out_)

4.22
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just rise on two or three issues because of time. On the issue of Presidential Advisors, the President is a man of vision and he has got 76 ministers. Why can’t these ministers advise the President instead of keeping these advisors? Last year you heard advisors say, “Some of us have even never had the chance of seeing the President.” Why should we waste taxpayers’ money on these advisors who do not even get a chance to advise the President?

On scholarships, we have got a whole Ministry of Education and there is a Central Scholarship Board. Why don’t we pass these scholarships that are acquired by the President to the Scholarship Board to issue out, and leave the President alone, instead of taking of scholarships to the President’s Office? 

On State House development money, I have seen development money. I do not want to refer to it because I do not have much time. We have just built State House. Why so much money for development? The same thing applies to the President’s Office. The Chinese have just put up new buildings and the President has not even moved in. Why do we need a lot of money for the Office of the President when the teachers are going hungry and when we do not have medicine in our hospitals?

This country depends on agriculture. Eighty two percent of our people live on agriculture. But when you look at the budget for agriculture, the budget for State House and the budget of the Presidency, we are really not serious. I beg to submit. 

4.24
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I like the achievements of this policy statement. I think we have done the talking for 25 years and now there is some outcome. 

Achievements of State House; mobilised masses for Prosperity-For-All - I remember we were all supposed to be given Shs 20 million per household -(Interjections)- and we are -(Interjections)- yes. We were supposed to be given Shs 20 million. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Hon. Members. 

MS WADADA: And we are here representing people out there who received this message from the President himself and you are arguing about it -(Interjections)- and if this was to mobilise -[Hon. Members: “Order.”]- Mr Speaker, may I say something please? Since we are all here and although others may be outside, may I know those who received this Shs 20 million per household in their constituencies -(Interjections)- for me PFA is Poverty-For-All. It is not Prosperity-For-All. 

Secondly, -(Interjections)– please, may I finish my point. And then it monitored the health sector to check on efficiency and effectiveness. Please, tell me how efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery will be seen in a health centre when a nurse cannot even put on a uniform. In fact, you cannot differentiate between a nurse and a patient -(Interjections)- and you are telling me that there is effectiveness of health services. To me all this is lip service. It will never happen. (Member timed out_) 

4.27
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for a presentation well made. I would also like to thank the shadow ministers for their responses. I wish to thank the colleagues who have made their contributions and I also wish to make the following contributions.

I wish to propose that we operationalise the constitutional provision of Article 203 as requested by the chairperson of the committee that the qualifications of the RDCs should be emphasised during recruitment. Article 203(2) requires the RDC to have a qualification equivalent to that of a Member of Parliament. So, it would be of interest that the RDCs out there have less and are not senior civil servants.

After reading the report, I would also like to propose that we operationalise Article 249 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which requires us to have a disaster management commission that should handle issues of natural and manmade disasters.

You will agree with me that we have a lot of disasters in this country. The whole of Bugisu and Kapchorwa regions have had many disasters as well as other regions in the entire country. If we have this commission put in place, it will help us to come up with ways of mitigating these crises before they occur.

I would also like to propose – when I was in primary school, we had a subject called Civics. This subject used to help us undergo what you are now calling patriotism. I wish to propose that instead of spending money in the name of patriotism classes, we re-introduce the Civics subject and we give this money to primary teachers to enhance their salaries so that these teachers can teach our children how to love their country and how to respect humanity. Instead of creating more structures, we should use the already existing ones and beef them up.

I thank you, hon. Members for listening to me. The money I am talking about is around Shs 10 billion that is meant for patriotism classes -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is exactly half past. I said we would close debate now. I will allow two people to conclude.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, under our Rules of Procedure –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what matter do you rise?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Under our Rules of Procedure, Rule 3 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the matter you are raising?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am raising it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is it? Is it a point of order?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: It is a procedural point. Under our Rules of Procedure, Rule 3 in particular, it is stated that communication in this House shall be conducted in the English language. In the recent past, it was reported in the High Court that one of the Members of Parliament representing Lubaga North could not speak until he got a Punjab translator. Is Parliament in the process of getting Singh Katongole a translator for Punjab? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The statement just made by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi violates the spirit of the Constitution, violates the Penal Code and cannot be acceptable in this House. The spirit is wrong and I ask the hon. Member to withdraw what he has said. Hon. Member, withdraw the statement.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I find difficulty in withdrawing. I was seeking guidance on a procedural point and more so, the rules under which I would be withdrawing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, the statement you have made is sectarian in nature and dividing. Kindly withdraw. That is my ruling.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: The rules under which I would have apologised remain to be approved by Parliament so I am not withdrawing. (Hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we have not concluded this matter. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, the implication of the statement you have made on the Floor of Parliament and that has been captured by the Hansard is negative.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, mine was not a statement but an enquiry. I inquired, with humility, whether he would access a Punjab translator since he wanted one in court.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in this House I think we represent people from both within and without. A statement has been made in our courts and if a Member whom the issue is touching is here, he can come up and say what you are saying is wrong or right.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I have ruled on this matter. Unless my ruling is complied with, I will ask the hon. Member to withdraw from the Chambers of Parliament.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: In the interest of this Parliament and the great respect I attach to the hon. Speaker, I honourably withdraw. (Laughter)

4.37
MR FADHIL CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make some contribution on what has been raised by the chairperson here and on issues touching my constituency, especially PRDP and its allocations to districts. I will focus on my district. Under PRDP, Kween’s allocation is Shs 394 million. This is the least amount received by districts under PRDP. Compared to other districts, we are getting peanuts. 

While I say this, we have lived with the problem of cattle rustling for many years. At a time when various parts of Uganda were peaceful, we were grappling with cattle rustling, right from the 1950s to the 1980s. I am grateful that the government has managed to combat cattle rustling in Sebei sub-region. But the problem is on how to resettle the people who were displaced before. If you went to Bunyoro or Teso, you would find the Sabiny there. Now, the question of floods has emerged in the same area again. There is nothing that has been done yet about the floods. The other time, people were being given relief in other districts, but Kween has never received anything. We, on the lower side of Sebei share the same weather conditions with Karamoja and Bulambuli, but we have never got anything.

The other day, I was travelling to my constituency and I went to Bulambuli to ask for some relief, but they said I did not belong there; and yet we have the same problems. At least, let there be some consideration for Kween especially for the displaced people within the areas of Ngenge, Girigi and Kwany sub-county, and all the other areas of Bukwa. Thank you.

4.40
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the members of the committee. But I have three observations to make. On the recommendation that they should be given two months to investigate the UBC saga and the ownership of property at UBC, I note with a lot of concern that this committee may not do a good job for us. 

If I may raise an issue under Rule 169, you realise that out of the 22 members, only eight of them signed the committee report. This indicates that there is something not right with this committee. Maybe an independent commission like IGG or a commission of inquiry should do this job for us. 

Mr Speaker, I ask this Parliament to operationalise Article 157 of our Constitution under the Contingency Fund. As we talk now, Mbarara has been hit by a hailstorm. If you go to Nyakaronko, Kitunguru, Kyabwihure, Kamomo and Kitojo – but I wonder how many of us would run to the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, who is also underprepared, to get some help. It is important that this article be operationalised such that in case people are hit by disaster, we know where to run to. 

I want to pay tribute to the Prime Minister; you have started very well and on a good note. But if you moved out now, the issue of performance contracts is very important and I will support you on that. We are talking about money and its allocation, but most of our people are not doing their job. Hon. Prime Minister, if you rectify that, I will be your ally, but if you deviate from that, we shall be enemies.

Finally, regarding patriotism, we have a problem. You cannot preach patriotism when you are not patriotic. How many of us in this House and outside are patriotic? (Member timed out_) 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Under Rule 67(7)(c), Mr Speaker, I have internalised this report. On page 2, they have listed the votes which will be passed, but there is some information lacking; the Vote of Internal Security Organisation as mentioned – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which rule did you cite?

MR KAKOOZA: Rule 67(7)(c), regarding information. When you look at the votes listed here - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have not got the rule you are citing.

MR KAKOOZA:  I can read it, if you want me to. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the rule?

MR KAKOOZA: It is on interruption of a debate: Rule 65(7)(c). It says: “And the Speaker shall follow the following precedence: (a) points of procedure, (b) points of order, (c) points of information, elucidation or clarification.” That is why I am rising up to give information on sub-rule (7)(c) as indicated. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please sit down. (Laughter)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance from you, because the President, in his State of the Nation Address, promised that money would be allocated for the students of Acholi and Lango who qualify for university but cannot afford fees, but I am not seeing it in the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Ministers will make comments. Hon. Ministers, I do not know how many of you will respond, but I give you 40 minutes. Please use that time well because at the end of it, I will go to the chairman.

4.46
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee members for the good report, but I will clarify on a few things. The first one is on the Uganda Aids Commission; this commission will soon undergo a restructuring process and in any case, its funding is under the health sector. So, it is not possible to relocate money from the construction of RDCs offices to the Uganda Aids Commission. The RDCs and Deputy RDCs now have vehicles and they are well facilitated.

For the qualifications, we have asked all of them to submit their verified academic papers. We have given them a deadline of two months and after that, I will give a report to the committee as they required me to do.

On the ISO arrears, we have noted that and we shall work with the Ministry of Finance to ensure that they are cleared. For the vote status of ISO, this has been ongoing and we shall continue interfacing with the Minister of Finance to see the possibility of granting ISO a vote. 

Mr Speaker, the number of Presidential Advisors has been noted. However, the recruitment and appointment of the Presidential Advisors is the prerogative of His Excellency the President. This concern, however, will be brought to his attention. 

It is not true that we hand-pick people. We normally follow the Public Service procedure through the Public Service Commission and the ministry to ensure that we place the most qualified Ugandans in the respective portfolios. 

On strengthening the Media Centre, there is an issue of the budget ceiling, but if we are allowed to improve it, we can give it more resources. 

There are two things for State House. It is true that the President supports students under the State House Sponsorship Scheme and the selection is purely a prerogative of the President as and when he is approached. 

The information I have is that students are picked from all over the country and the biggest number comes from Eastern region –(Interjections)- yes. This is followed by Western –(Interjections)- eastern region has 1,364 students. Western region has 1,303, Northern region has 1,258 and central region has 900 –(Interjections)- so, this covers the whole ­­ (Interjections)- eastern region has 1,364 but the most important thing to note is that for all the others, there are general Government programmes through UPE, USE and grants to the various public universities. Part of the donation budget is used to cater for this and the selection is the prerogative of the President. 

For KCCA –(Interjections)-  the KCCA Act is very clear in Section 69 about how it constitutes its contract committee. The Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury in consultation with the Permanent Secretary in the ministry responsible for the Capital City, shall authorise the use of services of the ministry responsible for the capital city or any other contracts committee. This is the law that was applied to select URA to, in the mean time, handle the contracts within KCCA.  

The chairperson did indicate in his report that there was Shs 58 billion that was discovered on ghost accounts in KCCA. This is not true. When KCC handed over, they declared 120 bank accounts, but in the process, another 31 bank accounts were discovered with a total of Shs 971 million. The total of Shs 58 billion was found on all these active accounts put together and are, therefore, not ghost accounts but active from the previous KCC now taken over by KCCA.

Lastly, about patriotism, I would like to request Members not to run away from the truth. Our Constitution enjoins us in Objective 29 to be patriotic, but Article 17 also talks about every able-bodied Uganda to be trained in defence of their country and, of course, to love our country. It can clearly be seen that some Members do not even appreciate this. It is within his mandate – the President did come up with the idea that patriotism be introduced in schools and these clubs are based in school. 

Funds allowing, -[Mrs Ogwal: “Clarification.”]- these clubs will be rolled over even to primary and tertiary institutions, but we had to get a starting point and this was -[Mrs Ogwal: “Order.”]– (Laughter) with secondary schools. [Hon. Members: “Order.”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MRS OGWAL: The minister is quite experienced by now to respect colleagues when they are seeking clarification because the statement she is making is very important. 

I have interrupted this minister because she is saying that some Ugandans do not understand or do not want to understand the importance of patriotism. I want to advise –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You raise the Point of Order. (Laughter) Please raise the Point of Order. (Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: I am preparing the ground for the order -(Laughter)- the Speaker is a lawyer and he knows that you cannot just make a statement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, if you -  

MRS OGWAL: Is it in order -(Laughter)- for this Minister who is even a princess from Bunyoro where I come from, to insinuate that some of us do not understand patriotism when the minister very well knows that there are no teachers to teach patriotism. Where is the curriculum? Where are the teachers? Is it in order for this minister to dream about matters which are not crystallised and formalised in terms of – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member – 

MRS OGWAL: Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am about to rule you out of order yourself. (Laughter) Hon. Minister, please proceed.     

MS KABAKUMBA: I thank you for your wise ruling. If you take to internalise, you will know that there is now a syllabus and guidelines that are guiding the patriotism clubs and their training.

Lastly, through research, there is proven reason beyond doubt that circumcision can reduce the transmission from the infected female partner by 60 percent. It must be noted that circumcision does not make one an armoured troop. So, the message is that for - you have to appreciate that circumcision will not protect you 100 percent. It is important you address your behaviour in sexual matters if you are to stay safe from the virus and you must behave yourself if you are to keep alive.

We also do offer as Government, post exposure - shall I be protected from ambassador hon. Wamanga-Wamai? (Ms Aol rose_)

Thank you very much, because of time, I will stop here. (Laughter)

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Rebecca Otengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me within this limited time to thank the Chairman of the committee and the members, and the shadow ministers who gave responses. 

I will begin with the issue raised by the committee on the tractor hire scheme. I agree with the committee that we have to go further and study how the tractor scheme should work. However, I would like to say that in some parts where the tractors were given, some progress has been made.

We have been in touch with different groups, the chairpersons of the districts, the people from the regions themselves, and even members from the PRDP areas. We have agreed that the tractor hire system or the purchase of tractors is important, but we have to reorganise it. I do agree with you, Mr Chairman.

I would like to briefly comment on what the Shadow Minister for Special Regions said. I would like to allay your fear, hon. Steven Ochola that probably the government is not committed to giving these funds. On the other hand, the government has honoured its commitment more than some partners. That is why we are saying that even the partners who are helping us on the PRDP framework should be clear on the resources they bring to us so that we are able to plan. This will help in the area you are talking about of duplication. We are saying that whosoever comes as a partner, must be able to make us know his presence, what he is doing and the resources he is bringing. But on the issue of the money being misappropriated, hon. Steven Ochola has been the chairperson of the district and you know that over 90 percent of these funds go to the local government.

I am happy to report that in our tour in the PRDP areas, we have been moving with the Members of Parliament and they have been very useful. They have realised that most of the money is being misappropriated in the district. So, we are asking you, Members, as ex-officios of the councils, to take interest in the management of the funds under the PRDP. 

Finally, I would like to say that this money cannot easily be misappropriated or even diverted because the money for Northern Uganda reconstruction is actually ring-fenced. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTERE (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the ministry I lead is not disaster. The ministry I lead is responsible for disaster preparedness and management. The ministry has come up with a Disaster Preparedness and Management Policy and I beg to lay it on the Table here.

In 2006, we had two million internally displaced people in the northern part of the country. The ministry was given the mandate to return and resettle them. As we talk, only 150,000 have not returned. The rest are in their homes certainly facing challenges, but they are safely in their homes.

We would like to thank the security organs and many partners including the leadership of PRDP for making that possible. Those who had not returned, the 150,000, are mainly from Lamwo - in the new district of Lamwo; the areas that border the park in Amuru; from Katakwi district, in places that were until recently bedevilled by the Karimojong cattle rustlers; and they are also in areas of Kapelebyong. They are in Ngenge; I had my colleague from Ngenge and the plan of Government is to facilitate and accelerate the return of these 150,000. 

However, we do appreciate that there are still a number of people as we complete to return and resettle the internally displaced people, displaced because of the Lord’s Resistance Army savagery and the cattle rustlers. 

More IDPS are being created because of the natural calamities that we are facing in the country and we have a plan to buy land every year. In our plan, we have looked for some money which will enable us to buy some land and that land will be for resettling particularly people who find themselves in situations of disaster like we are witnessing in Bulambuli.

We have started to implement the disaster policy by doing what we call hazard mapping across the country. There is a team comprising and led by the minister in the Office of the Prime Minister working together with the experts and agencies that handle issues of humanitarian interventions in the country, and hazard mapping is in very advanced stages.
 
This will enable Government and the ministry to know areas where there are challenges, and also guide on the interventions that are necessary. 

The ministry relies so much on the Department of Meteorology for its interpretation of the weather and yet the Department of Meteorology until recently was to the best of our understanding, not properly facilitated. I am happy to report to this Parliament that Cabinet elevated the Department of Meteorology to an authority. It is now becoming operationalised and then we shall have enough resources within the department to enable it become efficient so that it becomes reliable not only to the ministry, but to other sectors of Government like agriculture and those other sectors that depend on it for its interpretation.

We are fine-tuning our capacity to respond to emergencies particularly by also looking into the possibility of developing a national emergency and coordinating centre. We want to thank the Army for seconding to us Gen. Julius Oketta and very soon, we have got partners and friends who will help us to establish this. I know the challenges are huge, but we are on top of the situation. I thank you.

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (TESO AFFAIRS) (Ms Christine Amongin): Mr Speaker, page 3(b) for the record, among the ministers under the Office of the Prime Minister, who attended the meetings with the committee, there was General Duties and Teso Affairs. They were omitted and Economic Monitoring is not under Office of the Prime Minister.

We should correct Luwero Triangle as Luwero-Rwenzori.

Pacification and development is where Teso Affairs, falls. The Office of the Prime Minister will follow up the committee recommendations with the Ministry of Finance, immediately, in order to make sure that the reallocations are made internally within the Office of the Prime Minister. 

We came in as a new portfolio, but we are active and working. So, the honourable members should know that the Ministry of Teso Affairs is fully operational and is on fourth floor in the Office of the Prime Minister. We are there and we shall do the needful for that region. Thank you. (Applause)

5.08
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mrs Mary Okurut): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I also take this opportunity to thank the committee and the Shadow Minister for the Information. Hon. Wafula said that the media in Uganda is under seige and I beg to disagree with him. We have the freest press south of the Sahara and North of the Limpopo. (Laughter)

But we have also got to take into account the issue of social responsibility. Hon. Wafula Ogutu, a few other colleagues in Makerere and I wrote the first syllabus for the mass communication department in Makerere University. And one of the strongest points we made was that we would all advocate for a free press, but we should also advocate for a responsible press. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, where we fall short, we always call upon the public to come up and say, “You are impinging on our freedoms here”, and that is what they have been doing.

On the issue of the media reporting what it sees; I agree with hon. Wafula because the media should hold a faithful mirror to society. But sometimes, the press portrays issues in their own way. Like when we had the “Walk-to-Work”, there was a picture in one of our dailies here –(Interjections)– one of these papers had a picture of about 50 people lying on the ground and the caption under it was, “Fainted”. And this picture was on the Internet; we got many emails from people saying there is brutality in Uganda and that all those people had been murdered. 

On close scrutiny, those people were actually tired and were lying in some playground –(Interjections)– absolutely; it depends upon how you see your story.

In Uganda, if people –(Interjections)– let me finish, hon. Wafula, I listened to you. Mr Speaker and Members, there is a standing order that if there is a talk show, all political parties should be represented. So, if you go to a radio station and you are stopped, please take up the issue with the Media Council because their law is very clear.

Hon. Wafula pointed out that the Access to Information Law had not been operationalized. I want to thank you for bringing it up, because we shall use this forum as a point to bring it up to the public, which we have already been doing. But the Access to Information Act is fully operational. The regulations to that Act were gazetted early this year.

Another issue which was brought up was national guidance. We really need this; but I do not know why hon. Wafula thinks that he should only be shadow minister for information and not for national guidance. We all need national guidance. This is not indoctrination; our people need to appreciate that like the keys of the keyboard, we have the black and the white keys, but when they are played, they produce harmony. This is what we do in national guidance; in spite of our different political parties, we want to teach our people that as a nation, there are certain issues that are above politics and those are the issue that draw us together as citizens. (Applause)

Hon. Mpuuga talked about the $74 million for digital migration. This money and the MoU with this Chinese company are not final. We cannot get a loan without seeking the approval of Parliament. So, if we are to borrow, Parliament must approve, and where there is need to adjust these activities, we shall adjust them; nothing is cast in stone. 

Therefore, as we enter this digital migration, we make a case for UBC because of issues of National Security, and we are asking for only five years of exclusivity. After that, it will be an open court. Thank you shadow minister and hon. Members. (Applause) 
 
5.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (LUWERO TRIANGLE) (Ms Rose Namayanja): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I also want to thank the committee for a thorough report presented. Mr Speaker, one issue was raised by hon. Emma Boona in regard to whether Mbarara is under Luwero – Rwenzori Program and if so, how much does it get? 

To put everything in its proper perspective, the Luwero – Rwenzori Development program covers two areas. One is the area that was covered under the Luwero war struggles and the Rwenzori Region that suffered the insurgencies. And because of the intensity of the insurgencies, most districts suffered differently during those scuffles and I must add that originally, the program comprised of 22 districts. But as a result of the creation of new districts, the program now covers 39 districts. They were categorised into three segments. There are those categorised as high intensity districts; then the medium intensity; and the low intensity areas. 

Mbarara falls under the low intensity category. (Interjections) Mr Speaker, it is true that the programme was launched in May, 2010. Last year was a pilot phase in anticipation of full scale implementation this financial year. During that period, in preparation for full scale implementation of the programme, the low intensity areas and the medium intensity areas received around Shs 70 million at the district level. Of course those in the high intensity areas received more than that.

I must also put it on record that due to budgetary constraints; we shall not have full scale implementation of the programme. The budget that was provided was what we had under the pilot phase. We are optimistic that next financial year, we shall have full scale implementation of this programme. For that matter, Mr Speaker, allow me to make an amendment to the report on page 33 under the Luwero-Rwenzori Development Programme; item 3(a) among the planned activities, “To ensure full scale implementation of the Luwero-Rwenzori Development Plan.” The Office of the Prime Minister sent an addendum to the policy statement which did not include this after having realised that we shall not have sufficient resources as indicated on page 35 under unfunded priorities, where we have a shortfall of Shs 44.5 billion. I beg that item 3(a) be deleted because we shall not ensure full scale implementation of the programme in this financial year, but we shall have what we had in the last financial year.

I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.20
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. May I begin by thanking the committee for a job well done. I know it was not easy for them and they spent sleepless nights to produce this report. First and foremost, I want to congratulate - because the chairman almost missed this one - I want to congratulate him and the committee for producing this good report. I would like to use this opportunity to thank the Opposition for their response to the statements we have made under these votes. Certainly, we will take heed of some of the points they have made. I will respond to one or two. Generally, we have heard your voice. I want to encourage you, this is the way. When you have an opinion, give it; do not walk away or walk out. (Applause) 

On the question of barazas, we fully support the idea of barazas. We are totally determined to make them operational and effective. There are a few other things we are going to introduce in terms of applying modern methods of communication using modern technology to make sure this process is effective. 

On the question of the newly-created portfolios; I mentioned to the committee and I want to repeat that we are already operational as the ministers have said. We will try to be as effective as we can within the means available. I want to assure this House and the country that these ministries will be effective in performing their duties even if we do not have additional resources. 

The question of radio bimeezas is a very complex one. I think we need to talk about it in detail because the effect of what was happening where you have the kind of freedom we have; where talking on radio is not regulated; there are many dangers. Indeed, many of us noticed or witnessed the sectarianism that was exhibited during the presentations in the bimeezas. The usage of radio to mobilise for unlawful activities like riots and so on; which our friends in Uganda call pro-democracy demonstrations or in England, as the President said the other day, they call them criminal gangs. (Interjections)

If the Speaker will add me more minutes –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I expected the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to conclude the presentation of his team with strictness and sincerity knowing that out of the radio broadcasts and arrests, which we made in various parts, there was no court which convicted any person implicated in the kimeeza scenario. So, what are you talking about by referring to sectarianism? (Laughter) What sectarianism? Was sectarianism spotted only by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and no other person, including the courts of law I have referred to? What are you talking about? (Laughter) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, as my honourable friend, the hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi knows that I have full capacity to do so, me, as an individual. (Interjections) But let me respond a bit to the questions raised on the Floor. 

I want to begin with hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. As usual, Ken-Lukyamuzi specialises in headline-grabbing statements. He came here and repeated a baseless allegation that the Government of Uganda used £30 million being aid given to Uganda by the British taxpayer, to purchase a personal plane for President Museveni. First of all, I am not aware that President Museveni has purchased a plane; a personal one, for that matter. This must be in the mind of Ken-Lukyamuzi and his likes.  I am not aware that a gentleman called His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister for giving way. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi laid here an article which was published in the Daily Mail newspaper of UK. That paper was saying that the President of Uganda, not Mr Museveni, used the British money to buy a plane for the president, not for Mr Museveni. Therefore, is it in order for the Prime Minister to mislead the House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I heard hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi very carefully. He said that the President bought a personal plane. That is what I heard. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: It was a Presidential jet.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unless you are changing your statement now, but the statement that came earlier said a personal - 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: It was a Presidential jet. The error, which I pointed out, was about the diversion of the money meant for poverty alleviation to purchase a Presidential jet.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the statement has been altered to say, “Presidential jet”.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: That is what I would expect Ken to do. To say one thing now and immediately after change it to something else.

Mr Speaker, of course, it is true that Uganda has indeed bought a Presidential jet. Relating to donor money, it is also true that donors give Uganda what they call budget support annually. Every financial year, they have been giving us what is called annual budget support. 

There is an agreement between the Uganda Government and the donors under what is called the Joint Budget Support Framework, which spells out sectors which benefit from donor budget support. These sectors are health and education.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Parliament must be careful about the need to check public expenditure. The Rt. Honourable Prime Minister should not divert from the point I made. The point I made was that around the 11th June this year, Lord Ashcroft, from the House of Lords, reported that President Museveni had diverted a sum of 30 million pounds out of the 70 million pounds donated to Uganda to address poverty alleviation, to purchase a Presidential jet. 

My query was, did Parliament approve the misappropriation of that money. So, is the Rt hon. Prime Minister in order to jump the issues I have raised and instead exaggerate matters by meandering on issues of irrelevance. I have a right as a representative of the people of Rubaga to demand clarity over this money which was donated to Uganda to address poverty alleviation. I would like to have proof that this Parliament approved the diversion of the money. In the absence of that approval, the President has a question to answer. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, that was not a point of order but a point of clarification. I will ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to clarify.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is my friend; there is no doubt about it. I have known him since O’level when he was in secondary school and I was at Makerere University then. And when he came to work there - I will tell you that one day.

So, I was giving this House the story about donor money, including British donor money; that there is a budget support framework which spells out the sectors which are to benefit from that budget support and these are, health, education, water, roads and agriculture. That is all. There is nothing about planes. And I want to assure you that none of the money which was given for these sectors was diverted for anything else. (Applause)

Much as the United Kingdom Government gives us the welcome support they have given us, I want to assure this country and I want to assure the British taxpayer that the Uganda Government has never and will never divert that money for any other purpose. And I want to make a categorical statement that the purchase of that plane was by money of Ugandan taxpayers and not the British taxpayer. (Applause)

Hon. Mariam Nalubega asked how State House can promote tourism, trade and investment. Honourable Nalubega, the Constitution is clear. All Executive authority in Uganda is in the hands of the President. Anyone else exercises any authority at the pleasure and delegation of the President. Please, be informed. (Laughter)

My good brother and friend, the hon. Ssekikubo, asked, “Is the President safe in Nakasero?” I want Ugandans listening to this debate to go and sleep soundly. President Museveni is as safe in Nakasero as any President anywhere in the world. (Applause) 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I am the Shadow Minister of Defence and Security. (Interjections) I am concerned about the security of His Excellency the President. When you say that the President is as safe as all other presidents in the world, I get concerned because not all presidents of the world are safe. 

Do you mean to say that President Museveni is as safe as Gaddafi, the President of Libya? (Laughter) That is the information I would like to seek.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, my brother Fungaroo knows very well, and I am telling you from long experience, that for you to be an effective, even Shadow Minister of Defence and Security, please, be fully informed. (Laughter)

Mark my words. I said the President is as safe as any president in the world. This is the first time that I hear that Col. Muammar Gaddafi is a president. (Laughter) I would like to educate my brother. Gaddafi has never been a president. He has never aspired to be a president. He has been the leader of the revolution. (Laughter) I would like my brother to draw that distinction.

My good friend and brother, hon. Wafula Oguttu raised a very important point –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO:  Thank you, Rt hon. Prime Minister. The issue that I was really raising was the double standards approach to the President’s security where some neighbours were made to evacuate the premises and right now private apartments are surrounding the President and State House. More so, when you get to know that there is modern bugging, how safe is that facility when you have removed some sections of the people and yet you conveniently allow others to erect private apartments. It is unfortunate that the hon. Minister, Sam Kutesa, who would have elaborated on this has been here and is gone? (Laughter) 

If the minister didn’t know, can we really know under what circumstances some people are allowed to stay around the President and others are not? On top of that, as we read this, Entebbe Grade A Hospital is being told to evacuate and leave for State House. Why is it applying selectively? Some are free to encroach on the Presidential premises and others are not? This is the point I really want to make; is there a clear way we can have this? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, you need to roll it up right now. 

MR MBABAZI: Okay, I will not engage in Sembabule politics at all. However, I undertake, when I have time to fully bring to page the hon. Ssekikubo about the security of the President and the surroundings of his State Lodge.
 
Now, the hon. Wafula Oguttu –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO:  Mr Speaker, when we raise these matters, it does not matter where you come from. I could be coming from Kinkizi, but when we raise these matters, they are matters of national importance. Is it in order for the Rt hon. Prime Minister to gloss over matters of national importance and localise them as Ssembabule matters and yet Ssembabule is just a minute component where unfortunately I happen to come from? Is it, therefore, a bar and is the Rt hon. Prime Minister in order to put a bar to my aspirations in as far as matters on national importance are concerned to which he should address himself squarely without escaping into nonentities like Ssembabule, Mr Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matters that were raised by the hon. Ssekikubo did not arise from any matter of a building or anything that is in Ssembabule. The matter that was raised by the hon. ssekikubo relates to State House, Nakasero. Relating this to Ssembabule downplays the matter in a way that is not acceptable. So, the hon. Prime Minister, please follow up the matter. (Applause)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, of course I will not challenge your ruling. I am a disciplined Member of the House, but you know it is my colleague who brought in hon. Sam Kutesa and if I am not mistaken, hon. Kutesa and the hon. Member making the point are from Ssembabule. That is the context in which I brought it. (Applause) 

My brother, hon. Wafula Oguttu brought a very important point. Her said, “This national guidance is indoctrination,” and that, therefore, “only NRM should engage in indoctrination.” Let me tell you, national guidance as hon. Wafula Oguttu has correctly stated, is indoctrination. There is nothing wrong with indoctrination; absolutely. We must all clearly prepare ourselves to take a position about our country; about the direction our country must take; the ideological orientation of our people and it must be our duty to sensitise them; to give them that direction. (Applause) 

What is leadership if it is not to guide our people in the right direction? Therefore, yes that is what Uganda needs and that is what Uganda has been lacking; indoctrination to patriotism to make sure that people love their country; people sacrifice their time and energy to work for their nation. That is what we need for this country. 

Mr Speaker, finally my brother, hon. Mathias Mpuuga – I do not have time to tell you what I promised I would - I just want to say that since this was my first time to hear him speak in Parliament, I did not raise the matter negatively because he used the word “raided”; that, “The President’s Office raided state coffers.” “Raided?” What is raiding? I will tell you what raiding is in English because I speak English; by the way –(Interjections)- of course I speak English; “A raid is a rapid surprise attack on enemy troops either by aircraft or by soldiers or other armed forces in warfare.” So, tell me how the President’s Office raided the state coffers?  Who was the enemy? Where was the battle field?  Fortunately, I will have another opportunity, now that I have seen him, maybe to interact with him enough to understand these things. 

The press in Uganda is not treated as an enemy; of course not. Everyone knows how NRM treats enemies; everybody knows that; go and ask Kony how we handle enemies -(Interjections)- yes, absolutely. Enemies are treated as enemies. The freedom of the media in Uganda is the creation of the NRM. (Applause) The fact that my brother, hon. Wafula Oguttu, who is a mogul in the media, knows it very well that the freedom he has exercised all this time is what we fought for. Therefore, the NRM cannot treat the media as an enemy. However, the media must act responsibly; they must not tell lies; they must not divide our people and they have a duty to this nation to join the patriotic movement of the NRM; to build Uganda for success. That is what we ask the media to do. Otherwise, thank you very much. 

The matters raised in the above debate will give due consideration to the points from Members of the Opposition and Members from this side and we are very grateful that there is broad support for the programmes of this country. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the response from Government. Mr Chairman, roll up in three minutes. The matters are very clear; they have been elaborated. 

5.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Barnabas Tinkasiimire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable members for their good contributions and the ministers for their responses. I want to draw honourable members to a few areas of concern which I noted, particularly unfunded priorities of Government. There are unfunded priorities for which we agreed that Government looks for money - like Barazas - but there are unfunded priorities which appear on page 24, like the celebration of the golden jubilee, for which they require about Shs 60 billion. We said, as a committee, that given the circumstances under which we are operating, we don’t consider it a national priority. 

Mr Speaker, on the matter of UBC, we are only left with 15 months and one of the honourable members said we have no capacity to do a good job. I want to draw his attention to the whole report; that it is only this committee that was able to review seven votes in the entire Parliament. 

Secondly, you saw the whole Frontbench, almost everybody responded to our observations. Thirdly, I also want to inform him that our committee report was duly signed because our Rules of Procedure require only a third to sign, according to Rule 177, and we were beating time to come and report to this House. We have the capacity, as demonstrated this morning, that we have helped the KCCA to recover a house from an Army General. (Laughter)

On national guidance and patriotic clubs, the committee reiterates that these are important cores of Government and of course we must all accept that the NRM is here for five years until the voters decide otherwise. Whether you like it or not, these people working in these offices must guide the nation to the aspirations of the NRM.

I still want to reiterate the recommendations of the committee that Government should find resources to fund the newly created portfolios or else scrap them off because we are aware that existing portfolios like the PRDP is where they are drawing funds to run these newly created portfolios. We want the government to look for the Shs 4 billion that was highlighted or is required to run these new portfolios. 

On the issue of offices for the RDCs, we recommended the allocation of Shs 1 billion from the Shs 4 billion and we said that instead of constructing only 15 offices, they should use the Shs 3.5 billion to build 35 offices, each costing Shs 100 million. 

Mr Speaker, that State House scholarships should be removed, we find it important that the President still needs to meet –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, hon. Tinkasiimire for giving way, and thank you, Mr Speaker. While I associate myself with the recommendations made by the committee, is it in order for the committee to make observations on ethics and integrity on page 21, that the directorate lacks basic utilities and cannot operate and that this inhibits the fulfilment of its mandate and yet when it comes to making recommendations, the committee recommends that the directorate should be given funding for its own home? Is it in order, considering the importance of the need to fight corruption in this nation and considering the importance that His Excellency the President attaches to the fight against corruption as mentioned in the State of the Nation Address? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member. You have made your contribution. Please, finish. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before the honourable member wanted to be heard, I had said that state sponsorship is very important; particularly, the President still needs to meet the needs of the needy children of this country. Our committee recommended that there should be equal representation because needy children are everywhere in this country. 

We should -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please give him one minute to move his motion. Please, just move the motion now. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you. Hon. Kakooza, in his submission -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairman, move for adoption.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I wish to move the motion that the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2011/2012 be adopted by this august House as amended. (Hon. Ekanya and hon. Winifred Kiiza rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Amendment?  Yes.

5.58
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to move an amendment on page 34 of the report: Unfunded priority - implementation of digital migration, Shs 127 billion. The committee has recommended that Government finds this money and at the same time the committee, on page 36, has committed itself to investigate the matter and report within two months. So, I wish to amend that that item be deleted until the committee report is tabled in this House in two months as stated by the chairperson on page 37. I beg to move.

Secondly, Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it on the same matter? 

MR EKANYA: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t we deal with that one and then we move on to the next one? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: You realise that it is one of the unfunded priorities and I am sure before the government brings a supplementary budget here, where it could appear, we will be here in two months time with a report detailing the regularities and it will be upon you, depending on the information we will have got, to take a decision on whether to do away with digital migration completely or not.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think Parliament is not against digital migration. The only problem is the cost of this item. Government has signed a memorandum of understanding with one company called Huawei and the reason which we are giving is that if we are going to borrow money from the Exim Bank for digital migration, many players must be involved. If there had been a transparent process in which Huawei had been selected, I think there would have been no problem. These are the issues we are raising. 

So, what we are trying to say is that if you leave it as an unfunded activity, the moment you approve it, you would have approved this item that appears as unfunded and since the committee has agreed to carry out an investigation and to ensure that the PPDA process is followed, it would be better to remove it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the way I understand this is that it is a list of funds that Parliament will not pronounce itself on. It will not pronounce itself on it because it is not funded.   

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, based on your wise ruling and hoping that Government will not do internal reallocation to fund it, I beg to withdraw the motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR EKANYA: So, may I move another amendment? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes please.

6.02
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): On page 9, item 4.82: Outstanding Arrears - Internal Security Organisation. Mr Speaker, unless I am advised -(Interjections)- item (i). Unless I am advised, arrears are a direct charge of the Consolidated Fund and I beg hon. Tim Lwanga who is the chairperson of the Budget Committee, to pay attention to this matter. Arrears are a direct charge of the Consolidated Fund. The chairperson has reported that the government has provided for Shs 10,607,000,000 to cater for arrears, and arrears of ISO are statutory and are a direct charge of the Consolidated Fund. 

I, therefore, wish to move an amendment that this item be deleted from where it is. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What would be the reason for that?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, according to the Public Finance and Accountability Act, in a meeting which was chaired by hon. Tim Lwanga, the Accountant-General made it categorically clear that arrears of statutory institutions like ISO are a direct charge of the Consolidated Fund and, therefore, we do not need to appropriate here –(Interjections)- if we do it then this will be double appropriation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; we are not appropriating here. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, if we pass the report, unless you advise again - unless we are only going to adopt the report then the figures will be -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are only adopting the report as it is presented - 

MR EKANYA: Without the figures?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The figures will come at the stage when you will pronounce yourself on the figures on appropriation.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With your wise advice, I beg to withdraw the amendment.

6.05
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to propose an amendment in the report. It is under page 27. I wish to propose, like I did in my presentation, that we operationalise Article 249 and establish a disaster preparedness and management commission to help this country carry out activities and possibly help us to reduce disasters in this country within a period of six months.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where exactly do you want to insert that? Where do you want to put the amendment? You said page 27?

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Page 27, under disaster preparedness and management. That is where I am making the recommendation; that among the recommendations, we operationalise the constitutional provision under Article 249 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, because if what you are looking at is the same as the one I am looking at, it relates to what has been done. They carried out this - they trained district officials and so on and so forth. They are not making any recommendations here. Is there a place where they made recommendations? I am trying to see where it can fit better.

MS KIIZA: It is under page 36, Mr Speaker. It is recommendations and I wish to propose an amendment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman -(Hon. Ruhindi rose_)- Yes, the learned Deputy Attorney-General.

6.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): I am Deputy Attorney-General and in the absence of the Attorney-General in the House, I deputise the Attorney-General under Article 119(a) of the Constitution. And, therefore, I am now speaking in the capacity of the Attorney-General. (Laughter)

On a point of procedure, I am wondering whether it is in order or procedurally correct for the Opposition Chief Whip to move a motion, which has got financial implications. Is it in order for her to propose that motion without due regard to what is required to be done under Article 93 of our Constitution, because it has a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund that can only be moved by the government side?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, that is why I was seeking the opinion of the chairman.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, whereas it is a good contribution that would enhance detection and management of disasters in this country, you realise that putting up a commission requires a law in place and with the practical experience of making a law in this House, it is not possible in a period of six months. We can take it over as a committee and ask the responsible minister to bring the law such that we can start preparing for this commission.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that acceptable? The point raised by the learned Attorney-General is that a private Member is limited in their capacity from raising matters like motions or bills that have charges on the Consolidated Fund without consultation and confirmation from the Executive.

That is why I referred the matter back to see if there is a way of harmonising and we move forward without having to propose an amendment that would be limited by the Constitution. That is what I was saying.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need your help in understanding this financial implication. My understanding previously is that we all make general recommendations and every general recommendation some time will find a financial implication.

I think that the honourable member could only cut off or we could only have an amendment to cut off the timing bit of it and then carry the general recommendation that this be operationalised. Then Government will, at its own convenience, bring in a Bill or whatever that is required, which then carries the financial implication. Otherwise, nothing that we have been doing and that we have done for years would have gone through because if we say, create more hospitals, they will have a financial implication. But when we put in the time element, it is the one that brings the financial implication. So, I would like that, if my reading is anything right, then we remove the time element of it and just carry the principle.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why when I asked the honourable chairman, he said that matter can be accommodated and that they are going to take it up. In other words, he has submitted that the principle should be captured.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think we have the Constitution and there was a reason why they put it in the Constitution. This commission should have been established by 1995. If they have not - because disasters are in the country - you see when you have not been affected, you do not mind. Disasters are in the country and the reason they put that commission was to deal with issues of disaster.

Currently, it is hon. Ecweru alone who you are hearing saying he is in Bulambuli walking alone. He is doing nothing in fact - you are being over stretched for nothing. If the commission was there, he would just be fitting in directly.

So, the responsibility of this function is the Executive and unless we urge them, they will not do it. Or else let us delete it from the Constitution if we see it is irrelevant. Otherwise, it is a very important thing and we should put it in this recommendation and the government will find resources to be able to fund the commission.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I think the chairman of the committee was reasonable in saying that nobody is against the principle. In any case, it is constitutional, but if you check this Constitution, you will find where the Constitution was clear on the timeframe of establishing that law; for example, the land law and I can quote others.

All we can state is the principle by actually repeating what is in this Article and then the government will go ahead and start the process as it has been thinking about it.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the principle of Article 93 has been clearly ruled by the Speaker. One similar situation is if you take a patient to a hospital; it is like Government bringing a Bill or policy statement to Parliament. It is the responsibility of the doctor to diagnose, dissect and treat the patient accordingly. 

So, in this case, the motion we are handling was moved by Government. What this House is doing is just making amendments and improvements. If you look at the report of the committee, the chairman has in one item regarding digital migration, given a time limit of two months. So, once a Bill or report comes to this Parliament and Government has moved the motion, we now do our legislative work and, therefore, the interpretation of the Attorney-General that Article 93 applies, is totally invalid.

It is invalid because the motion on the Floor was moved by Government and our work is appropriation. So, we make adjustments, improvements, shifting votes here, making recommendations and setting timeframes. If Article 93 now ties our hands, then we can do virtually nothing. Mr Speaker, I beg for your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Article we are talking about is Article 93. “Parliament shall not, unless the bill or motion is introduced on behalf of the government:

(a) Proceed upon a bill, including an amendment bill, that makes provision for any of the following -” and particularly, we are referring to (ii) “...the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction.”

What they are proposing is not by reduction. If it was by reduction, we would be permitted by the Constitution. What you are proposing is by increasing. Therefore, it is restricted by the provision of the Constitution. That is the point I was saying; that the spirit and principle should be captured and followed up by the committee responsible. If you want to provide that as a recommendation in the report, that would not be a problem, but the principle should be captured in the report and that is what I am saying.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I want to accept that the other side has Members who are members of the Committee on Presidential Affairs and I am certain that even if Government will overlook it, they will impress it upon Government to ensure that it comes up in subsequent meetings. So, our committee entirely agrees that the principle be taken as a general recommendation to remind Government of its responsibility.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson for accepting to take up this recommendation. I am glad that we have all taken it in good faith. I concede that we put it among our recommendations and it becomes our duty to ensure that Government fulfils it. 

The second amendment is still a matter to do with a constitutional provision of what is required for someone to become a Resident District Commissioner. I invite this House to be cognisant of Article 203(2) of our Constitution that stipulates the qualifications of someone to become a Resident District Commissioner, and that we operationalise this too. If it were fully operational, the committee would not have put it as an issue to task the minister responsible to ensure that the RDCs present their certificates and CVs. And the minister would not have assured this House that the CVs would be available in the next two months. It is because of this that we are saying that as we appoint RDCs, we should be mindful of the constitutional provisions. Thank you.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, the minister has conceded and accepted the recommendations of the committee. Our committee can only accept a period that is not beyond three months from today.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we thank the committee for that recommendation, but who is going to verify those documents? As much as you are saying that the RDCs will bring their academic documents, someone will say they have completed A’level and there is nobody to verify that. I think the easiest way to do it –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I think the Leader of Opposition was not in the House when I was explaining this. I said that we had already written to the RDCs and deputy RDCs to submit their verified qualifications. The verification is usually done by UNEB and the National Council for Higher Education – for those who need equating of their qualifications. We have given all of them two months, but you know it is also a process on their part. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have noticed that before we approve a minister or any official here, they first bring their CVs and their certificates. I do not know how you appoint an RDC without a CV and certificates.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have just received information from the Committee on Social Services - by whose pressure I had been made to adjust the Order Paper to move it forward – but I have been informed that the report is not ready. However, we have teachers who have been here the whole day. In the interest of being responsive, I will use my prerogative under Rule 22(1) to make further alteration to the Order Paper to allow the Minister of Education to make a statement on some urgent matter as we wait for the committee report. 

6.24
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Mr Speaker, this is a statement on Government’s efforts to address teachers’ grievances; the copies are being circulated. On July 4 2011, I met UNATU executive who presented a number of grievances major amongst which was a demand for a 30 percent salary increment. Their letter is attached to the statement and is duly signed by the UNATU leadership. Several other meetings followed including one on July 15 2011 following an ultimatum by UNATU to call a nationwide strike on July 28 2011, which they ultimately did. 

Mr Speaker, we noted that a week later, the demand for a 30 percent salary increment had switched to one for 100 percent salary increment. On July 28 2011, the President of Uganda convened a meeting at State House where he directed the Ministry of Public Service to convene meetings of an inter-ministerial team comprising the ministries responsible for Finance, Education, Justice, Local Government and Labour, and UNATU, to analyse the budget revenue and expenditure outlay with a view to assessing whether it was possible to have a salary increment for teachers this financial year or the following financial year and if so, to propose to Cabinet the feasible and sustainable percentage increase. 

Under the leadership of the Ministry of Public Service, inter-ministerial negotiations with the Uganda National Teachers’ Union were conducted, which culminated in a meeting with the President on Sunday, August 28 2011 where a report of the negotiations was presented. The President noted amongst other things that a broad agreement had been reached on all areas except on the matter of 100 percent salary increment. His Excellency the President explained the country’s economic strategy and Government’s position that no selective awards would be made anymore. Therefore, a salary increase for teachers alone was considered inapplicable.

The President, on the advice of both the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Public Service, gave a firm commitment that salaries would be raised across the board with effect from financial year 2012/2013, and the increment was to be staggered over a three-year-period. For example, a 15 percent salary increment in the financial year 2012/13, 20 percent salary increment in the financial year 2013/2014 and a 15 percent salary increment in the financial year 2014/2015, with primary school teachers getting a 50 percent increment over the medium-term, an increment that is higher than the 30 percent originally demanded by UNATU.   

Government was surprised when on 29 August 2011, UNATU General Secretary issued a statement to the effect that as a result of “the failed negotiations with the inter-ministerial committee and His Excellency the President of Uganda, teachers have resolved to continue with their action until they receive a positive feedback over their demands for salary increment of 100 percent in the financial year 2011/2012.” 

It is very important to point out that negotiations did not fail. Even over the salary increments, Government has met UNATU’s demand that Government specifies percentage increments over the medium-term should it not be possible to raise the increment this year. The significant difference is that UNATU would like to have a big selective increment for teachers while Government insists on a uniform increment for all civil servants in the same salary scale.

I would like to draw your attention to that table on page 2 which summaries areas of negotiations that were held by the Minister of Public Service as directed by the President. You can see that the first item which was extremely contentious was the 100 percent salary increment for teachers.

On that issue, the recommendation was that cognisant of the fact that the bulk of the national budget is “ring fenced” leaving only Shs 50.7 billion, which may be re-allocated - 

MR KYANJO: I thank you. Mr Speaker, you are presiding over a House that has the responsibility to cater for the interests of the members of the public among whom are the teachers in the Gallery this evening. These teachers came here to listen to the discussion of their sector during the presentation of the report. 

I think it is not procedurally right to begin to accuse the teachers who came for a different thing at this moment. I would beg for your indulgence that this matter gets curbed here. If the report was ready tomorrow, the teachers would come and listen to the report. We are endangering ourselves as a House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The ministerial statement has not come because the teachers are here. The statement had been indicated earlier, but we just did not have an opportunity to get it and so I was trying to reschedule it for tomorrow hoping that the social services – that is why I moved forward the report of the social services committee, but now I am informed that it is not ready. So, I have altered the Order Paper to allow this ministerial statement to be made and it is debatable. 

It is also in the interest of the public that this information is released because people are already going on strike anyway. It may be delaying and today they expected something, and so, we need something for the public. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I just fear that you could be misunderstood. Quite honestly, if I were a teacher right now in the Gallery, I would misunderstand you because I came for one thing and I am now having something different.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is not – 

MR KYANJO: The coincidence –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is not a statement to the people in the Gallery but to Parliament –(Applause)- they only happen to be there. This is a statement to Members of Parliament on the situations that are prevailing right now and an update to the Members of Parliament. Madam, please proceed and do not go through these tables.

MR KYANJO: I am most obliged.

MS ALUPO: What I was trying to articulate is that on the issue of 100 percent salary increment – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of procedure, hon. Minister.

MS ALASO: I would like your guidance on a matter of procedure in regard to our rules of procedure. Rule 67 talks about anticipation. 

Rule 67(1) says, “It is out of order to anticipate a Bill by discussion of a motion dealing with the subject matter of the Bill on a day prior to that appointed for the consideration of that Bill;

(2) It is out of order to anticipate a motion by discussion of any matter directly relating to the subject matter of the motion prior to the date appointed for the consideration of the motion;

(3) In determining whether a discussion is out of order on the ground of anticipation, the Speaker shall have regard to the probability of the subject matter in anticipation being brought before the House within a reasonable time.”

Mr Speaker, the Committee on Social Services has been considering this matter and it is something that the committee will be reporting to this House within, in my view, a reasonable time either tonight or tomorrow. I would like to know whether it is procedurally okay to bring in the honourable minister in anticipation of what the committee is going to be reporting to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what we have been waiting for is the report of the Committee on Social Services on the ministerial policy statement on social services issues which include health, education and several other things. But there is a sticky matter that has been disturbing members of the public, which under the rules, we also allow ministers to make statements on matters that come before their docket. (Applause)

I see no contradiction and anticipation because what is going to be presented will be an overall bigger thing than this particular matter. So, I do not see any conflict in this situation that we are anticipating that possibly tomorrow a motion will come with the same content. But what is coming, and I hope it comes soon, is a whole report of the Committee on Social Services, which has many things in it. That is my understanding. 

Hon. Minister, please quickly roll up this thing and if we are going to open it to debate, we can debate it and if not, we will receive the information and then we can suspend our debate and wait and debate it together with the overall report, if it is necessary. The minister has felt that it is necessary because there is something happening in the country and the matter now is not coming before this House because the report is not ready. Honourable minister, please proceed.

MS ALUPO: Mr Speaker, on the table that I had earlier on drawn the attention of Members to, and particularly on the issue of salary increment, the inter-ministerial committee -(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with due respect to the presentation of the Minister of Education, I am rising on a point of procedure pursuant to good advice given to us by hon. Alaso -(Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, hon. Alaso made her submission and you made a ruling. The ruling of the Speaker is final; hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi should be informed. Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to continuously interrupt, deliberately, so as to inhibit progress of debate? Is he really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the rules for challenging the ruling of the speaker are very clear. The honourable member has not followed those rules; he cannot, therefore, be in order. He is ruled out of order. (Applause)

MS ALUPO: Mr Speaker, cognisant of the fact that the bulk of the national budget is ring-fenced leaving only Shs 50.7 billion, which may be re-allocated, but this is at the risk of paralysing operations of ministries and service delivery –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I propose that instead of going to read the content of this table, read the issues raised and whether it was agreed upon or not so that we note it. We are not going into these details in the table. There is a column on issues and then the column on remarks. I see some objected, agreed - why don’t you just do that for us? 

MS ALUPO: That means that on the issue of salary increment, we as Government did not agree with the provisions that UNATU forwarded and I have already provided what Government responded with, that is, a three-year increment and I have given the percentages.

On the issue of a tax waiver on all teachers’ salaries, we and the teachers were in agreement. On the revision of Pay-As-You-Earn threshold from the current Shs 130,000 to Shs 260,000, we agreed that it should not be implemented because it would affect negatively the national revenue collections and the economy. On the timely remittances of the capitation grant, it was agreed that Government releases the money on time directly to school bank accounts.

On increasing the beneficiary areas of hard-to-reach allowance to include urban areas or municipalities in all the beneficiary districts, we also agreed to move as indicated in the recommendations.

On the payment of scientists’ allowances, we agreed that next financial year, Shs 40.335 billion is set aside to pay allowances to science teachers.

On the resumption of implementation of the scheme of service to provide in class promotional ladders for teachers, we agreed that Shs 7.8 billion needed to implement the scheme of service be availed in financial year 2012/2013.

On the implementation of Public Service Negotiating, Consultative and Disputes Settlement Machinery Act 2008, we agreed that the Ministry of Public Service assisted by the Solicitor-General’s Office issues a roadmap for finalising the statutory instruments required to operationalise the negotiation machinery under the Act by the end of October 2011.

While at State House, it was evident that all parties were satisfied with the outcome of the negotiations. We were, therefore, surprised to get notice that industrial action was continuing. It should be emphasised, however, that basics regarding the way forward were agreed at the State House meeting and even if UNATU were to mobilise teachers for continued industrial action, this would have to be done in accordance with the provisions of the law.

The Public Service Negotiating, Consultative and Disputes Settlement Machinery Act, 2008 prescribes a due process to be followed before such industrial action is taken. The Act guarantees workers’ rights to withdraw labour or call a strike in furtherance of a labour dispute, but sets out a procedure that should be followed, if such action were to affect delivery of the essential services in the Public Service as stipulated in the Sixth Schedule, including education services.

The most important point of it all is that Government, therefore, expects that teachers will report for duty when the school term opens on Monday, 5 September 2011, and if not, Government will be left with no option, but to apply sanctions as prescribed in the relevant laws -(Interjections)- regulations and government standing orders. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, should we debate this or should we take it to tomorrow? Let me propose as follows. We received this statement; tomorrow the Committee on Social Services is going to make a presentation. If we want to discuss this before the committee presents that report, that is fine; but I propose that tomorrow we receive the overall report and we could single out a moment to deal with this specific matter in more detail.

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I am addressing myself to the issue of modalities like procedure. How are we going to handle this matter? We are pressed by time. The sequence of events we have followed from the beginning up to now shows that really time is pressing us hard, but this issue is very important and it requires to be given sufficient attention. 

Therefore, tomorrow -[Ms Kabakumba: “Are you challenging the Speaker?”]- No, I am not challenging the Speaker. I am just trying to appeal that tomorrow, sufficient time should be given for this statement alone and for the social services report so that even if they flow together, the factor of time should be considered seriously because the issue is very serious.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is fair because the matter is actually a serious matter.
   
MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I inherently beg for your extreme indulgence in accepting to receive the statement of the minister, but not to allow this statement to be debated. Use your discretion so that we are not part and parcel of the threats she has paraded in this report. These are insults to the people who cannot defend themselves. So, I beg that you accept to receive this report as if it was just laid on the Table, and we wait for the committee report as we debate the plight of the people within the docket of the social services. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I had proposed; are we in agreement on this -[Members: “Yes.”]_ Thank you very much hon. Members. –(Interjections)– So, can we push for another thirty minutes and we see how far we can go with Defence? We can receive the presentation from the chair, which will take 15 minutes, and then we will receive the response from the minister, which will also take 15 minutes and then we can adjourn. That way, tomorrow we will start with other matters and the debate. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since the matters we are handling beginning this afternoon are very crucial - they need special attention in their own right. So, the issue of defence should be in the line which you had previously arranged and not this one. Let us deal with the report on education and tomorrow we can handle the one of defence.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, look at the situation we are in; at the end of debate today, I am going to be forced to make some decisions. But we have 30 minutes which we can use. Can we just receive the statement from the chairperson and the statement from the shadow minister and then we adjourn and continue with the rest tomorrow? We are just trying to see how much we can accommodate given the situation. 

Hon. Members, I have personally sat here since morning; I should be the one who is worse off, but I am trying to see how we can help this country move forward, especially in this period. So, can we agree to receive the report from the chairperson of the committee?

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for that passionate appeal. I do not object to the principle of extending our hours of work. But this is an accurate time for me to go and pray with the rest of the Muslims. 

So, allow us a break of 15 minutes; we will be back –(Interjections)– yes, I am a shadow minister and I have the right in my religion. It is getting to 7 O’clock; and if the House is desirous of continuing with business, I would be willing to go as far as midnight. But I am requesting for a break of 15 minutes because I am the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs, and Hassan is the Shadow Minister for Defence; we are both Muslims. What do we do; unless Islam does not matter at all? Hon. Moses Ali is here, he can bear witness. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can we agree to receive the report and the statement from the shadow ministers today? ([Members: “Yes.”] In that case, in order to accommodate them, can I suspend the House for 15 minutes?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I wish to remind you - hon. Speaker - on the directive you gave on the plight of the people in Amuru; you said that the Minister of Finance should come with a statement to this House. This matter is very serious –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, actually, a copy of the statement on the issue of the training sessions by Enterprise Uganda at Archbishop Fricke Secondary School in Pader District by the honourable Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. The minister had undertaken to come back with it in the afternoon and it is here. So, can we have the 15 minutes suspension and then come back and receive this - 

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker, I am a devout Catholic, and it is my time for rosary –(Laughter)– but if there is postponement because my Muslim colleague has asked for it, then I will also request for time for the rosary. So, I believe that God can wait so that we can continue receiving the reports and we discuss tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, on Monday, I had to make a public apology to our Muslim friends because of the pressure we put them under, by sitting here the whole day, yet the next day was a big day for them, just because we wanted to accommodate that business. I am very reluctant to deny that request, especially since it is presented in that way. The House is suspended for 15 minutes. Thank you. 

(The House was suspended at 6.55 p.m.)
 
(On resumption at 7.22 p.m., the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you have 15 minutes. 

7.22
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Simon Mulongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs has a report for the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2011/2012, which I beg to lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR MULONGO: The committee, in fulfilment of the Constitution and Rules of Procedure, undertook to review and report on Vote 004- Ministry of Defence; Vote 009 - Internal Affairs headquarters; Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force; Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service; and Vote 120 - Directorate of Citizenship and Immigrations. 

The report, in its scope, highlights the performance of those various sectors or sub-sectors; considers key planned activities and programmes in this financial year; considers the underfunded and funded priorities; looked at the proposals by the ministries; and also considers the committee recommendations in the previous financial year, and pronounced itself on certain observations and recommendations. 

We did hold meetings with all those key agencies, and reviewed and analysed the key policy documents. We also conducted field visits to ascertain information on spot. 

In terms of Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence, the budget performance for 2010/2011 was that the approved budget was Shs 623.5 billion. There were two supplementaries amounting to Shs 1.501 trillion, giving rise to a revised budget of Shs 2.125 trillion against which Shs 2.099 was released. To this, we had a 99 percent performance by the Ministry of Defence.

I want to point out that the increment unusually, was occasioned mainly by the Shs 1.394 trillion for capital expenditure on classified equipment, which was duly approved by Parliament. This was part of the Shs 1.5 trillion commitment by the Government of Uganda on the same account.  The committee was satisfied that the performance of the budget of over 99 percent was achieved. 

This financial year, the same ministry has presented a proposal for Shs 957.992 billion covering wage and non-wage items, including a capital item of Shs 280 billion as a final instalment on the classified expenditure to finalise the instalment to cover or retire the accounts of the capital expenditure on classified equipment. 

The committee took note of the provision of Shs 25.095 billion for capital expenditure to which, measuring against the annual submission by the ministry on its Defence Strategic Infrastructure Investment Plan is inadequate because in this financial year, the ministry looks forward to undertaking a number of development programmes which the committee feels that the Shs 25.095 billion is inadequate. To avoid coming up with supplementaries, we feel that in future, the ministry should ensure that its DSIIP should have adequate coverage in terms of infrastructure development for its institutions. 

The Ministry of Defence covered extensively the area of professionalisation and modernisation of defence capabilities, including additional acquisitions, upgrading and maintenance of strategic weapons and weapon systems. 

The ministry did undertake additional pursuit of the LRA into areas of DRC and Central African Republic. The ministry and indeed the UPDF also continued with the disarmament programme in Karamoja, leading to a significant reduction in raids and joint improvement of the security situation. They also continued contributions towards the peace support operations in Somalia. They have also continued to undertake and participate in various regional and international peace arrangements, which include the EAC, the UN and Eastern Africa Standby Forces. 

This financial year, the ministry looks forward to enhancing its earlier achievements, mainly in areas of national defence and policy planning and support services; including inter alia, capability consolidation enhancement, recruitment and training, welfare and the issue of operationalisation of the Defence Strategic Infrastructure Investment Plan, which will consider, among other things, construction and rehabilitation of various infrastructure such as hospitals, residential accommodation, airfields and so on. 

The committee has, however, come up with certain observations and attendant recommendations.

On the classified expenditure, the committee has taken note that the Shs 280.91 billion is significant to retire the earlier commitment of Shs 1.585 trillion against which Shs 1.394 trillion has already been approved by Parliament. This Shs 280.91 billion has already been submitted through the Ministry of Finance as a corrigenda adjustment to the budget.  

On AMISOM funding, the committee was informed that the money in support of the mission comes to the Government of Uganda through a special account with Bank of Uganda. We, as a committee, feel that the account needs to be strengthened to allow stringent measures for better administration and management of the account. There are two grounds for us to consider this. 

One, there is a possibility of establishing a fund and, therefore, an Act of Parliament, to allow a more specified regulatory framework for how such monies are supposed to be managed, or following the Public Finance and Accountability Act as a statutory instrument which clearly specifies how such monies are supposed to be utilised. The committee felt that the latitude allows the ministry to develop its own priorities. Even if with the consultation of the ministry, but without an attendant regulatory framework as mentioned, this can be subject to abuse. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that either a peace fund be established through an Act of Parliament, or a statutory instrument be obtained. At the same time, we did not see the reflection of the monies received from AMISOM in terms of non-tax revenue, reflected in the budget. Whereas AMISOM funding is well articulated in the budget and the expenses thereto, we did not see in the non-tax revenue column disclosure of how much money is received in terms of the benefit of the Government of Uganda.

In terms of the AMISOM operations in general, the committee felt that the operation is expanding and more and more resources are required by the troop contributing countries, namely, Uganda and Burundi. And this definitely has huge strains on resources back home. This cannot go on because since 2007, the pledges of various African countries have not been realised. 

We consider it important as a committee that two things happen: First, that Government steps up its engagement through the African Union Commission to persuade African states to honour their pledges.  

Secondly, that given its lead role in AMISOM, Uganda re-engages the region and other stakeholders to bolster the political process on national peace and reconciliation to fast-track a peaceful end to the conflict in Somalia. This is important because the military person with a butt and a gun cannot definitely offer a solution in terms of conflict resolution, but can only be there to generate a conducive environment to support a peaceful resolution. So, the ministry needs to invest in this very seriously. 

The issue of domestic arrears; like in other domestic agencies, it has not been provided for by the Ministry of Finance and yet domestic arrears do exist and need to be paid or retired. 

It is our recommendation that the ministry takes cognisance of this and settles the accruals which arise from non payment of arrears, and indeed, could easily earn us a very bad name. There is no way we can bury our heads in the sand that we cannot cover arrears when they actually exist. 

There was an issue of land and how this land is managed. The committee took note that of late, there is wanton disposal of prime land in and around the city and other areas by the ministry for other considerations. 

We think that some of these pieces of land are located in such prime areas, which can be useful for security reasons and that disposing of such land will render us more insecure in future. And in any case, we can actually use such land for other purposes including commercial ones.   

There is also a case in question about the land at Kitante which was swapped for a new CMI headquarters in Mbuya at Shs 6 billion. The concern of the committee is that the disposal of land was undertaken without proper valuation and by the time the offer of Shs 3 billion was made to the investor, the land had not been valued. At the end of the construction, when the headquarters was handed over to Government, it was valued at Shs 20 billion. The difference between Shs 3 billion or Shs 6 billion and Shs 20 billion is so high that it has drawn the interest of the committee to institute some inquiry into the matter. 

We recommend that the ministry halts any further disposal of such land including other land held elsewhere like Kisekka Foundation Hospital, Mbuya land and Mpererwe.

The ministry should rationalise its landuse patterns and prioritise its development budget to address any funding inadequacies. For example, if we wanted to construct the headquarters for CMI, we would have saved this land, got money from the Consolidated Fund from Government to build the headquarters, and we could have continued to own that beautiful piece of land in a prime area like Kitante. 

On the issue of transport; it is the strong feeling of the committee that there is need to standardise transport means of the ministry by impressing a policy of standardisation of the fleet to ease the costs of maintenance. 

In terms of investment policy, the UPDF is one of those forces that are supposed to be productive and, therefore, invest in certain productive ventures. In particular, the National Enterprises Corporation has continued with its subsidiary to register losses despite annual injection of certain subventions into it. 

The committee recommends that Defence reviews the activities of NEC, but also immediately considers appointing a board to operationalise this recommendation even further. 

On welfare, the committee recommends that there should be a review of salary scales for the UPDF upwards given the high and rising cost of living. The ministry should also follow up the utilisation of construction materials to ascertain that they are satisfactorily utilised and that they benefit the end users. (Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Another five minutes will do?

MR MULONGO: Thank you so much. I will have to summarise. On education policy, the ministry has come up with various educational institutions which are extremely important under the military arrangement, but the committee feels that this should be rationalised and harmonised with secular educational programmes so that these are approximated and the qualifications in the military institutions can be equated with the national curriculum. 

On the question of pension and gratuity arrears; this has not been dealt with adequately. We still have a huge population of ex-servicemen who have not been paid. The committee recommends that they undertake to expedite the payment of ex-servicemen and also deal with the question of the auxiliary forces whose complaints, in a similar area, are still lingering. 

The committee considers unfunded and underfunded activities which amount to Shs 196.6 billion, which the committee actually considers important, but have not been provided for. 

In terms of Ministry of Internal Affairs, we have the headquarters, the Police Force, the Prisons Service, the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigrations. At the headquarters, the performance of the budget was rated 69 percent and that was largely on capital development because of under provision of the releases. In terms of the allocation for this financial year, the budget has not changed much except in reduction of Shs 1 billion to cater for domestic arrears, which have not been funded by the ministry responsible for finance. 

Actually, the budget for Internal Affairs has remained more or less the same and yet with their budget provision for last year, they were able to do a number of things in peace building, the Amnesty Commission, forensic and general scientific services, the computer services programme including the NGO Board which has done tremendous work.

The priorities for this year continue as those of last year; small arms and light weapons, the Amnesty Commission, forensic and general scientific services, the computer services and NGO Board, underpin this financial year’s budget.

Observations

I will just point out the fact that there is a problem with the national ID project, which includes the national security information system. 

The ID card personalisation machines remain housed in squalid conditions inside dilapidated structures at the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation centre in Entebbe. 

The MoU which is supposed to be signed between the Government of Uganda and the British Government has not been undertaken. Therefore, even the project on the national ID, technically speaking, has not taken off and cannot be operational now even when it was formally launched during the presidential inauguration of this term. 

We made various recommendations, which include among others that the ministry engages other line ministries for which this project is supposed to benefit and they include the ICT ministry, the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, the security services and so on. 

Secondly, they should benefit from the pool of skills and knowledge from those ministries because Internal Affairs alone cannot undertake this project on its own. 

The ministry should consider locating to one stock spending centre for the project on NSIS because as I speak, some votes are at the headquarters while others are at the Immigration. So, this creates a lot of disparities and un-coordination.  

The rest are recommendations on NGO Board and Amnesty Commission, which are in the line of boosting those institutions. 

Uganda Prisons Service

Mr Speaker, the approved budget compared to the releases led to the performance of 90 percent. There were achievements in terms of reduced prisoner population and there is also a daily average of prisoners incarcerated at 31,000 last year, which was very well handled. There is also a reduced prisoners’ escape rate, which is an achievement. And there is also an increased rate of recapture, especially of those who escape. 

The committee did discuss the question of the provision of priorities for last year and this year and on page 39, we have our own observations and recommendations. 

Mainly, the issue of Kigo Prison, which needs to be settled with support from the Ministry of Finance, including internal administration, institutional review and management. 

We are happy to note that the Prisons are undertaking measures to improve on non-tax revenue, which we have applauded, but we have recommended additional support in terms of capital financing, especially in areas of equipment so that they can generate sufficient food for the prisoners.

We had an issue of children of prisoners in prisons in which we were satisfied that some measures have been taken to cater for their welfare, but we feel that socio-psychological needs need to be addressed as well.

The welfare of the staff and the prisoners; we have made recommendations as well to the effect of improving upon them as well. And that goes along with underfunded and unfunded priorities on page 45 through page 46. 

Uganda Police Force

The revised budget vis-a-vis the releases shows that the performance was good. Alongside that, there was maintenance of law and order; recruitment; reduced crime rate by four percent; retooling of the Offices of the officers; operationalisation of the Police Duty Free Shop, which impacts on the welfare of the Force.

I wish to point out, however, on page 49 that whereas there is improved collection of non-tax revenue, there is huge room for improvement in this area because the collection of non-tax revenue from the Police sources in our view is understated. 

There was improvement in Police emergency response capacity, etcetera.

Planned outputs include enhancement of those activities in terms of ensuring proper rule of law and order, reduction in incidences of crime and violence, Police welfare and internal administrative systems. 

The budget provisions for this year stand at Shs 251.16 billion

Observations
There are shortfalls, which were pointed out and we think that they should work together with the Ministry of Finance to cater for these shortfalls, especially in wages for new recruits and those newly promoted. 

In the same way, we would like to see remuneration of the Police improved and those that were absorbed from the Local Administration Police properly tooled to work in tandem with the Uganda Police Force. 

Domestic Arrears

There were no provisions and yet we need to have them. 

On page 53, the rent for Police Headquarters; the Police having relocated from the Training School in Kibuli to Parliament Avenue, is paying Shs 3.6 billion and yet the construction of their headquarters is underway. There are three phases and the first phase to be completed requires Shs 6 billion. It is the consideration of the committee that we avoid paying further rent at the headquarters and instead the money should be paid upfront to complete the headquarters in phase one, where they can then shift. (Applause)

Additionally, we noted that there is a lot of contractual obligations being undertaken or entered into by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and thereby committing Government. This, it was observed, is being done without proper regard to certain procedures. We feel that this should not happen – with proper planning, this can be avoided. 

On Public Private Partnership (PPP), the committee recommends that the Uganda Police Force halts the implementation of the PPP programme until the committee is properly appraised on this matter. The issues of value for money; and the issues of the legal framework, which is not in place, require that all of us move in tandem so that we are satisfied that what they are doing and committing Government to while using public resources like the land, is a decision properly taken. Otherwise, until the committee is fully on board, this matter should rest. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give him an additional five minutes so that he can finish off with the Directorate of Citizenship and then wind up. 

MR MULONGO: Thank you so much for the second time. We also took note of the reforms in the Uganda Police Force. We are happy that significant reforms have been done. However, these reforms have been done in a piecemeal manner. Such piecemeal reforms can lead to problems related to lack of inter-proprietor ability within and between security services. 

We recommend, therefore, that reforms in the Force be consolidated on a comprehensive long range planning such as doctrine, the Force design, the levels, logistics, equipment etcetera because there hasn’t been a strategic document raised by the Police analysing their needs and stating how they are going to meet those needs, including the threats that will warrant the structure and Force form that they need to have. Piecemeal reforms can have a lot of imbalances and, therefore, problems. So, we asked them in the committee to consider a comprehensive review in tandem with other security establishments.   

I would like to also state that underfunded priorities exist within the Police, for which we have recommended that they are considered together with the Ministry of Finance.

Finally, on the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control, their budget performance; they are basically dealing with issues of passports and clearing people entering and leaving the country at entry points. There are other activities which the directorate is not undertaking. 

However, in terms of what they would like to do, they would like to broaden and deepen their activities including operationalisation of the National ID Project; the construction of their headquarters; and automation of information systems. They would also like to have logistics for removal of illegal immigrants, which the committee supports very much because the question of immigrants in the country is becoming increasingly sensitive. And until we deal with it, especially the ID issue and the question of illegal immigrants, we have a lot of risks.

Observations

We would like to see the institutional mechanism and criteria for issuing work permits reviewed and the question of monitoring aliens undertaken.

The construction of the DCIC building should be undertaken in line with the earlier understanding between the Government of Uganda and the UK Government. Just like the other headquarters, this has also stalled because of no execution of the MoU between the Government of Uganda and the UK Government. 

We would like them to step-up on the management of border points and of course revamping staff and structures at the headquarters. 

For the underfunded outputs, we have also recommended that they be considered as well. In conclusion, we wish, as a committee to move that this august House approves the budget estimates for the votes under review for the Ministry of Defence - Shs 947.9 billion; for the Ministry of Internal Affairs – Shs 1101.27billion; the Directory of Citizenship and Immigration Control – Shs 7 billion; the Uganda Police Force – Shs 251.16 billion; and the Uganda Prisons Service – Shs 73.393 billion. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to report. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I do not know the order in which you are going to proceed. Hon. Fungaroo, the Shadow Minister for Defence and Security, you have 10 minutes. 

7.53
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND SECURITY (Mr Hassan Fungaroo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues. First, I start by associating myself with the committee report presented by our chairman. I would like to present the Opposition’s response to the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Defence for the financial year 2011/2012 to this House. This presentation is made under the following provisions of the Constitution and law; Article 82(a) sections 1 and 2(c) and the Parliament Act, 2006 Section 6(e) sub-sections 1, 2 and 4. 

In the interest of time, I will go to observations on the key areas of concern, beginning from page 2. First and foremost, the budget for this financial year 2011/2012 varies greatly from the previous year by over 220 percent. In the previous year, what was budgeted and actually released should be subtracted from what is provided for in this year. In this sense, you see a trend of change. The 2010/2011 budget varies from the 2009/2010 and that variation is abnormal because of two factors; funding for purchase of classified equipment and the AMISOM funds. 

On page 3, there are concerns also of administration and budgetary control. There is poor administrative and budgetary control at the Ministry of Defence. In the first place, the audit department is weak; there is no senior internal auditor and if you look at the power structure in the Ministry of Defence, what is provided by the minister shows that the relationship between the PS and the CDF is not correct. Refer to Annex 1 and 2, got from the revised ministerial policy statement provided by the minister. The PS reports to the minister and is a chief administrative and accounting officer of the ministry, but here, as presented by the minister, the PS and the CDF are at the same level. So, who reports to who? The Permanent Secretary’s position is shaky in the sense that the person working there is on temporary basis; he has not been confirmed yet he is also put at the same level with the CDF. The state of not being confirmed has been ongoing for a long time. This creates a situation of fear as one cannot be firm to control and regulate the military and, therefore, the CDF. Money can be used in this regard anytime anywhere without say from the Permanent Secretary yet the Constitution provides that the military should be under the control of civilian authority. In this case, it is the civilian authority that is under the control of the military, sometimes. 

If you go to the strategic and security environment of Uganda, which forms the basis for the budget, the minister said that key risk factors in the strategic environment and the risk factors of security include: A narrow strategic depth, regional conflict and instability, shared strategic resources, global terrorism, to mention but a few. I agree with the things that the minister has mentioned, but it is a big mistake to limit that statement to that effect. There are other risk factors, which should be considered alongside this. 

Peace and security; whereas in the military sense today, Uganda is comparatively peaceful compared to the past 25 years ago, in that there are no wars within Uganda and Uganda is not engaged in wars with any other country, there are problems of a non-military nature which constitute threats to our security. Such political risk factors include deterioration in democracy, good governance and the rule of law that goes back to the 2001, 2006 and 2011 elections. The elections are no longer regular, free and fair as provided for by the Constitution. 

For example, elections in Uganda are not limited to presidential, parliamentary and LC V elections. LC I, LC II, women councillors and youth councillors, have not been given importance like the other elections that have been already held for the past three times and this creates a dent in our democracy. 

Court rulings on petitions raised by people against the Electoral Commission indicate that elections are not free and fair, and that is a security risk to Uganda given the history of this NRM Government that went to the bush because of rigged elections. The elections of that time were not free and fair and, therefore, this took them to the bush. With this incident in mind, it means that if elections continue not being free and fair and the courts rule to that effect, it may be possible that another NRM may be born because of these elections, which are not free and fair. And this is a security risk to be addressed.

National Disaster and the Natural Environment

We have lost people in Bududa and several other places. There are floods which occur as a result of environmental degradation and poor conservation practices of the environment. The environmental disaster is a security threat, but the minister ignores this. He has not mentioned this and yet his and my boss, who is the Commander-in-Chief, goes on to increase that security risk by threatening to give away Mabira Forest to be destroyed. People are dying because of the destruction of the environment, and instead of conserving, you want to destroy more and increase the risk.

Social factors, which are also risk factors - the teachers’ pay and salaries for civil servants, including health workers, are low. There are complaints of disparities in our social environment. This is a security risk. Suppose they rebel tomorrow, they can cause a problem or a peaceful demonstration may be violently suppressed and people die in the process. So, that is a security risk factor.

Economic factors - unemployment, poverty, the rising prices of fuel and food, and inflation. These are all security risk factors from the economic environment. These need to be taken note of and addressed. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three minutes. Summarise in three minutes.

MR FUNGAROO: Deployment of troops abroad - we have troops in Congo, Sudan, Central African Republic and Somalia. We need an explanation from the minister under what circumstances we deploy troops all around, particularly those in Congo and Sudan. Sudan now is an independent country with capacity to protect its own borders and our own interests even there. When are you going to withdraw the UPDF troops from there?

AMISOM

The funding for AMISOM has a lot of problems. Every soldier is said to be paid $ 1,028 but the government deducts $ 200 from every soldier. This money is not reflected in the ministerial policy statement; it is not reflected in the Treasury. Where does it go?

Fighter Jets
A lot of money to the tune of $ 740,000,000 used for the purchase of six fighter jets is improper. The jets are not necessary. There is no war that calls for these jets inside and outside Uganda. The current security threats we have, including maybe terrorism and insurgencies, cannot be fought with that type of equipment. 

So, stop the deal. This is a recommendation. Stop that deal, refund the money and then allocate it to essential sectors like agriculture, health and education to pay the salaries of teachers since you are looking for money to cater for their salary increment.

Poor Welfare of the UPDF

Every soldier - the ordinary soldier - is paid something like Shs 250,000. Today, it is teachers complaining about low pay. What about if it was the soldiers complaining? Teachers may complain with pieces of chalk in their hands but the soldiers may complain with bullets in their hands. Their complaining will be different. So, withdraw the money from the purchase of jets and bring it down and pay the UPDF troops higher salaries than what is given to them now.

Veterans

If you go to the villages, you find that among the poorest and the most miserable people of our society are the veterans of the UPDF. They go to the military and pass through it without any preparation for a good civilian life. The training they undertake in the UPDF is not prepared, standardised and synchronised with the training in the civilian institutions. 

We recommend that at every stage of training, there should be standardisation of the curriculum so that when a soldier graduates from a military course, he graduates also for any equivalent course at the civilian level. This means graduating from a military school gives you two papers; one which will be relevant for your life in the military, and the other one for a life after you have retired from the Army. In the present circumstances, even a well trained officer after retirement from the Army will be a useless person because the employers will not consider his good papers which were good for the military. 

In this regard, we recommend that training for the UPDF should be standardised like what is provided in a seminary - somebody who enters a seminary to become a priest graduates with two degrees; one is a degree of Arts in Philosophy and the other one is for Theology. The degree of Philosophy is about society/people. If you do not become a priest using the theological training, you can go and use your knowledge of philosophy outside. If you leave the Army with your military training, there is no preparation for you to go and live as a civilian. This is what I am trying to address.

Mr speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity and I hereby lay on Table, the Opposition’s response to the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates of the Ministry of Defence for the financial year 2011/2012.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we have the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs? Properly attired.

8.09
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hussein Kyanjo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your kind attitude towards the appeal I made before we started this session. 

I beg to lay on Table, the Opposition response to the 2011/2012 ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Internal Affairs with the component of human rights. 

Allow me also to lay on Table, pictures of individuals whom the Opposition has done thorough research and investigation on and discovered that they are the people who mix with the Police during combined operations to terrorise civilians. The images are here and are now documents of Parliament. They are also available on Face Book on Torture Uganda. When you write “Torture Uganda” you will discover these faces. They are individuals who go around masquerading as security officers and the Police have not come out to disassociate themselves from them. And the third image is a combination of their operations.

I am going to start on page 3 of my statement right down to Uganda Police, but before that, I want to thank the chair of my committee and the vice chairperson who presented the report this evening, and to inform you that the workings in the committee were cordial and there was a lot of co-operation. I largely associate myself with the main committee report and simply highlight areas of policy where we disagree as the Opposition.

In the Uganda Police Force, we have got an issue with the human resource management, especially the registry. We visited the registry and it was poor. Our recommendation is that immediate capture and computerisation of personnel records must be undertaken.

We have got an issue with the promotion of people in the Police and our discovery was that there is a lot of imbalance in this exercise, and worse still, this imbalance is based on regional orientation. We are recommending that this must stop and a proper streamlined promotion policy, which is fair to all Police men and women must be put in place.

We have an issue with recruitment and training. The policy regarding this is unclear because training and recruitment, even when we met with the Police Force, was not explained properly.

We would seriously recommend that the Police Force puts up a mechanism that is properly streamlined in as far as recruitment and training are concerned.

There is also another disease that the education policy within the Police Force is still irregular. There are junior officers who are allowed to go for further training and some of the senior officers deliberately refuse to go for further training and education. An explanation from the officers of the Police was not forthcoming. Our recommendation is that this must stop and should be changed.

I want to go to page five on the welfare policy, which includes remuneration. Uganda Police Force personnel are among the lowest paid persons in our country. Given the nature and code of conduct of the Police Force, the majority suffer silently and they cannot come up to sound this cry. You are all aware that Police officers cannot go on strike and they cannot demonstrate.

This matter must be addressed and we recommend a comprehensive salary review of all security related personnel to move in tandem with the overall pay reform and ongoing negotiations between Government and some sectors of Government.

There is an issue with accommodation and the disturbing element within it is: (a) the houses within which the Police officers are housed are dilapidated and some of them are given uniports to share and yet they have families. Everything must be done to rectify this situation. 

More still, there has been a discovery that there are individuals within the Police Force who qualify to stay outside the barracks. They continue to occupy houses within the barracks denying those who are supposed to stay there housing yet they get allowances to go and stay outside.

Our recommendation is that an investigation into this matter should be instituted and we further recommend that a comprehensive pay reform for all security related staff alongside other Government employees be put in place.

Regarding transport, I associate fully with the comments that appeared in the main committee report on page 8 regarding the private-public partnership. The view of the Opposition is that we are not objectionable to the project as it was brought, but it has not become law. This good conversation was conceived by senior people in Government and the assumption was that it has been largely accepted and, therefore, it can go into operation. We think this is village talk. It should be institutionalised and the law brought to the House and agreed upon so that we can work under clear terms.

Still, we insist as the Opposition that some sectors, especially security, should not be surrendered to this arrangement of public-private partnership. Government has the capacity to raise funds and deal with all issues including construction of the Police and military barracks without necessarily resorting to this so-called public-private partnership, which may end up like barter trade.

About administrative units of the Police, everybody in Uganda is aware that districts in this country are created like tropical rains. It is very easy to find a shiny morning and a very rainy afternoon. Because of that, we have a fear that the Police cannot cope with this speed of creation of districts. Our recommendation is that the police zones must be standardised and should not follow the new creation of districts.

Public order management policy

We have discovered that there is a lot of equipment that was procured rapidly and there was no commensurate training given to the people who are using this equipment. The end result has been brutalisation of the population by the untrained Police personnel, some of whom are actually not Police officers as you will see in the images I have laid on Table. We recommend that Police operates within the acceptable legal means in executing its mandate.

Joint operations

I have already laid images on Table and we think it has been a disturbing element within the operations of the Police Force. We know that there is an allowance within the law that the Police can call upon the Army to assist, but it has become common routine that every time the Police goes into an operation, the next stage is for the Army to come and without notice.

In other countries, it is not prohibited but it is announced. You are demonstrating, Police has announced that it is no longer coping with you and in the next three hours we are going to bring in the Army. The level of demonstration will reduce because there are those who will say, we shall not be able to deal with the Army, but here it is a mix; Kiboko Squad, non-uniformed soldiers and everybody wielding a gun. It is not a modern fashion of managing public order. So, we recommend quite strongly that this method gets changed.

Within this, we would like to see immediate results because there are very many cries from the public, some of which are innocent. They are not demonstrators or politicians.

Fire-fighting

Recently, we have had many fire outbreaks in schools and markets, but reports have not been forthcoming or have not come to logical conclusions.

In recent times, we have seen the Police Force acquiring equipment and the military also acquiring the same equipment. We do not know how this operation is going to be handled. In the past, we made recommendations through the committee that proper legislation should be instituted, which mandates the Local Government Ministry to deal with this issue. This has not worked out and this is why private companies like Fire Masters cannot operate freely because they cannot break a wall to go and stop a fire because of the encumbrance of this law.

Police uniforms

We have a problem with Police uniforms. My investigation and inquiry has discovered that Uganda is one country that has the greatest number of Police uniforms. UK has only three; US in all the States have either one or two uniforms. They change small elements on the uniforms like belts, pips and so on, but here, we have close to 17 different shades of uniform. Our recommendation is that these uniforms should be scaled down so that they are clearly understood by the individuals - (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give you three minutes to wind up.

MR KYANJO: I will be very grateful, Mr Speaker, if they are five. You will bear with me because my glasses broke and I am having trouble reading. Thank you very much.

Human rights violation and civil liberties curtailment

The Uganda Police Force has been accused by both the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Human Rights Watch plus members of the public, especially Members of the Opposition.  We understand the duty of the Police Force and we sympathise with them in a number of situations. But we cannot go ahead to give them the excuse of brutalising civilians in the public. 

Let me give you a number of incidences where we feel uncomfortable in the area of human rights; there have been brutal actions of the Police in combination with the Military and other state-sponsored militia – Kiboko Squad. Up to 80 people have been killed and a number of others injured during the Kayunga, Kasubi and walk-to-work protests all combined.

My findings have brought to surface the facts that there are 314 tramped up charges against members of the Opposition. More than 880 people have been arbitrarily arrested and a majority of them subsequently released without any charges. Over 280 persons are currently held beyond the mandatory 48 hours and worse still they are kept in ungazetted and unauthorised places. Close to Shs 1 billion worth of property has been destroyed by the unprofessional handling of situations by the Police Force. More than 1,500 motorcycles and 70 vehicles, especially trucks, have been illegally held by the Police without reasons and this has caused untold suffering and losses to large sections of the population. We demand an end to this violation and recommend that Police remains focused on its constitutional mandate.

On Prisons, I want to largely associate myself with the comments in the main committee report. On land management, I still associate myself with the recommendations therein. Regarding the Identity cards, my major comment is that Uganda must shift from over-concentrating on an ID as an item. In other countries, the most important element is to capture data. If we did that we would only need to issue individuals with a national identification number; you do not need to have an ID card. The moment you mention the number, it is fed into the system; your thumb print and eye image are taken, and your details will appear. So, we think there has been some element of fighting this project within the Ministry. This should be investigated and those fighting the project must be brought to book.

The idea of going to Entebbe for printing should be abandoned. Let us have three acres of plain land; Government can purchase this land – even if it was in Kasese, Fort Portal or Amuru – because this is not a walk-in; it is just a personalisation centre and in fact it needs to be away. We should put it in Kalangala. But the idea of putting it in Entebbe or Kampala – this “Kampalaisation” of everything is an archaic idea.

I recommend that the Ministry should be given the opportunity through Government funding to build its own headquarters rather than depending on donors or using other means. 

The immigration policy is not present and we are demanding that it should be brought to this House for approval. 

On the Amnesty Commission, our recommendation is that it should be merged with the Uganda Human Rights Commission to make one stronger body.

We also have a recommendation for the government analytical laboratory; it should be compressed into a department and taken to the chemistry department of either Makerere University or any other Government science university. This would be safer, cheaper and smarter. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Members. We seem to be doing very well. It is now coming to – The Leader of the Opposition is asking if we should start the debate. If we gave it 20 minutes we would finish. (Laughter)

Under Section 8 of the Budget Act, which I read the other day, let me read again: “There shall be presented to Parliament by the sessional committees, the reports on the Budget Estimates that fall within their respective jurisdiction by the 31st day of August in each financial year.”

Hon. Members, today is the 31st of August; it is now clear to me that we will not be able to comply with this by midnight of today. Even if we extended our sitting for today, we would not be able to finish because we still have to debate the reports on defence and internal affairs. We still have to receive the report of the natural resources committee and the reports of the social services and finance committees which are not yet here. So, we still have three committee reports that have not been presented at all and one that requires debate and response. In addition to that, we still have the Finance (Amendment) Bill, the Stamps (Amendment) Bill, the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill and the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, which we still have to handle. 

In the circumstances that it has become practically impossible for us to conclude this matter within the time provided for by law – under the same Act, in Section 21: “The Speaker may extend any period provided under this Act for a reasonable period.” I have considered the volume of work remaining and I find it necessary that the period be extended. After consulting with the Leader of the Opposition, the Government Chief Whip and the Leader of Government Business, we agreed that an extension of up to 8th September would enable us complete all our business. So, I am accordingly exercising the powers conferred upon me to extend the period of handling budgetary matters up to 8th September 2011. It is so extended.

Hon. Members, we still have business and a lot of it. The committee reports that have been presented are heavy and those remaining are even heavier. We think it is important for us to increase the pressure of work and we start early tomorrow and see how far we shall go. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 8.30 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 1 September 2011 at 10.00 a.m.) 

