Wednesday 30th, August 1995
(The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)
PRAYERS
(The Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)
(The Council was called to order.)
PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
DR BYARUHANGA (Kitagwenda County,Kabarole): Mr Chairman, I beg to present for the Council's consideration and approval of the Report of the standing sectoral Committee of this Council on Natural Resources covering the Ministries of Natural Resources, Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. The debate on the Ministerial Policy Statement and a committee's observation and recommendation on the ministries’ estimates of both the recurrent and development expenditure for the financial year 1995/96. 

The report is in two parts vote 028 Ministry of Tourism Wildlife and Antiquities and Vote 029 Ministry of Natural Resources, as hone Members have read through the Policy Statement I will just highlight the Committee 's observation and recommendations very briefly 

The mandate of this Ministry that Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities which develop Tourism Sector of the economy to the maximum extent possible consistent with a protection of environmental and cultural values as means of generating wealth, foreign exchange, employment and promotion of public awareness of the international and local communities understanding of the of Uganda. 

Observation and recommendations. The Committee observed the growth inadequacy in allocation of funds to the Ministry which has made the Ministry unable to carry out its activities effectively. The Committee noted with great concern the arbitrary cuts suspension of money approved by NRC, by 1tlnistry of Finance and Economic Planning without consulting the Ministry responsible and recommend that in future Ministry of Finance should always consult NRC and Ministry responsible before reducing or suspending allocations. 

The Committee observed with great concern the mere extinction of some rare species of animals in game parks currently being carried out by some armed thugs from both inside and outside the country and recommended that; the role of the game warden be strengthened by providing them with better fire armies in order to encounter poachers who are better armed. 

Consideration and Provisions be made to this Ministry to buy equipment and facilities to protect existing games. The Committee noted that Tourism is not given enough publicity and observed that if this is done tourism could bring to the country much more foreign exchange than currently. It, therefore, recommended that more money be provided and intensive tourism promotion and publicity both inside and outside the country. The Committee observed in their tour of game parks that they have poor or no communication net work and recommended that efficient communication net work in terms of all weather roads and walk talkies for game rangers be provided. 

The Committee noted with concern the poor working conditions of the staff working in some game parks and recommend that consideration be made to improve their welfare. The Committee noted the increasing rate of expansion of controlled areas from 2.7 per cent to currently 9 per cent, it was however, reported to the Committee by the Ministry officials that the Ministry have put in place policies to utilise 12 per cent of the revenue collect to benefit the surrounding local population and provide development projects to these areas as incentives. The Committee noted that the Hero Square is neglected and recommended that ground should be considered and given all respect deserves by being fenced and properly maintained. The Committee observed and recommended that Uganda Museums be made an autonomous institution. 

The Committee during its tour of the Wildlife management college at Katwe observed poor facilities in the college and noted that unless the budget provision for this college is kept up it will be forced to close down and therefore, recommended improvement of facilities of this college to an international standard. The Committee recommended hon, Moses Ali's requisition of Third Deputy Prime Minister and wished him success in his office but observed that despite the increased role of the Minister no provision at all has been give to cater for his post and recommend that the Minister for Finance provide a separate budget a provision of one hundred thirty seven million five hundred and twenty thousand to cater for this increased activities. 

The Committee also observed that the concessionaire of Kidepo for Apoka rest camp in Kidepo that is Alukain Holding Limited has not yet opened the facilities for use and yet they are ready and showed worry on the high rates which are marketing these facilities at US dollars one thousand (1000) per night which station is likely to discourage tourists from outside the country and indeed inside the country. 

The Committee noted with concern that the Secretary to the Treasury directed MS Apolo Hotel Corporation to remit US account dollars 1 million to a blocked ENAGO project in Switzerland against the advise of the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and a board of Directors Apolo/Sheraton, since then there has not been any acknowledgement of receipt of this money, the Committee therefore, noted that this money was remitted and should be accounted for. 

In our interviews with the board we discovered that there had been a lot of communication between the Minister for Finance and Sheraton/Apolo Hotel Co-operation on this issue but we are still not satisfied with accountability for being this one million US dollars, we feel that this money is not accounted for. The Committee recommends that the equator pass at Masaka road be developed to match the standard of that at Naivasha in Kenya. The Committee observed that the current switchboard in the Ministry is old and no longer effective and a provision be made to the Ministry to purchase a new switchboard as a priority. 

The Committee recommends therefore, to the House to approve a total sum of 1,535,000,395 (One billion, five hundred thirty five million, three hundred ninety five thousand) under vote 028 for recurrent expenditure and eight billion, nine hundred and seventy seven nine hundred thousand under vote 128 for Development Expenditure -(Applause)- Vote 029 Ministry of Natural Resources. 

The Ministry directorate of Natural Resources is divided into three, namely, Water development, Energy and Mineral development, Environment Protection and each directorate has a specific mandate to execute. One, Water Development the Committee appreciate the efforts of Government in providing accessible water to all areas in the country, but observed that despite this effort the situation still remains green with only 34 per cent of the rural population and between 50 and 70 per cent of the urban population having access to take water, the committee therefore, urges Government to accelerate its efforts in availing safe water to all parts of the country. The Committee observed a serious discrepancy existing in the funding for safe water and sanitation programme between urban and rural areas and recommends that Government bridges this gap by increasing the fund for Water Development in rural areas. The Committee noted that the implementation programmes for the small town water projects under IDA has stalled due to a delay in passing the relevant legislation and recommends that the water bill be part of the priority of Government in this august House as soon as possible. (Applause) 

The Committee noted that urban water under National Water and Sewerage Corporation are currently only in 9 towns, namely; Kampala, Jinja, Entebbe, Masaka, Mbarara, Tororo, Mbale Lira and Gulu hopefully this will be increased by three other towns within the next two years by inclusion of towns of Kasese, Fort Portal and Hoima, the other towns and municipalities are directly under the Water Directorate in the Ministry. The Committee noted with appreciation that under the rural water programmes the following projects had bee undertaken and there is a list of all the districts of Uganda and the current programme in each of those districts for Members peruse. Despite all these projects, the situation in Kisoro still remains grave with school going children failing to go to school instead of walking over 10 kilometers in search of safe water, the Committee, therefore, recommends that the Minister of Natural Resources seeks the approval of this House for a special release of Uganda shillings 2Qxm 120 million as a emergency requirement for water provision to Kisoro. (Applause) The Committee also observed that RUWASA programmes in all areas above have been so slow and recommend the directorate to expedite implementation of these programmes. 
The Committee is greatly concerned by the provisions that are ridiculously far below ceilings set by the Minister of Finance, for example; small towns water projects request of Five hundred and nineteen million was cut to two hundred and thirty two million by the Minister for Finance that is a short fall of 50 per cent. Rural Water and Sanitation Programme request of 795.1 million was cut to 565.1 million short fall of 40 per cent. The gravity flow scheme request was given a provision of 57 million a short fall of 60 per cent and we are told, as far as the gravity flow scheme is concerned that it is the cheapest known method of provision of safe water, the Committee noted that the capacity building already carried out in the 21 districts at considerable cost in the first year of gravity flow programme will be kept redundant by the short cut in the budget. 

The other example is a short fall of about 50 per cent in the water resources managing projects and Emergency Rehabilitation request cut from 470 million to only 66 million a short fall of about 80 per cent it is almost inconceivable that these projects can be executed with this kind of - by the Minister of Finance, Energy and Mineral Development. The Committee noted with appreciation that work at the Owen Fall Dam expansion project is progressing well and that an agreement has been signed for the generation of power 300 to the tune of megawatts that Bujagali Falls. The Committee, however, observed that despite the excessive demand for electricity, the tariff has both in rural and urban areas kept the population away from utilising it and noted that in some cases the complete absence of a national -has meant that a big section of the population are not connect to electricity. The Committee recommended that:
1. Tariffs Charged by Uganda Electricity Board be reviewed from time to time by the NTC, that the complete rural electricity programme be put in place. The Committee observed that UEB continues to supply power to Kenya at a ridiculous low rate of 0.25 US cents per unit and that negotiation to revive these terms have stalled, however, the demand for more profitable Power to Tanzania and Rwanda has increased, it therefore, recommends that negotiation on the rate of power supply to Kenya be revived. The Committee observed that the Ministry of Natural Resources has still put a little in place effort to provide cheaper alternative sources of energy such as solar and biogas. 
On the Petroleum sub-sector, the Committee appreciated the role the Government is putting in to encourage the exploration of petroleum as evidenced by the signing of a petroleum sharing agreement with Uganda General Works and Engineering Company in February 1995. The Committee however, noted with dismay that there is no provision at all by Ministry of Finance for capital development in spite of the Minister of Natural Resources having requested for Uganda shillings four hundred and forty four million eight hundred and thirty five thousand, two hundred twenty four (444,835,224). The committee considers it ridiculous for the Ministry of Finance to expect a sub-sector to raise one hundred and three million point seven (103,700,000) to get % raised as a appropriation in aid by a non - generating a revenue generating sub-sector. 

The Committee showed great concern for the complete absence of provision for maintenance and procurement in respect of Jinja strategic reserve tanks and recommends that a provision be made for this and the Ministry of Public Service create additional establishment to cater for this strategic reserves. As we speak now there is no provision in the budget for this. The Committee noted gross under funding for the: sub-sector of geology in spite of the improved capacity building that have been achieved through the UNDP Project UGA/89/001. With sadness the Committee regrets the tragic loss of one of the investors in gold mining through a plane crush and appreciates the quick response by Government to form a commission of inquiry to the crush." In the same sad note the Committee on behalf of the NRC wishes to extend sincere condolences to hon. Kajura, Minister for Natural Resources for the loss of his daughter in the same crush. 

Environment Protection. The Committee noted with appreciation t following the passing of the Environment Bill, Government has now launched the National Environment Action Plan Board which will 0 see the implementation of the Environment margin statute which was passed in this august House. The Committee also appreciates centralisation of Forest Department that had been decentralised and commended the continuous support and interest shown by donor agencies in this area, particularly EEC, DANIDA, and others. The Committee, however, is alarmed by the continuous activities of illegal pit sawyers operating in the natural forests of Budongo and west Bugwe in particular I and ask Government to take action. 

The Committee also showed concern by the non-fulfillment of Government policy of the forestation programmes by the licenced pit sawyers/saw millers. The Committee solar house hold observed that wood fuel continues to major as a source of energy which has resulted in uncontrolled charcoal burning the major factor of environmental degradation and recommended that Government comes out with a more affordable and environmentally friendly source of energy and the Committee also noted with great concern that the Minister of Foreign Affairs has not been remitting moneys to international organisations and conventions for the first 8 years, and the department is bound to get denied voting rights and other privilege. 

On further scrutiny, we found that the monies owned to International organisations amounted to only 69,000 US dollars. The Committee observed that an agro-forestry network project code named NR-03-a-129- Forestry-93 continues to be budgeted in the Ministry of Natural Resources yet the information available to the Committee shows that the Ministry of Natural Resources plays no role whatsoever, in the co-ordination of its project we felt this project was misplaced and we were made to understand that it even appears under NAR so the committee recommended that a clear position of this project be outlined. 

The Committee was greatly concerned that only a third of the 1994/95 budget provision for metrology was provided, also noted that there is a 75 per cent short fall in this section in the recurrent budget provision for 1995/96. The worst hit sub-sectors being that of training, the monthly weather bulletin and operation funds for the 18 hydro metrological stations. Therefore, is sub-sector is characterised by none motivated staff and yet the Minister of Finance expect it to raise Uganda shillings Two hundred and eight hundred million in this financial year as appropriation in aid to provide for its activities, therefore, the committee recommends the setting up funds for the sec The Committee further appreciated that the success attained through the fall projects the National wetland conservation and management programme, the Kibale Semiliki conservation and development programme, the Mountain Elgon conservation and development programme, the institution support for the protection of East African by-diversity as institution strengthening of the implementation of the Montreal Uganda. All these programmes are very well outlined in the policy statement which I hope all to Members have got. The Committee therefore, recommends the House to approve a total sum of Uganda shillings 1,901,000,061.under vote 029 for recurrent expenditure and shillings 58,423,100,000.000 under vote 129 for Development expenditure. I beg to move. 
MRS KULANY: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank also the chairman of the Committee for his presentation. I need some clarification as far as the water project under RUWASA. RUWASA was supposed to start a water project in Kapchorwa district in 1994, but up to now we have not seen any tangible results. Secondly, the UEB carried out a feasibility study in 1993 and Kapchorwa has only power through a generator for about 4 hours that is from 7.00 a.m. up to 11.00 a.m. and as such the town cannot grow because of lack of power. I would like to have some information concerning the two water and energy -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. lady from Kapchorwa that for the last four days UEB has so it operates up to 10.00 p.m. now:' 

KALULE-SENGO: Mr Chairman, I want to express my disappointment at what has appeared in the report -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. 

MR KALULE-SENGO: Mr Chairman, I am on page 12 of the report subsection (h). I want to express my disappointment at this very little provision in the department of the metrology section. Because as I have always pointed out I have found 1m. These reports of these weather forecasts are very inaccurate. For example, only yesterday but one on Sanyu Television, the weather forecast was such yesterday should have been a very sunny day and the lady on the television warned that we should be waiting for temperature which would have gone to 30 degrees centigrade and she even advised us to wear light clothes and following that advise I put on my kawunda suit yesterday -(Laughter)- not to suffer from the extreme heat. But on the contrary, the day turned out to be very cold the whole of yesterday, which actually proves my point that these weather forecast reports are very, very inaccurate. 

Now, if we are to save this country and guide it properly, enough money should be budgeted for this particular department, because the same error goes even to the extent of informing farmers that it is likely to rain that they should start planting. Now, when they start planting because of these -forecast you find that the rain does not come and the farmers lose. So, I would like to express my support to the hone Deputy Chairman of this committee and to each the feelings of my colleagues that this particular section should actually be given more money, because by giving it only one third of the budgeted amount we get this wrong reports and we find ourselves in trouble. 
Chairman, thank you very much.' 
MR ELYAU: Mr Chairman, I have about two points; one is water. I thank the Minister, particularly that at least in Teso today, at least a mile has got a borehole and I am encouraging that more money -(Interjection) yes, I have seen it in my area -(Interruption)
THE CHAIRMAN: Order please. 

MR ELYAU: So, Mr Chairman, there is still a problem with schools our primary schools at people at mid day you find small children really yawning without water. So, I want the Ministry to consider the schools; that most of the schools be covered, especially primary schools. Now, going to electricity or energy, we still have a problem. I told the Minister last time that since we came to this House no repair have been carried in that line that goes via Kalaki to Kaberamaido, I am urging the Minister to do his best to put the thing correctly; 
Lastly, there is that line which goes from Mbale up to Lira above us we are finding it a problem; people are asking can we not also tap that electricity so that we can start industries because the line just passes above us and we are wondering why we cannot really enjoy that power. Can the Minister give us some explanation; because people are asking why we cannot have that share the power is Just passing the lines are on our heads up to Lira but soroti, Kalaki and Kaberamaido do not have access to that power can we get clarification so that we also enjoy the industry which is coming soon. Thank you very much.
MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The high rate of cost of electricity continues to be a major to industries and other consumers and in fact recently in the press conference a question was put to the President and he did admit that he was wrong to -capital development to the Bill for the consumers so that the amount is covered within such a short time. I do not know whether the Minister intends to do something about the high electricity tariff. 
AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, while thanking the Chairman of the Committee what they have done -for the Minister for Natural Resources people have been talking about power and I think they are aware if a mere generator in a place like Kotido is there for the lines 50 years it is not there and we have always been going to the House I bas told they to explain the position some generators were taken to Moroto and then moved that one from there I do not know whether it crossed to Kitgum but the people are enjoying power, whereas other people are not enjoying and yet we are saying by the year 2000 electricity must be everywhere. How long will it take? So, it is even a shame to talk about it because we do not see it. I want to inform the Minister concerned the people of Kotido district are very disappointed for this Italian Co-operation and Development. Sometime the UNICEF donated 50 pounds I think that was 1992; they have only served 16; 16 out of 50 and there is another donation of 50 msking now another 84 then plus another donation of 100 totaling 184, now from 1992 I do not know when they will finish these 184 pounds to be served and if they were not able to finish 50 since 1992 today, I do not know. First of all, the team which was there they were not able to cooperate even with district officers they would just do whatever they want. Now when they were advised can you think about here, they did it on their own they; were not cooperative and I do not know now how the Minister of Natural Resources will handle the matter. 
One time I explained to the Minister that this team is giving us a hard time and it is of late I hear they have moved; I do not know whether they are going to cooperate with us or not, they do not know anybody not even a political leader, not even an administrator they have been working isolated. So, I would like the Minister to know this very seriously and if he wants to prove this let him go he will find the problem there. Thank you. 
MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to comment on environmental protection. I will start by thanking the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee for the good report , but I have three points that I want to make one is on National Wetland Conservation and Management. This is a very, very, serious point because I see that Mukwano Industries have constructed Soap Industry in our wetland, in the past or before the wetlands were supposed to conserved and that swamp was supposed to keep cooling Kampala, but now that swamp has been built and the chemicals that are coming from the soap will go to pollute the lake and we are going to be found with a lot of problems. Another thing on Environmental Protection is the BAT industry which is right in the town. BAT fumes are causing havoc to the workers in that area -(Interjection)- protection. Everybody is saying all of them are getting polluted; so with this, I wonder and I do not know how this is going to affect the lives of those who are working immediately in there and those who are being forced to smoke involuntary. 
Thirdly, in all developed countries they have done away with advertising cigarettes but here whatever they rejected in the States or anywhere else those are the sigh posts that are hanging allover Kampala advertising cigarettes, I condemn it and I would like Government to take specific action to make sure that these advertisements are not there I am well aware that Government is getting a lot of tax from B.A.T or from whatever, but we must be mindful of people’s; the green in Kampala by the time we realize there will be no green at all. There were areas that were completely marked for leaving as green areas but you go everywhere houses are mushrooming every time, factories are mushrooming and by the time we realise we will be having environmental degradation within the heart I am not taking any information right now, Mr Chairman, thank you. 
Mr Chairman, on the third point -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR: Point of order. Is the hone Member holding the House in order to mislead the House that construction rather than be cause trees and grass do not make a country developed but construction is important. Is she in order, Mr Chairman?
 
THE CHAIRMAN: That is an issue of argument. 

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for your protection and I a8 surprised that veteran politician is putting me in order in a point. That he should see even in very developed countries in Europe they have open space they have green areas they marked out for green. Chairman, I think thank you for ruling him out of order. 

On the fourth point on environmental protection, in the report, 3(e) I feel and I strongly recommend that Government should or must make sure that we do the solar energy, you know using bio-mass to protect or trees we should have institutions that teach solar energy from bio-gas and bio-mass. I thank you. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now call upon the Minister to reply first. 

MR KAJURA: Thank you Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. members for the valuable remarks and contributions that they have made. The Ministry of Natural Resources is a very large ministry and its, I can in responding to the various points that have been raised, first of all, let me take the simplest; the green of Kampala and indeed of the towns, it seems I do not know it is a cultural problem we do not seem to appreciate keeping green places or patches in our towns. Our town planners, town clerks and others in charge of towns and a city of Kampala tend to think that if you have structures going up then there is development, but we need to create these empty spaces for health and recreation grounds. So, I would hope that hon. Members would use their influence not only in Kampala but all over the country in ensuring that we are left with empty spaces where the citizens of towns can sit and relax. 

Now, as an alternative source of energy we need to look at biogas, solar, and wind indeed as other forms of energy. We have tended to leave this to the private sector we have been encouraging -we have contacted various firms to come and put up factories for the manufacture of panels in the areas of solar energy so far we have not succeeded; we are still negotiating. But Government has reduced or in fact removed the 54 per cent a tax import duty on panels I hope that this has affected the price positively and that hone Members will try to educate Members of the Public about this, indeed there are missions or parishes and schools that already use panels in the use of solar energy. 

I hope that either through -which has been established or through this House we shall be given some funding for publicity's seek in order to educate the people on other forms of energy at the moment we do not have any money we have tried to get it we have not succeeded. It is necessary for us to demonstrate maybe to have at least a demonstration place in every district to show to the people what else can be done in the ways of lighting, cooking and so on so that we can reduce on firewood. So, when this move the pressure on biomass, on trees, a proposal comes up I hope hon. Members will look at it feasibly. 

BAT, this is an area of pollution I understand BAT has been told to move itself away from where it is. Now, I would like to look into this matter mach closer today and I will resort to the House, because there is the factory's inspectorate which has been looking into this matter and I would like to find out what they have done. But I agree that there had been complaints in Kampala that people are coughing and having problems with their chests arising out of the fumes coming out of BAT's activities in Kampala. 

Now the cost of electricity. Well UEB has had a problem of having to fund its rehabilitation programme it has had the extra 30 million for the Owen extension's project. Now, if this House had been able to vote 30 million dollars then UEB will not have had to raise the same, but since this House could not do so, it was UEB to find the 30 million otherwise there would be no project because the donors insist that at least 10 per cent should be provided by the country either the Government or the utility.

 So, what hon. Mwandha at the back has raised this matter it is really a question of the budget not being able to provide 30 million hence UEB has to provide it otherwise I say the project would have failed, we are looking to the future and there maybe inconveniences now but we need to have these inconveniences for a better future. Now our negotiations with Kenya have stalled, well we await a more -time to be able to conduct these negotiations but for the time being they have stalled for reasons very well know to this House, it is the politics and I am sure hon. Members here are politicians and they know the politics that go on between the two countries. Now, on the provision of generators both for Kotido and Koboko these are on order we hope they will get here in the near future and be installed, so I would ask for patience.  

This morning I received a request about the Kalaki - Kaberamaido portion of the national - we are trying to repair this line and we hope it should be functioning in the near future I cannot be very precise because it is part of the fund that we are negotiating with an external donor and I cannot be very precise but vie are conscious of it and we are proposing to do something. Similarly the Kapchorwa line was investigated; it was surveyed and assuming good luck if the negotiation towards the end of the year successful work will start on that line this is not being funded from the internal resources of UEB we are getting it from a bank. So, the negotiation will be held towards the end of the year and once the funds are around the work will start.

I agree that Meteorology needs funding now I welcome the support given by the House but I would like to say that in metrology you can never be precise because the air masses continue changing all the time, today you could be receiving most -(Interruption)
MR OBW4NGOR: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hone Minister of Natural Resources that meteorology as science precise knows how to predict the wind and productivity. 
THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed hone Member. 
MR KAJURA: Mr; Chairman, I was unable to get the point made by the hone Member, but what I was saying that the air masses affecting certain region change because of what is happening in the way of conveyance extra. So once you forecast that most laden winds blow into East Africa on the other hand you will find that you have a stronger and dryer winds coming from the Sahara. So, instead of having rain you have a dry stake and vice-verse, so it is a never changing situation and it will change any time. So, it is not only the accuracy because we lost a lot of equipment because of the wars that we have had so far we have replaced 50 per cent, but very nature of meteorology that it can never been a statistic situation. 

RUWASA and Kapchorwa. I would ask the hon. Members coming from Kapchorwa to try to mobilize the people in Kapchorwa because the Programme involves or requires that the people are mobilized; that complemented they are able to do certain things which are then by the RUWASA Programme. When they visited Kapchorwa there was no mobilization. Secondly, they had hoped to find streams in Kapchorwa they found none so they had to change of adopting a more expensive system of boreholes. So, it is taking a bit of time that I would ask the hon. Member to be patient I believe by early next year the programme will start. 

So, I think these are -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order hon. Obwangor. 

MR KAJURA: Mr Chairman, these are the major -(Interjection) Finally, on the NGO supposed to be operating in Kotido, which has not been very civil and nationalistic; this is a matter which has been drawn to our attention and I have since held some discussion with this group we intend to continue negotiating with them, we need to handle them with a bit of care because they have come back with a bit of money, foreigners in the right way the same time we need their resources and these resources we need them where they are into areas in Uganda so we shall have a combination of both diplomacy and effectiveness and eventually we get what we want rather than if we leave them out. I thank you, Mr Chairman.  

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY
VOTE 028 - MINISTRY OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES HEAD - R135 
PROGRAMME 01 

PROGRAMME 02

PROGRAMME 03 

PROGBAMME 04 

PROGRAMME 05 

PROGRAMME 06 

PROGRAMME 07 
MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr Chairman, while I do not have any objection over all these programmes, the of Finance has not told us what steps he has taken to recover the one million dollars he remitted to. 
I would, therefore, suggest that, we deduct from this ministry the equivalent of one million dollars until the money has come back.  Mr Chairman, I propose. 

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Chairman, I raise to support the suggestion that has been brought in by hon. Member over there. I belong to this particular Sectoral Committee. The Committee was not impressed and was not satisfied as to why a directive should come from the Permanent Secretary of Finance.  Directing that, that amount be sent to other account which he knows that, is blocked. Now that, that money has been remitted into that blocked account, there is no acknowledgement up to now. So, we are not too sure whether it has not bounced but the person who has ordered that, it be deleted. That is why the committee was saying that it was fraudulently processed.  And this is why, since it is taxpayers’ money which was going to serve as a loan that is to be accounted for, before it is taken or considered. So, the fact that this House cannot recommend upward, but can recommend that we can bring it down with reduction. I do concur with him, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I just wanted to remind you that, this is a different ministry. Bear that in mind. 

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Mr Chairman, I disagree with reduction. I think you are punishing the round ministry. First of all, the accounting officer of the ministry objected, the Board of Directors objected; the Board of Directors under this ministry objected in contact. Now, the order for transfer did not in fact come from any vote controlled; it came from a micro controller of the finances i.e. the Secretary to the Treasury. So, there is no particular vote that should be affected except the micro vote. 

If you want to deduct, you deduct from the higher government vote that is whatever billion as a collection; but not a particular vote. So, I object to this proposal. 

THE CHAIRMAN: In short, it is not in order, even for me too. I now put the question, the total sum of shillings 1,535,395,000 under vote 028 Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities be provided for. 
(Question put and agreed to.)
ESTIMATES OF DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE
HEAD 128 -MINISTRY OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES - HEAD B 132
THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that, the sum of shillings 2,884,400,000 under head 128, Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities be provided for.
(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 029 - MINISTRY OF NATURAL RESOURCES - HEAD 141. 

PROGRAMME 01

PROGRAMME 02

PROGRAMME 03

PROGRAMME 04

PROGRAMME 05

PROGRAMME 06

PROGRAMME 07

PROGRAMME 08

PROGRAMME 09

PROGRAMME10

PROGRAMME 11

PROGRAMME 12

PROGRAMME 13

PROGRAMME 14

PROGRAMME 15

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Ushs 21,991,061 C under vote 029 Ministry of Natural Resources, be provided for. 
(Question put and agreed to.)
ESTIMATES OF DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE
HEAD 1 29 -MINISTRY OF NATURAL RESOURCES HEAD 138

GRAVITY FLOW SCHEME DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On Rural Water and Sanitation, the Chairman Mukono District although it is supplied by JSMASA; we are having a lot of problems with the water basin. Most of the boreholes that were put in place, the water I has dried because the water table is very shallow. And we have a water project especially in Ntenjeru County, which would supply the water for the small towns situated in Kangulumira. And everything is on site, but there is just very little that is left to be done handled. And that project would supp~ all the little towns and route up to Kayunga. I would like the minister of Natural Resources to see into that problem. I thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR KABUBI: Before we finish this development expenditure, I would like to bring this observation that, this Ministry has got many development projects; totaling to 58 billion. And if you can see the recurrent expenditure, we are giving it almost may be 2 billion; as against 58 billion in development expenditure. If you are to look at this development expenditure to ensure that these development projects work proper~; you need to also increase some money on recurrent expenditure so that, these projects can be monitored proper~. And we have a problem of these projects not achieving what they are meant. So, I would ask the Minister of Finance at least to give us an explanation as to why, they should give so little money on current expenditure and while this ministry is responsible for all this big sum of money on development expenditure; which is taking almost I would call about 20 percent of the total development expenditure of the budget. 

MR ENGOLA: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the point laboured by the hon. Member. But I wish to draw his attention to the fact that, in each of these projects; in the development he is talking about, the recurrent is also taken care of. You would find training; you would incentives on allowances and some others. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that, the total sum of shillings 7,542,830,OC under head 129, Ministry of Natural Resources be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

ESTIMATES OF DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

HEAD 324 - UGANDA ELECTRICITY BOARD - HEAD P7 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that, the total sum of shillings 7,778,300,000 under head 324, Uganda Electricity Board, be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

MR KAJUBA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that, the council do resume and the committee of supply do report thereto. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that, the council do resume and the 
do report thereto. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

MR KAJURA: Mr Chairman, I beg to report that, the committee of supply has considered Votes 028 and 029 and Head 128 and 129; and 324 and passed them without amendment. I beg to report. 
MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

MR KAJURA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

THE CHAIRMAN: With those in favour? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: And with that, we have come to the end of today 's session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. Thank you. 
(The Council rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 31 August 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

