Thursday, 31st August, 2000

Parliament met at 11.54 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

ASCERTAINMENT OF QUORUM

120 Members were ascertained as being present

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you will note from the Order Paper, the business we have deals with the issue of amending the Constitution. And because it is amending the Constitution, if it has to be carried for the Second Reading and the Third Reading, the vote must be two thirds of all Members of Parliament. Apart from the Second and Third Reading, we may have the Committee Stage, and at the Committee Stage, you do not need to have two thirds, but there will be a normal majority voting. I want to make this clear before we embark on this business. 

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With due respect, I stand on a point of procedure. Noting that the Bill we are going to discuss is so important and that it affects the future of this country and the constitutional order of this country, would it not be prudent for us to be availed with a report before the Minister proceeds?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, according to the item we have, there is a motion by the Minister. We shall have another occasion to receive a report from the Committee to which the Bill was committed. Just give us time to deal with the first item, and then we shall deal with that issue. 

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, with due respect to you,  as representatives of the people, it is important for us to have the report in time so that we cautiously examine it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I advise you to receive the presentation of the motion from the Minister. Obviously we shall not start the debate before we receive the report from the Committee. So, you are not prejudiced at all!

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Constitution (amendment) Bill, 2000’ be read a Second Time.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded, you can proceed. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. The rule of law in a civilised society, provides a state of order and orderliness or orderly behaviour, on the part of the citizens and organisations through the laws, regulations and rules, which institute, what I may call, structures of expected behaviour on the part of law abiding people. The rule of law thus creates or engenders relative certainty as to what one should expect, and thus enables people to go about their daily lives without unnecessary uncertainty and apprehension. 

In other words, laws, regulations and rules do away with arbitrariness in the conduct of public and social affairs. It is imperative that they should not be tampered with capriciously and arbitrarily, for this can create undesirable uncertainty and a state of anarchy. If they have to change, this must be done for a demonstrably sound reason and done in a transparent and orderly manner. It follows, therefore, with greater force, that a constitution of a country must not be tampered with wantonly or arbitrarily, for that would be the very negation of the rule of law. We certainly cannot afford this.  

The need to amend our Constitution, which was so painstakingly put together, some five years ago, by the elected delegates of the citizens of this country, has arisen. As hon. Members are certainly aware, this was as a result of the recent judgement by the constitutional court, which has declared certain vital rules and methods for transacting business in this House, unconstitutional or ultra vires the basic law of the land. 

The Government has responded to this undesirable state of affairs by bringing this Bill to this august House. The Bill seeking to amend the Constitution is firmly grounded on the imperative demand that Parliament must conduct its legislative business constitutionally. In other words, this law-giving institution must, itself, act constitutionally.  It must act in accordance with the basic law of this land as interpreted by the court, if its laws are to be laws at all. Thus, the Government and I, as Minister for Constitutional Affairs, have not engineered a reason for seeking to amend our Constitution. We are content to operate this Constitution and the laws and rules made under it by this Parliament. All of it ignorantly, until the constitutional court has drawn us to certain defects in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, which render what Parliament does nugatory, or in the language of those who are reputedly learned, renders them null and void. 

Parliament must, therefore, in my opinion, act expeditiously and rise from this state of, what I call, ‘legislative impotence.’ I am glad that the hon. Members have already decided to do this, hence this Bill, and hence this motion.  

I must point out that this short Bill does not mean that other deserving proposals for amending the Constitution cannot or will not be entertained. Certainly, I can say authoritatively that this is not the attitude of Cabinet.  Indeed, as you are all aware, we already have a Constitutional (amendment) Bill, 1999, which is being sponsored by hon. Onapito and Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu. And I am given to understand that it is lined up for consideration and deliberation in this House. 

Hon. Winnie Byanyima and some other Members have expressed a desire to also tackle other Articles of the Constitution for purposes of amendment. All this is legitimate, but if you have a bicycle whose tyres, brakes and carrier need to be repaired, it would be prudent to start repairing the tyres and the brakes and then start riding the cycle. Otherwise, if you start with the carrier, it just will not move. That is why I am proposing that these amendments, which are here to enable Parliament to do its duty, should be dealt with expeditiously.  

Let me now turn more specifically to this Bill. The constitutional court has declared that taking certain decisions and making laws on the basis of ‘ayes’ and ‘noes’ as a voting method is unconstitutional. This means that the Rules of Procedure of this House in which this is the method of determining issues are ultra vires to the Constitution. Consequently, whatever Parliament has proposed to decide or legislate in this manner is vacuous, is null and void, and is of no legal effect! 

These are some of the direct consequences of that judgement. The Articles of the Constitution are Article 88, which deals with the quorum of Parliament and Article 89, which deals with the manner of deciding whether or not a particular measure has been passed by the requisite majority of Members presently voting, within the meaning of that Article. Also Article 90, which deals with the appointment, formation and functions of Standing Committees and other Committees of Parliament. Those three are the only Articles, which the amendment is dealing with. The Bill before you, therefore, is limited to amending those Articles only, as a way of meeting the requirements of the court’s judgement.  

The first principle behind the proposed amendments, therefore, is that the Articles must be amended in such a way that Parliament can get on with its business in accordance with the Constitution and not contrary to it. And we want to do so expeditiously, particularly at this time when the national budget is still limping on our laps, so to say. The proposed amendments to Articles 88, 89, 90 are, in this sense, prospective. In other words, they look to the future on what Parliament is going to do from now on. 

There are also certain clauses being proposed, which relate to what Parliament has already decided, but now can only be described as having purportedly been decided. These laws and decisions too must, in the public interest, be regularised, if they are to have constitutional and, therefore, legal and operational effects. This is what I call the principle of validation. However, I must state strictly and categorically that this validation is being proposed subject to Article 92 of the Constitution, which I now proceed to read:  
“Parliament shall not pass any law to alter the decision or judgement of any court as between the parties to the decision or judgement.”  

Therefore, the validation has to be done, if we agree, subject to this Article of the Constitution. This Bill, therefore, specifically relates to all those decisions that Parliament passed under our rules by the method of voice voting, namely, ‘ayes’ and ‘noes’, as well as those decisions that Parliament made through the Committee of the whole House. As hon. Members know, all legislation has, at the second stage in the reading of a Bill, had to be committed under our Rule 101(1). Under this Rule, every Bill goes through a Standing Committee to the Committee of the whole House. At all material times, therefore, in the life of this Parliament, this has been the position. So, I propose that Parliament makes this crystal clear in the amendment Bill, to remove any shadow of doubt. 

Some legal opinion has it, however, that such past decisions or laws are not automatically invalidated until challenged in court and so declared to be invalid. I respectfully agree with this opinion. However, all such decisions are potentially challengeable and possibly potentially capable of being declared null and void. 

I urge Parliament not to agree to remain in this state of indecision and indeterminacy hanging around all these issues. I think we should decisively say that we will validate these rules subject, as I said, to Article 92 of the Constitution. This uncertainty and indeterminacy must be dealt with and transformed into legislative and operational certainty. 

Having given the general reasons for seeking to introduce these amendments, let me comment briefly on the specific clauses. In Clause 2 of the Bill, which refers to Article 88 of the Constitution, we are proposing that this Article as it now stands now be amended. Article 88 now reads as follows: “The quorum of Parliament shall be one-third of all Members of Parliament.”  

Now, the difficulty with this is that, it talks about all Members of Parliament. This includes Members of Parliament who are ex-officio and, therefore, not entitled to vote.  The court has already said if they vote the result is null and void. So, actually, Article 88 also refers to ex-officio Members. Therefore, we propose that the quorum of Parliament shall be one-third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote, and not anybody else. 

Having said that, although we do not provide for it here, we provide that the Rules of Procedure of Parliament shall, for many other reasons, be left to determine what Parliament should do and how Parliament should carry out its business. For that reason, we are proposing that not only should we have a quorum at the time of voting, but there should also be quorum for the transaction of business. We are leaving this to the Rules. The rules should determine what the appropriate number of people to transact business should be. I think it would be rather poor if I came here with the First Deputy Prime Minister, and two of us, together with the Speaker started transacting business. It is done in other countries. In United Kingdom, three Members of the House of Lords can transact business. Do not say it is not possible.  

Although, in the United Kingdom, the Membership of the House of Commons it is 659, however for voting, the quorum is only 40. Ours is a third, as of now, about 93 people, and we see what is happening to the quorum. In United States they have got 435 Members of Congress, quorum for sitting is 3 and for voting is 280. South Africa has a membership of 400, quorum for sitting is 134 and quorum for voting is 200. Canada has membership of 301, quorum for sitting is 20 and quorum for voting is 20 out of 301 Members of Parliament. India has a total membership of 545, quorum for sitting is 55 and for voting is 55. Ethiopia has total membership of 546, quorum for sitting is 273 and for voting is 273. Kenya has total membership of 224, and quorum for voting is 30 on every legislation except constitutional matters, where 65 percent of the total membership is required. Lastly, Zimbabwe has total membership of 150, quorum for voting is 25, but when it comes to constitutional matters, they have to be 100 Members of Parliament present and voting for the measure. 

We said formerly that the quorum should be got from those entitled to vote. Secondly, we said this issue of quorum should be raised at the time of voting.  

Article 89(1) deals with majorities, and it reads as follows: “Except as otherwise prescribed by this Constitution or any law consistent with this Constitution, any question proposed for decision of Parliament shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting.”  

The court has decided that this phrase “determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting”, excludes voting by voices. And so, we are proposing to include, in this amendment, that voice voting shall be legitimate, should be constitutional, in addition to counting and any other method, which Parliament, in future, might come up with, for instance electronic voting.  

We also propose here, what I call, the principle of validation, in which the laws which have been passed here using ‘ayes’ and ‘noes’ should not be declared invalid only by virtue of the fact that they were passed using the ‘aye’ or ‘no’ method. 

Article 90 relates to Committees of Parliament, and it reads as follows: 
“(1) Parliament shall appoint standing committees and other committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions”.  We are not changing this one

“(2) The following shall apply with respect to the composition of the committees of Parliament…” 
It goes on to mention who should be on those committees.  

We are proposing that the Committees of Parliament, which we have under the Rules of Procedure, for instance Sessional Committees and the Committee of the whole House, should be specifically mentioned here so that we remove any doubt in the future.  

Article 90 (3) lists the functions of Standing Committees. It describes what the Standing Committee should do. We are proposing that these functions can be relegated to the Rules of Procedure, which will be able to determine them.  Those are important principles, and I have already alluded to the ‘aye’ and ‘nay’ validation requirement of that.

Lastly, I want to read this to you, which is clause 4(8):  “For avoidance of doubt, any Act passed or purported to have been passed at any time after the commencement of this Constitution, the Bill for which was examined and reported on to Parliament by the body known as the Committee of the whole House, shall at all times for purposes of this Constitution be taken to have been discussed and recommendations made on it to Parliament by a Standing Committee.”  This, again, is validation that is being done specifically and subject to Article 92 of the Constitution.  
I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr. Wacha Ben): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You will recall that on Tuesday 29th August this year, the Minister for Constitutional Affairs moved for the First Reading of the Constitutional (amendment) Bill, 2000. After the First Reading, it was agreed that the Bill be referred to the Committee for Rules Privileges and Discipline, in light of the recent constitutional development arising from the decision of the constitutional court. Accordingly, on Wednesday 30th August 2000, the Committee met to consider the Bill. We were privileged to have the hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to brief the Committee on the justifications of the Bill. 

The Bill is directed at removing uncertainties and restrictions in the business of the House regarding quorum and counting of majorities. The Bill further seeks to validate legislations, resolutions, decisions, loan guarantees, appointments, and other matters taken by this House since its inception. The Bill specifically deals with Articles 88, 89 and 90 of the Constitution, which it proposes to amend.  

Being the first constitutional amendment, the Committee would have wished to interview as many interested civic organisations and persons interested in this amendment as possible. This, however, proved impossible in view of the directive of the House that the Committee should report its findings on the Bill this morning. So, besides the hon. Minister, the Committee decided to concentrate on the proposed amendments. The Committee considered the Bill clause by clause in the following manner:  

(a) The Committee agrees with Clause 1 of the Bill, as it is the appropriate title of the Bill.

(b) In respect to Clause 2, the Committee felt that it would be important to improve the Clause by inserting a sub-clause 3 to allow Parliament to prescribe quorum during its day to day deliberations.

Let me repeat that we accept the concept that quorum should only be for purposes of voting, and we leave it in the Constitution as a provision of the Constitution.  But the Committee felt that, since Parliament might find reasons for moving the quorum at its daily sitting, up or down, the decision as to what constitutes a quorum for purposes of deliberation of this House should be left to Parliament. And it may be done in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

(c)  The Committee is of the view that Clause 3 of the Bill should be deleted to allow Parliament to determine the manner of voting, since methods of voting will continue to change. 
Let me explain, Clause 3 deals with Article 89 of the Constitution, and this is the Article which deals with methods of voting and methods of arriving at a decision, whether by majority vote or otherwise.    

The Committee is of the view that the whole of this Article should be deleted because we feel it was misplaced, in the first place, since voting and methods to come to a decision is a matter which should be controlled by the Rules of the House.

(d) The Committee agreed that a number of the provisions in Clause 4 would be better placed in the Rules of Procedure of the House other than in the Constitution.  The Committee, therefore, proposes that this Clause be re-drafted to take care of this view.  

The composition and functions of Committees, whatever Committee, should be a matter for the Rules of this House.  It was a mistake for us, those of us who were in the Constituent Assembly, to have singled out certain Committees and fixed them in the Constitution and then allotted duties for those Committees in the Constitution. The argument of the Committee is that it should be within the power of this House to decide on what Committees it is going to have, to allot it duties, and to make provision for their composition. While we agree that mention should be made that parliament should have Committees, its internal mechanism and procedures should be left for the rules of this House.  

(e) The Committee is of the opinion that validations’ provision, as proposed by the Minister, are a much larger issue than what is being restrictively put here.  The impression being created is that validation is only for purposes of curing recent ills.  

If we take the view of the constitutional court in detail, a lot of ills have already taken place in this House. So, the validation should be a much wider than having it restricted to certain specific Articles only. That is why we have proposed to place a new article in the miscellaneous section, called article 257(a). I intend to move this these various amendments to the Bill at the appropriate stage.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that, given the time frame within which the Committee was expected to work, unfortunately, it was not possible to invite other individuals to present their views. We are sorry about this.  

I wish, however, to take this opportunity to thank the hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and his team for their input in our discussions during the deliberations on this Bill. I wish also to extend my gratitude to Members of the Committee and to co-opted Members of the Committee. This being a technical matter, we found it necessary to co-opt some Members of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee to come and assist us.  We did co-opt four Members, three of them turned up, and they gave us real intellectual insight in our discussions. I want to thank them.  These are hon. Medi Kaggwa, hon. Omara Atubo and hon. Owiny Dollo. I wish to thank them most sincerely. 
I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we move to the debate, I just want to reveal that I have received a document, unfortunately, it is not signed, but it is entitled Minority Report under Rule 160. It is on the Constitutional (amendment) Bill 2000, but, unfortunately, I do not know the source. I do not know those responsible for the minority report, because the copy I have is not signed. So, that is the information I would like to pass over to you. Oh! Now there is another one that has just come in. This one is signed by hon. Nobert Mao. I do not know whether you have received copies, but I have received one. 

MR.ONGOM:  Mr. Speaker, I would just like to clear my mind on this issue before we start debating the Bill. Rule 54 (1) of our Rules of Procedure, says: 
“Reference shall not be made to any matter on which judicial decision is pending in such a way as may, in the opinion of the Speaker, prejudice the interest of any party to the action.”  

The Bill we are about to start debating, which has already been tabled, and the chairman has already read the report, covers a subject which is in court. Clause 3 (4) of the Bill specifically talks of an Act or Resolution or decision passed or taken, or purported to have been passed or taken at any time after the commencement of this Constitution using the procedure described in Clause 3 of the Bill.  

The procedure that was used to pass certain laws is a matter in court, which is going to affect some interests.  So, I am not quite sure whether the House is in order to discuss even the whole Bill, or at least this particular part of the Bill which directly affects the matter in court.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This House has no notice of a case proceeding in court, which is being dealt with by this particular Bill. Secondly, you are quoting Rules of Procedure of this House. I believe the Bill before us is a constitutional mandate. Parliament is just exercising its functions as per the Constitution. Definitely, even if what you say is correct, the Rules of Procedure cannot fetter the functions of Parliament bestowed on it by the Constitution.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I remember, on Tuesday, when this Bill came for its First Reading, hon. Elly Karuhanga of Nyabushozi did talk at great length and did allude to how this Bill and its determination would affect the determination of a hearing pending in the constitutional court. On that day, - (Interruption) 

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member holding the Floor, from Ayivu, in order to mislead the House by misquoting me and referring to a small slip of the tongue, which you overruled, and therefore was deleted from the Hansard? It was deleted because of your ruling, is he in order to now turn it into a substantive point, which he describes as a wrong contribution, when it is not?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since you were overruled on this slip of the tongue, it cannot be a point of reference. So, please, make your case.

MR.NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The slip of the tongue did give you a chance to make a substantive ruling.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Here, you are balancing Rules of Procedure and the Constitution. Definitely, the Constitution will float above, because the Rules of Procedure cannot take away what is given to you by the Constitution. I do not see any judgement of court that says that Parliament should stop legislating. I do not see it anywhere. If you have one, we shall obey it.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, whereas I am very disturbed at sounding as if I am arguing with the Speaker – (Interjection) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is your freedom.

MR.NYAI: I believe you will protect my freedom as a representative from Ayivu to express this view very clearly. On Tuesday afternoon, you ruled, Mr. Speaker, that matters which are before the court are subjudice – (Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And I will not allow any debate referring to any matter pending in court.

MR.NYAI: Precisely, therefore, Mr. Speaker, should this Bill be debated while the matter is in court? Once we pass this Bill in the form it is in, we will have removed Article 89, under which those people are proceeding for redress. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have said, there is no injunction against Parliament to restrain it from carrying out its constitutional duty.  

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. After the ably presented report by hon. Ben Wacha, I heard you mention that there is a minority report. Would it not be proper for this House to listen to the minority report before we proceed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am the one who brought to your notice the document I had received, which was not signed, but it was a minority report. After some minutes, I received another document, which was signed, and I reported this to the House. But you should appreciate what Rule 160 provides for. Rule 160 says:
“Any Member or Members dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a Committee may state in writing the reasons for their dissent, and the statements of reasons shall, if presented in time, be appended to the report of the Committee and therefore...” 

If his report was not appended to the report, the Member strictly did not follow the rules, but as I promised, the hon. Member will be given the opportunity to say what he wants to say. He came in when the debate was actually about to start. There were some clarifications from Members otherwise we should be debating. But, I will give an opportunity to hon. Mao to say what he wants to say. He will be the first one to contribute.

MR.MAO NOBERT (Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr. Speaker, it is not true that the minority report was not handed over to the Clerk in time. I did hand over the minority report to the Clerk of the Committee to be appended, and he knows that very well. I handed it over to him, and I also know that it was probably the intention of some people in the Committee to short change this minority report. 

MR.MED KAGGWA: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to impute bad motives on the members of the Committee, when we agreed yesterday that we convene this morning in the committee room and he did not show up?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is out of order to impute improper motives.

MR.MAO: Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that statement. The truth of the matter is that nobody would have humanly been able to attend the meeting and also prepare a minority report in time for this debate. That is why I said, probably they wanted to knock it out technically. All the same, I will seek your indulgence, Mr. Speaker, to order that the minority report be appended to the main report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am giving you an opportunity to present your case.

MR.MAO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am going to read what is in this report. It is moved under Rule 160, and it dissents from the principle and the recommendations of the Committee. I signed it. I am the minority referred to.

The undersigned minority believes that, while in principle it is proper for the House to pass a Bill to make changes in the Constitution, to bring it into consonance with the recent rulings of the constitutional court, such changes should be a result of a comprehensive constitutional review process, to take into account also the current trends in our democratisation process. Those who hold out to be in charge of the democratisation process must read the political barometer correctly. There are many repressive provisions in the Constitution, which undermine effective participation in governance by a cross section of our society. This should be reviewed and changed. Therefore, it is the considered view of this minority that the Constitution (amendment) Bill, 2000 is brought in bad faith and will only serve the selfish interest of the current regime.  

On Quorum (Article 88):  
The undersigned minority believes that quorum means Members present and competent to transact business. Quorum should be fixed by the Constitution, it should not be left at the discretion of the Speaker of the House or for the House to change and alter by a mere simple majority. Transacting business is not only restricted to voting, but also includes debate. Therefore, quorum should not exclude non-voting Members of the House. Quorum should, therefore, be one-third of all Members of Parliament.  

On the manner of voting (Article 88):  
The undersigned minority proposes that rather than circumventing the ruling of the constitutional court, Parliament should do away with the voice vote of “ayes and noes” completely. The constitutional court was right to rule that, that manner of voting is primitive and does not allow for the votes of Members to be counted. It is all right to validate laws enacted by that voting system, but henceforth, Parliament must abandon that type of voting.  Our Constitution must state, unequivocally, that decisions shall be taken by a simple majority, save in certain cases, and the counting shall be done in accordance with the Rules.

On Standing Committees (Article 90): 
This minority believes that all Bills must be examined by Committees and that it could never have been the intention of the Constitution to make the Committee of the whole House a Standing Committee. Therefore, it is wrong to declare that the Committee of the whole House can ever be a Standing Committee.  

According to the new Oxford dictionary of English, a Committee is a group of people appointed for a specific function by a larger group and typically consisting of members of that group. This does not, in anyway, contradict the idea of the Committee of the whole House, which refers to the Parliament when sitting as a Committee. Thus, Article 90 could not have intended for the Committee of the whole House to be a Standing Committee. 

As a matter of principle, Committees give credence to the idea that the Legislature under our Constitution is not the alpha and omega of law making. Most of the laws are initiated by the Executive and not the Legislature.  

Secondly, when presented to Parliament, there is input from the public, who appear before the various Committees to help shape the Bills. When the Bills become law, they can be reviewed by the courts of law for purposes of determining whether they are constitutional or not.  Therefore, law making is an inter-play of all arms of Government and the people at large. Parliament dominates law making, but not to the exclusion of all other branches of Government. The importance of Committees cannot be over emphasised. All leading authorities agree that Committees perform five major functions, which a Committee of the whole House cannot perform. 

First, Committees allow Legislatures to perform simultaneously numerous important functions that otherwise might not be conducted at all. Examples of those functions include detailed review of proposed legislation, oversight of Executive branch activities, examination of and reporting on policy issues, and special investigation.

Secondly, since Committee proceedings are less formal than those of the entire Legislature, Members are able to discuss issues more formally. This creates an environment in which compromises on small matters and technical improvements in legislation can be agreed upon expeditiously.

Thirdly, Committee membership is a means of establishing leadership within the Legislature and visibility in the public arena. This is because Committee members become authorities on matters within the jurisdiction of their Committees and are acknowledged as such by their legislative colleagues, the press and the public.

Fourth, by holding public meetings, Committees allow citizens and media attendance, educate citizens on important policy issues, the likely implications of proposals and about the democratic process. Open meetings allow Committees to gain public understanding and build support for the Legislature’s subsequent decision.

Fifth, Committees that conduct public hearings provide opportunity for academic, business and non-governmental experts to present their views. 

Thus, it was wise for the framers of our Constitution to make it mandatory for all Bills to be reviewed by Committees. Obviously, their intention was not to make the Committee of the whole House one of those Committees to scrutinise Bills. 

Given the pending constitutional case challenging the Referendum Act, 2000 on grounds that it was not properly passed since it did not go to a Standing Committee, there is a lot of panic in Government circles. It is wrong for the Parliament to break the Constitution, and then when challenged, proceed to amend the Constitution to validate its erstwhile unconstitutional action. Therefore, this minority opposes the amendment seeking to ratify, validate and cleanse the unconstitutional procedure that the Parliament adopted to pass the Referendum Act, 2000.

Conclusion:
This minority opposes the specified amendments for the reasons aforesaid. Furthermore, this minority calls for a comprehensive constitutional review process to accommodate the many challenges and pitfalls that the 1995 Constitution has faced and is yet to face.

This minority opposes the ‘fast food’ approach to constitutional amendments. A constitutional amendment is a serious matter and cannot be approached in a frivolous manner just to accommodate the whims of a regime. Values of a generation are at stake here. Parliament must not be used to condone, sanction and acquiesce the unconstitutional acts of the NRM regime. What this country needs is the rule of law not the law of rulers!

I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR.OKELLO OKELLO (Chwa County, Kitgum): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for a very good piece of work. But allow me to say that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is about the most serious document we have –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I should set time for each contribution, because many people may be interested in making contributions. We should restrict ourselves to five minutes. 

MR.OKELLO OKELLO: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Constitution of our country should not be treated as if it was a party manifesto. It is totally different from a party manifesto! The Constitution is for all of us. If I feel hurt by some Articles in the Constitution, I should be listened to! If anybody else feels the same, that person should be given attention. I oppose the idea of using the method we are using now to amend the Constitution. I think the amendment is ill timed. 

I am sorry to say that our reputation here is at stake. We have damaged our reputation of late, almost beyond repair, and I am scared that we can still volunteer to damage it further. We are about to end our term, but I want to go out there and walk with my face straight. I do not want to go out and walk with my eyes down, fearing what people will say about me.  

On those two counts, the fire brigade method of work and the ill timing of these amendments, I definitely and strongly oppose the amendment. If they had come later than next week, I would support these a hundred per cent. However much we pretend to hide our intentions here, the signals we are sending out there are very clear. We are trying to render the judiciary unnecessary. The loser in this case will be democracy. The biggest loser in our country will be democracy because you cannot practice democracy when you are all in one, everything else in one. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.MUTYABA BENEDICT (Makindye East, Kampala) Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for its work. I support the amendment, but of course, as some Members know, I will rise again to move another amendment some time. 

It is very clear that one of the pillars of democracy is the principle of separation of powers. The judiciary trying cases following the Constitution, the Executive to govern and the Legislature to legislate. By virtue of what the courts have decided, the judiciary has taken it upon itself to inquire into the internal proceedings of Parliament. Now, when you do that, then you have a fusion of powers, and that can only lead to a constitutional crisis. I believe that the amendment aims at removing that kind of scenario. However, the amendment, as brought by the Government, is inadequate, and that is why I support the Committee report in total. 

The Government is trying to deal with this matter in a way which my Friend, Okello Okello, has called fire fighting. You will see that the amendments that are being introduced actually deal with just two issues. One, the issue of the Standing Committees, because that is constitutional and it might cause problems later. Two, the issue of ‘ayes’ and ‘noes’, because that has already been decided on by the court. I will support that, but do not be surprised when tomorrow another suit is brought, this time not to challenge the ‘ayes’ and ‘noes’, but on another matter, which again deals with the internal proceedings of Parliament. 

We are not re-inventing Parliament. Parliaments have existed for a long time, and I think we are following our former colonial rulers, the British. This Parliament, as far I understand, is a high breed between the Westminster model and the United States model. 

What have other Parliaments done in cases where the courts have interfered in the internal proceedings of Parliament?  As early as 1664 in England, there was a very big case where a Member actually took the Speaker to court, challenging the proceedings of Parliament. He was a Member of Parliament, but the decision actually affected him. Of course, the court ruled on behalf of the Member, and Parliament decided not to interfere with the decision of the court. However, they went back, as we are doing now, and passed an article and I think the Minister should have brought that Article as the first Article for amendment. 

That Article says that the freedom of speech, the debates and the proceedings of Parliament shall not be challenged in any court or any place out of Parliament. The gate is sealed. So, even if someone wanted to challenge the proceedings of Parliament on another matter, which has nothing to do with the voting, he would be restricted by that constitutional provision. Remember that the judges in this case were actually right, because the Constitution was vague. However, where the Constitution is specific, the judges will not go beyond the Constitution, because their job is to interpret the Constitution. 

When I discussed this matter, I was told that this issue could come up with a constitutional review. How do you know that tomorrow, another case is not coming? Would you want us to come back here and again have a Constitution amendment in order to make sure that, that act is validated or is it better for Parliament to have, some people may call it, an omnibus provision, which would protect Parliament? This is not the first time, as I said. It has been practised in most of the Parliaments in the Commonwealth, and at an appropriate time, if the rules so permit, I would like to move that amendment.  Thank you very much.

MR.WAPAKABULO JAMES (Mbale Municipality, Mbale) I beg your indulgence, Mr. Speaker, so that I may speak from in front here, notwithstanding the fact that I am a Backbencher –(Interjections)- I take objection to the label I am receiving from hon. Ongom, he called me a master confuser - (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I did not hear that. Proceed.

MR.WAPAKABULO: Thank you. I do not have much time. I will make very brief comments. I would like to thank the Minister for bringing this Bill, and I thank the Committee for a very good job. I would like to highly commend not only the Committee, but also hon. Ben Wacha for this professionalism - (Applause). 

There have been two judgements concerning the work of Parliament. One judgement by the Supreme Court says that the court system has freedom to tell Parliament how it does its work. That is the summary of that judgement. 

The second judgement by the constitutional court puts into question a number of laws, resolutions and actions of this Parliament, by virtue of the ruling regarding the method of voting and also regarding the question of quorum.  Also, by the very ruling of the constitutional court, it placed on Parliament how it can progress and set the speed at which it can do its job. 

What we are doing now falls into two parts. Part one is that this Parliament respects the Constitution. We are in fact proceeding in accordance with the spirit and letter of Article 79 of the Constitution, which says that Parliament shall protect the Constitution and promote democratic governance of Uganda.  

The judicial system, one branch of the state, has come out and made important rulings which, as I said, have raised doubts and questions. We could have chosen to go ahead and ignore the ruling of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal or the constitutional court. But as a law-abiding institution, both at the Executive level and at the Parliamentary level, we have chosen the constitutional path in resolving the issues that have arisen because of the decisions of the Judiciary. You cannot call that behaviour a shame, you cannot say that we have brought the reputation of this House and continue to bring it down. What we are doing is actually upholding the Constitution, as required by Article 79 of the Constitution. 

In summary, what we are doing should have three things, but we are doing only two. We are required to obey the judgements by coming out with a validation. The Bill here is about validation of laws, appointments, borrowings and so on. 

It is about facilitation of Parliament in its work.  Parliament is required to pass the Budget by a given time.  Parliament is required to process Bills in a particular way. The ruling has put fetters on Parliament. So, this Bill is about facilitation of Parliament in its work.

The third leg, which we are not doing, and I join hon. Mutyaba in that, is insulation. We should have prepared a provision here to insulate the work of Parliament from intrusion by the judicial system. Unfortunately, this Bill does not provide for insulation, and if the rules permit, we should seriously consider the question of bringing in insulation. So it is validation, facilitation and insulation.  

The Supreme Court ruling and the constitutional court ruling do not stand to be condemned, they were doing their job. We are also doing our job – (Laughter)- and I do not see why anybody should question the wisdom of the House when it comes up with amendments, but I urge the Minister to consider insulation. I thank you. 

MR.AISU OMONGOLE (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for a job well done. On the on-set, I must say that I support the amendments and I support the motion. 

As a citizen of this country, and as a Member of Parliament representing the people of Kumi County, I am getting worried day by day by the way we transact business in this country. Why do we have this crisis today? We have this crisis today because some people chose to ignore the voices of some people who told them not to rush things in the House as if the world is ending tomorrow. We have this confusion because some people think that they are beyond advice from Backbenchers. So, let us pass these amendments, but let us correct the way we run Parliament and the way we are run this Country.  

I am not anywhere near the law profession, I am a lay man, but I am able to see that the way we do things is not in order. So, we need to put our house in order. The judgement that the constitutional court passed is a test to this Government. It is a test to see how tolerant we are as a Movement, as Government and as Parliament. 

I would not have supported this amendment, but because we are enjoined by the Constitution to make laws for the good governance of this country, I support this amendment. I do not want a situation where we get a stalemate and we are not able to move. So, we should check our ways.

Good governance and constitutionalism demands us to put forward whatever Bill that we are supposed to bring into this House in good time, so that we are able to pass these Bills through the various Committees in the correct manner.  On Tuesday, I was one of those who voted against suspending our rules so that we rush this amendment. This is not constitutionalism! This is not good governance! 

In the past we carried out some investigations in this House, but we must learn to accept our mistake. If a mistake is pointed out, it is not good for us to always rush to the Constitution. I prefer to have a number of amendments that Members want to bring to this House to amend the Constitution. We have talked and talked about the Constitutional Review Commission, but up to today, nothing has been done about it. If we had the Constitutional Review Commission, all these amendments would have been made to the Constitution in good time, so that we avoid all this confusion, so that we are able to harmonise the operations of both the Judiciary and Parliament. So, experience is the best teacher. Let us not repeat these kinds of mistakes.  

We are enjoined to make laws for the good governance of this country, and the country must continue to operate in a peaceful manner. I support the motion. Thank you very much.

MR.NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would have supported the amendment if it were not for the time in which it has been brought, and considering the parts, which are being amended when there are some other influences around it. I feel the amendment has not been brought in good spirit. There is a lot of inequity and ill motive surrounding the amendment.

The idea of repealing Article 90 removes the rights of Members of digesting the Bills introduced by the Executive.  The repeal introduces the whole Parliament to handling all this summarily, without giving Members time to digest the Bills. The repeal of Article 90 introduces a permanent system of debating the Bills summarily, thereby abandoning the democratic principles in the debates. It is not moral, as I have said, inequitable, full of tepidity, and intended to prejudice proceedings that are now before the courts of law.

One can ask himself, after passing this Bill, what is the appeal going to be based on? If the Bill goes either against the state or against the respondents, how are they going to execute it, when everything has been removed? So, when I consider all these things pending, I am hesitant to accept the amendment, because of that element of inequity, which I read in the Bill.  

The amendment is silent about the law, which will protect decided and existing constitutional cases. The repeal will make filed appeals difficult to handle under the new law, designed to protect the Executive, but not the complainants. It will be difficult to enforce and execute orders, when there is no law to protect the parties.  

At Page 4 of the Bill, Article 90 4(a), makes Parliament its own arresting officer, prosecutor and judge. When you say that Parliament will sit as a Statutory Committee, and then after sitting, they come and report and then at the same time, go back and pass the Bill, the whole thing is too clumsy! I cannot understand how we shall have a law of that nature.

On the question of quorum, I think quorum should exist at the beginning and at the time of deciding a matter before Parliament.

On Article 99, the Bills are not the same. I also admit that some Bills may need ‘ayes’ or ‘noes’, because I cannot imagine us sitting here and starting to debate the Budget, and go on standing or raising hands, we will never finish the job. But there must be some decisions that can be made that way, and some others that can be decided based on numbers. 

In those circumstances, I would like to call upon the Minister to think of a method that can enable us not to really abandon the ‘aye’ or ‘no’ method. He should be capable of knowing the type of work, which can help us to carry out the job in a smooth manner. Surely, you cannot use the ‘aye’ or ‘no’ system on a Bill like the Referendum Bill. This is a fundamental change and everybody needs to know how it has gone. But to say, ‘aye’, ‘aye’, I cannot accept that - (Laughter).  

I did not agree with the comment made by the Minister that he is aware of the provisions of Article 92. And yet if the Constitution has taken away the power to undermine the judgement of a High Court, there is no way you can do it when this Article is still existing. 

I had not proposed to read this book, but Article 92 reads as follows: “Parliament shall not pass any law to alter the decision or judgement of any court as between the parties to the decision or judgement.” Surely, this is now what we are doing –(Interjections)- every body is entitled to what he wants to say. I am telling you, that is what we are doing, that is my judgement and you cannot make me change it. 

For that reason, while I may accept the amendment, if the hon. Minister could make some alterations to show us what Bills can be decided by ‘ayes’ or ‘noes’ and those which need actual counting. Of course, I know that there must be some amendment to this Constitution because it is now too old and unfashionable, it needs thorough amendment.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

LT.COL.MAYOMBO NOBLE (Army Representative): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in support of the motion.  Philosophers have something they call 'content and form'.  It would be very dangerous for us not to distinguish between form and content. I would have been very reluctant, if the amendment to this Constitution, which I participated in discussing and promulgating, was being brought on the issues of fundamental rights and freedoms. If the amendment were taking away rights already granted on land, I would be reluctant. If the amendment was brought fast or slowly, but affecting the issue of political systems or if it was affecting issues which Ugandans expressly said they would like to change with Parliament, as Parliament sits with district councils or consults the whole country, I would be reluctant. 

The wise Constitution makers categorised Articles of this Constitution. There are those we entrenched knowingly or deliberately, and those we made available for Parliament to amend. The procedure we follow in voting in Parliament is very much within the jurisdiction of this Parliament to change. This is especially so when the legislative programme of this Parliament is already passed, which includes contracts we have entered into, development programmes we have proposed and people have supported, budgets and decisions, which deal directly with the lives and alleviating suffering of the people concerned. It is the duty of this assembly to rise up and resolve this issue.  

I have also heard some people talking about the sanctity of the Constitution. I am a lawyer, and I am a constitutional lawyer. I respect the sanctity of the Constitution. The Constitution of Uganda is both a document to guide the country and a legal document, and it was wise for the Constitution makers to make it flexible. A constitution shall only survive if it is flexible. Rigid constitutions, which do not reflect the dynamism in society, will fail.  So, a constitution must always reflect the dynamism in society, and it is our duty to see that dynamism, and make sure that we always make the constitution move to respond to the wishes and aspirations of the people. Now, we are respecting what the judiciary has decided, in terms of interpretation and making laws to respect and abide with that judicial interpretation. We are only upholding the rule of law. We are only upholding the rule of constitutionalism.  

I have heard in the corridors of Government that a constitutional review commission is underway. That is very good, and I hope this time round, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs will expedite the forming of the Constitutional Review Commission, so that the issues of constitutional importance are brought up and discussed in time. That will assist us to make sure that we not are misunderstood, even when we have a good cause. 

I would like to conclude my presentation by saying that there are only three options available to us –(Interjections)- there is no option of a coup, it is not necessary. Uganda has walked away from coups. One of the options is for us to go the courts. We are already there. I have already heard from the distinguished Attorney General that the Government of Uganda is in court to seek clarification on the interpretation of many aspects of the Constitution, some of which may be before the House. 

I am also aware that we can amend this Constitution, and I think it is wise to do so, that is why I support the amendments.  These amendments are good, they will save the legislative time and programme of this Parliament.

We can also go and ask the people. Can you imagine a scenario where this Parliament cannot resolve this matter and we go to ask Ugandans how we should vote, whether we should put up hands, whether we should use our voices or whether we should line up! Do 21 million Ugandans have time to listen to that? I hope this Parliament will support this amendment and do its duty as provided for by the Constitution. UPDF will defend it. I thank you.

MR.MWANDHA JAMES (Representative of persons with disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to amendment one of our Constitution. I also rise to support the amendment.  

I looked at the option of leaving the situation as it is and allowing us not to go ahead with these amendments. This would result in absolute chaos, and whenever there is chaos in a country, the disabled suffer most. Therefore, I have a vested interest in ensuring that we remove uncertainty so that stability and peace continues. 

How did we get here?  How did we get to this kind of situation? We got to this kind of situation because Government failed to bring the Referendum Bill, 1999 in time. They knew, from day one, that this Parliament will have to pass this Bill, but we waited until the eleventh hour! The Minister of Constitutional Affairs, who is a Cabinet Minister, waited until the eleventh hour to bring the law, which caused us problems. These problems took us to court, and our privileges have been undermined. We now have to do things in a manner that is not desirable. But we have to do this because we have to save this country. 

I sometimes wonder whether the leader of Government business has a work plan to ensure that some of these important priority legislations come to this House in time so that we do not have to do things as if –(Interruption) 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I would like to inform hon. Members that we are highly organised. We have a clear plan. We do even have a co-ordinating committee that lays down priorities. The point must be made that, because of the new Constitution, there are many things that must be done, and we have only 24 hours per day. I wish we had 36 hours per day. We are highly organised and we inter-face with you, but there is the timeframe issue, and we have an over load.  I thank you.

MR.MWANDHA: I am happy to hear that the leader of Government business has a work plan for legislation. I hope he can follow that plan. But evidence shows that the work plan has not been working, because the Referendum Bill should have been here long ago, but we had to do it at the final minute and do it badly, and end up in courts of law.  

The Land Act is another example of your work plan, which is not working. I am sure, if we had already enacted some of these laws, the constitutional court would not complain.  There are certain laws, which must be put in place, and the Minister for Constitutional Affairs has not moved to tell this Parliament when these laws are going to come. But now, there is nothing we can do, except do what we are doing right now. We must go ahead with these amendments so that we can move forward.  

I would also like to propose, very strongly, that we find a way of ensuring that the conduct of parliamentary business is not questioned by anybody outside Parliament. This must be done so that we can get on with the business of this House without having to be subjected to courts of law and even to our privileges being undermined. I support the motion. 

MR.NYAI DICK (Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased and gratified that after more than two years the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs at last comes to this House to say that the Constitution of Uganda can be amended. For a long time, I have been asking him and trying to prevail on him to amend this Constitution to excise Article 269, but he would say ‘no, it is in the Constitution’. Now I am glad that the principle of amending the Constitution is accepted.  

While I am glad that this is accepted, I am aggrieved at the expeditious manner in which we are going to protect our plight. I am using the word ‘plight’ judiciously. We are a new Parliament operationalising a new Constitution.  Instead of this Parliament saying, we have made mistake in translating the requirements of the new Constitution, we are saying we should protect ourselves. That is not the way of humility. My appeal to this House is that we should learn some humility. Let us face the Ugandans squarely and tell them as fellow citizens, who elected us, that we have made certain errors, but we made them in good faith, and we would like to correct them. 

I hope the Prime Minister is listening to me loud and clearly. We should have a meeting of all stakeholders to find a way forward, without killing the only country in which we are all stakeholders. Creeping into this debate are extraneous matters of people saying that the courts want to take away parliamentary immunity. That is not true! In our arrangement of checks and balances, Parliament passes laws and the courts decide whether those laws are constitutional or not. But it becomes very dangerous for this Parliament or any Parliament to go to the Constitution and take out an Article after the courts have said that that Article is unconstitutional. When you find any Article not to the liking of Parliament, you remove it! I think that is very, very dangerous, because these are retrospective amendments, as a senior lawyer, Mr. Speaker, you know that. I cannot declare Dick Nyai innocent in 2005, when he had actually killed in 1998. That is the import of retrospective amendments.  

I am not talking as a lawyer, but in my humble opinion as a citizen of this country, if a wrong was committed and we amended the Constitution, that amendment would take effect from the dates it was put in our Constitution. 

Now, I would like us to address ourselves to one thing. We cannot obey in part and then disobey in the majority. It is unfortunate that the National Political Commissar and Member for Mbale Municipality, hon. Wapakabulo, has just walked out. He said that the interpretation of the constitutional court ruling, among other things, means that the judges hold their positions unconstitutionally. If the judges are unconstitutional, then how do you obey an unconstitutional rule? You must defy the whole lot. If you agree to obey that part of their ruling -(Lt.Col Mayombo rose_)- No, I am not going to take information from the army. Let them just protect me, they are listening -(Interruption)

MR.WAPAKABULO: Mr. Speaker, is the Member of Parliament for Ayivu in order to put words in my mouth? I did not say that judges hold their offices unconstitutionally. I said that because of the ruling, any person now is free to petition a court for declaration on whether the judges are holding their offices constitutionally. Is he in order to put words in my mouth?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If that is what you said, he is out of order.  Proceed. 

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member representing Ayivu to say he will not take information from the army, when he knows very well that my neighbour here, who represents UPDF, is duly elected by the army in accordance with the Constitution? And I know my hon. Friend respects the Constitution. Surely, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member mixed up the roles of the hon. Member. The hon. Member is not here as the army, the hon. Member is here as an hon. Member of this Parliament.

MAJ.GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, the army, which I represent in this Parliament, is a serious section of the public and that is why the Constitution made it possible for it to be represented in this Parliament. Among the laws that were made by this Parliament was a law against sectarianism. And that is a serious law. Is the hon. Member from Ayivu in order to be sectarian in choosing who should give him information, and in saying he cannot take information from the army?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The same ruling I gave earlier still applies.  You are here as a Member of this Parliament. You are not here as the army. So, it is wrong for somebody to refer to you as the army.

MR.DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for that ruling. In that ruling, I have the privilege to refuse to take information from hon. Mayombo, including hon. Elly Tumwine, who is very closely tied to his petticoat. But more seriously, the point I would like to raise is contained in paragraph 3.0 of the report of the Committee of Rules, Privileges and Discipline. The Committee states as follows:  
“Being the first constitutional amendment, the Committee would have wished to interview as many interested civic organisations/persons as possible”.  

The expeditious way that we have gone about this makes me very suspicious. In fact, the slip of the tongue from hon. Elly Karuhanga was only possible because he was in the know. You cannot have a slip of the tongue, if you do not know the truth. Thank you very much, Mr. Elly Karuhanga –(Interruption).

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I stand on a point of order.  You have already ruled on this matter, which was raised by the same Member now raising it. Maybe he has forgotten your ruling. Having accepted your ruling and apologising, the hon. Member is repeating. Supposing I said what he said substantively and I was wrong, which you said I was, does it mean that the hon. Member must now also say something, which he knows is wrong? Is the hon. Member in order to assume that what Karuhanga says is the law? Is the hon. Member in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The best I can do is to recall the earlier order I made on this same issue. Proceed.  

MR.DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, hon. Elly Karuhanga will be very careful with his slips of the tongue. It took very many years, it took about five years for a constitutional commission to be set up, and it includes a lot of distinguished Members of this House. That constitutional commission reported, and it took a very august body, the Constituent Assembly, to consider that issue for almost two years. The distilled wisdom of eight years is being breached in a matter of two days. 

colleagues here in this House, I pray, let us bethink ourselves. Haste is not wisdom. Let us be honest to God and do things that will stand the test of time and not protect immediate advantages. I oppose this motion. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

COL.OTAFIIRE KAHINDA (Ruhinda county, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to congratulate the Minister for Constitutional Affairs for introducing this amendment Bill at this material time in our history. I would also like to congratulate the chairman of the Committee, Ben Wacha, for his –(Interruption)

MR.MAO: Mr. Speaker, we may excuse the Congolese influence on the Member’s attire, but is he properly dressed for purposes of our proceedings? - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not familiar with the Congolese attire, but you have said it is Congolese, and he is free to dress as a Congolese if he wishes. Proceed.

COL.OTAFIIRE KAHINDA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your protection from Members who were elected for being frivolous –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is unparliamentary to say Members are frivolous, unless you can substantiate. It is out of order.

MR.MAO: Mr. Speaker, will the hon. Member withdraw that statement for the record?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have said he is out of order for using that language.

COL.OTAFIIRE: I am sorry, Mr. Speaker.  

It is quite interesting that, while we were in the Constituent Assembly, quite a number of us raised the issue that, while the Constitution is supposed to be a statement of intent and guidance to the nation, quite a lot of detail was put in it and that detail was going to cause us problems. The very people who were arguing for writing this Constitution in detail, which details have caused us problems, are the same people who are now arguing against removing those very details we had complained about. I find it quite interesting for anybody to try –(Interruption)

MR.DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to say that the same Members who are arguing against details are the same people who argued for them, without naming the Members?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which Members are here that were there?

COL.OTAFIIRE: Hon. Dick Nyai was there. That was not my point of emphasis, but I find it quite interesting that somebody does not know that the current Government is not the Government that promulgated this Constitution. This is a different Government operating a Constitution that was made by the Constituent Assembly!  I find it funny for someone to say 'shame upon this Government', which did not organise this Constitution! This is not the Government, and this is not the House!  The Constitution gave this House the task to cure the possible ills that could have been made by the Constituent Assembly –(Interjections)- protect me, Mr. Speaker, from these hon. Gentlemen, hon. Mao and hon. Dick Nyai.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected. 

COL.OTAFIIRE: So, Mr. Speaker, this Parliament is enjoined to do its work, to help the Executive run the country. You put too many details in the Constitution and the Judiciary was forced to interpret it the way you wrote it. You, the framers of the Constitution, made this bed, so you must lay on it, with it thorns.  So, when somebody says that this thing was not properly done, it is your responsibility to do it properly. 

When we ask you to rectify mistakes you made or mistakes that were made by your fore fathers, that is following the dynamics of the society. A body that does not change is a dead body. A body that is not capable of changing and adopting is a dead body.  This Parliament is enjoined to rectifying errors that could have been done in the Constituent Assembly.  

Somebody is arguing about consulting the civil society, I find it interesting. Should we go and ask the Cardinal about how we should vote in Parliament?  Should we ask the Mufti or the doctors’ association how Members of Parliament should vote? (Interruption) 

MS. BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very many civil society organisations are engaged in shaping this democracy. We have very many non-Government organisations, which conduct continuous civic education, helping our people understand the importance of the Constitution, of Parliament and of democracy. These are the organisations, which often have very legitimate views about the work that we are doing, after all, they are the ones who remain in the community explaining this work to the people. So, I hope the hon. Member is not arguing against the role of civil society in building democracy.  Thank you. 

COL.OTAFIIRE: I thank you for the information, but those civic society organisations did not stand for elections. If they had wanted the mandate, they should have gone and sought the people’s mandate to come here and legislate! We shall listen to the civil societies as and when it is required, but education is a continuous process. When will these civic societies of yours understand the process of legislation, so that we can amend the Constitution!  There is a problem.

There was a constitutional ruling, which puts good governance at crossroads. It is the duty of this Parliament to help the Judiciary, to help the Executive to remove these obstacles in the process of good governance, so that society can operate smoothly, tranquillity can be maintained, life can go on and people can have confidence in our country!  I do not see why we should not grab an opportune moment to change the Constitution in order to allow for a tranquil change.  

I support this amendment because it is going to bring peace and tranquillity. It is going to harmonise the mechanics of operating the three arms of Government, the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary.  Like hon. Wapakabulo said, it is important for this House to play its role like the Judiciary had played its role. There is nothing to panic about. Nobody is panicking. It would have been worse if sat back and allowed the situation that has been developing to get out of hand and paralyse Government. It would paralyse the Judiciary and paralyse the Executive. History would condemn us for not raising to the occasion, to do what we are required to do in order to protect good governance in our time.  
I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR.MUSUMBA ISANGA (Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion.  I also rise to thank the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for having done the work they did in the time frame that was available to them. I just want to make a few contributions to this debate.  

My first contribution relates to the provisions in Article 90 of the Constitution. Both the Bill, as presented by the Minister and the report of the Committee, seek to dilute what was enshrined in the Constitution relating to Committees. I would like to start by giving this House an example on something that came to me in the course of my work as chairman of a Committee of this House. This House did debate and pass a resolution relating to Co-operative Bank, but prior to that, the Committee that made the report sought to get space on the Order Paper. So, the report was ready, and for three months, we kept pushing for space on the Order Paper, but we would not get this space. Every time we were promised space but every time space was not given. 

On the day that this report was to be debated, after appearing on the Order Paper as business to follow for quite some time, I was invited or summoned – that is actually the correct word - to the office of the Speaker. I was in the Speaker’s office at about 2.15p.m, and Members were already seated in the Conference Centre waiting for the Speaker to appear with the order of business as the Committee report. I was summoned to the Speaker’s office and in there I found the Prime Minister, the Rt. hon. Apolo Nsibambi, the Minister of Finance, hon. Gerald Ssendaula, and the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, Rebecca Kadaga, with the Speaker. I was summoned to appear before them.  The question the Speaker put to me was, ‘why do you want to take this to the Floor?’ I knew that the Speaker knew why, but I still had to take out this Constitution and read it. I told them that Article 90(3) says: 
“The functions of standing committees shall include the following- 
c) to assess and evaluate activities of Government and other bodies; 
e) to report to Parliament on their functions.”  

It is only then that I was able to persuade the honourables that were seated in there that this report is coming as a result of a constitutional direction. 

Here I will hasten to add that the amendment should be to remove Standing Committees and leave the functions of Committees generally, but leave these functions laid out in the Constitution as indeed the current situation is. These two proposals seek to remove them, but let me read them for the ease of everybody. You are seeking to remove these functions as enshrined by the Constitution. Article 90(3) says:
“The functions of standing committees shall include the following -
    a) to discuss and make recommendations on all bills laid before Parliament.”  Do you want to take away that?

“(b) to initiate any bill within their respective areas of competence.”  Do you want to take away that? What will happen to our Private Members’ Bills and the Bills from Committees?  

“(c) to assess and evaluate activities of Government and other bodies;  

d) to carry out relevant research in their respective fields; and 

e) to report to Parliament on their functions.”  

By simply lifting these functions and putting them in the rules, which we can suspend or easily amend, you create a problem that was sought to be cured by institutionalising and putting the Committees in the Constitution. Committees have done a good job in this House. There was a reason why they were put in the Constitution. I was in the Constituent Assembly myself, and I was persuaded that the reason we need to put the Committees in the Constitution was to ensure that their roles and functions are part and parcel of our work methods as a country and as Parliament. And this is supposed to ease the work of Parliament. It is supposed to give it credence, and it is supposed to give it energy. 

At the appropriate time, I will move an amendment to the effect that the provision that relates to the functions of Committees generally, not only Standing Committees, must remain enshrined in the Constitution. To handle them otherwise is to err.  

My second point relates to the point that hon. Mutyaba earlier on made. If given the opportunity, I will support that amendment and I will speak to it. I will support the amendment that reinstates the privileges this House has with regard to what is said here, what is recorded here and what is done here. Members may not understand the full import of this provision, but let me give a simple example.  It may be graphic, it may look alarmist, but it can happen.  You can come to this House today, you may be Musumba, you may be Wasswa Lule, you may be Lukyamuzi, you may be anybody, and you say anything about anybody, about the President, about the First Lady. 

I do not know about now, but previously, you would enjoy the privileges of Parliament and nobody would ask for the records of what you said here to use them against you. After the constitutional court ruling, it is possible for someone to stand here and say anything, even say this Government is killing a lot of people, and tomorrow, they can cause this record to be produced in court and used against you. Where is the democracy we are looking for? So, this is supposed to be a double-edged sword. At this point, someone may want to use access to this information for his or her own gain. I have no problem, but it can work against all of us. To that effect, -(Interruption)

MR.DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just wish the hon. Member would clarify on this issue, especially with regard to the privileges of the Members of Parliament.  The framers of the Constitution thought it wise for the powers to interpret the Constitution to be given to the constitutional court and Members of Parliament take the oath to defend and uphold the Constitution. If at any time the Members of Parliament proceed in a manner that breaches the Constitution, how shall that interpretation be made, in the event that we are seeking to legislate that this immunity must be protected? I just wish to get clarification so that when I make a decision, I make an informed decision. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

MR.MUSUMBA: Thank you very much. If I may clarify, the amendment we are seeking will be similar, in terms of provisions, to the Parliamentary Immunity and Privileges Act. And a balancing Act will be brought forward. We will ensure that before access to information is given, we, the Members of Parliament, have the opportunity to weigh the effect and the purpose for which that information would be sought. That is the current law, and our own amendment will move towards ensuring that the law that has been now rendered in-operative by the decision of the constitutional court is re-addressed and properly framed and entrenched in our Constitution. Otherwise, Sir, you are going to have a Parliament of impotent men and women - (Laughter)- I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we shall have our lunch break now. So, proceedings are suspended until quarter to three O’clock.  

(The proceedings were suspended at 2.05 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.37p.m, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we continue with the debate.  

MR.OKUMU-RINGA PATRICK (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support this motion, which seeks to amend the relevant articles of the Constitution, in order to put in place both political and legal sobriety in our society. 

If law is the reflection of the aspirations of the society in the modern method of governance of society, then it is incumbent upon the leaders to ensure that the law, which is to protect the interests of society, is promulgated and enacted to ensure that the society retains and sustains order.  It is against this background that I support the constitutional amendment. However, allow me to note, with sadness, that this House, over the last 4 years I have been here, has had a high degree of non-compliance with the rules of our procedure. We have a full House if a Minister is being censured, we have a full House when it is the ceremonial opening of Parliament, but I am glad that this issue has brought us to order, and the House is full. I want to thank my colleagues.  

Allow me to refer briefly to Article 90 of the Constitution, which is being put out for amendment. Indeed, Article 90 is very clear with regard to ensuring that all the work of Parliament, over the last four years or even before this House, should not be rendered legally worthless. The work of the Committee of Parliament is so paramount and so important that it would have been proper to demarcate certain aspects of the work of this Committee. We would include the Committee of the whole House as a Committee, and also specify the work of these other Committees, which may not necessarily be standing committees but perform functions on behalf of the Committee of the whole House. This is very, very, important.  

The other area, which I would like to talk about, is with regard to segmenting of quorum. It would be proper to stipulate in our Rules of Procedure, later on, that we do have quorum at certain stages. We can stipulate them the way the Minister responsible for Constitutional Affairs kind of highlighted when he mentioned what other Parliaments have put in place as a practice. I am saying so because, over the years I have been in this House, I have noted that at times the House is quite empty and yet important issues are being deliberated. So, that would also act as a sanction to us, Members of Parliament. So, there may be need for us to consider that, when we go to Committee Stage.  

My last point is with regard to Rule 95 of our current Rules of Procedure. Rule 95 reads as follows: 
“(1) Matters with no proper relation to each other shall not be provided for in the same Bill.
(2) No Bill shall contain anything foreign to what its long title imports” 

I raise this matter, which could also act as caution, so that when we are proceeding later on, we should proceed consciously, knowing that we have a line of other amendments being proposed. Will these amendments be within the confines of Rule 95?  I think it is important for the Minister responsible for this Bill to note that, so that the House is guided, so that at the end of the day we transact business and complete this work within our given time frame. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. OKULO EPAK: (Oyam South, Apac): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think I would be right to appeal to the entire nation to pray for hon. Mayanja Nkangi and this Parliament. I also want to thank hon. Mayombo and to make an observation on the statement that he made here this morning. He said that UPDF will protect us, and I think that is apparently an oversized statement. I also want to thank the Committee for the good job. The version of the Bill, which they have presented to us, is far less clumsy than the original Bill we got here, which was Tabled at the First Reading.  

I would like to agree, in principle, with the Committee that much of the details that were contained in the original Bill would better be dealt with and accommodated in our regulations. However, I am a bit oblivious of the way we treat our Rules of Procedure. We suspend them in any manner we want in order to allow anything to go on, and this makes it difficult to accept that proposition. Nevertheless, since hon. Ben Wacha is also the chairman of the Rules Committee, which is busy amending our rules, I would like him to look at this. Once we agree on these principles, I would like the removal, or what hon. Wapakabulo nicely puts as ‘suspensions’ of such provisions as may - whatever it is - enable us to do this –(Laughter)- to be made a little bit more difficult, so that we do not just have so much of it, as we may wish to do something with, and allow us to proceed without breaks. 

Definitely, this country is in trouble with the result of the constitutional court decision. We must admit this. But why did we have to get this far, and how did we get this far? I hope that we have learnt a lesson from this experience, and I hope we have also how to be a little bit more humble. There is very little we can do to avoid proceeding with the amendments, but some aspects of these amendments beg for questions. Some of us begin to wonder whether we did not bring in so many other amendments, which really are inevitable, in order to meet the purpose of an amendment, which was desired for a certain very dangerous purpose. I do hope that when we have accomplished this exercise, we will not create opportunities for more court challenges and such crises. I do hope that when we proceed with the details, we shall have the opportunity to express strong objections on certain aspects of these amendments.  Some are straightforward and they would help to facilitate our work and save us from embarrassment. But this retrospective aspect, which solves a lot of problems, has some bitter pills somewhere, which I think are suspicious and make it sceptical. When we come to the details, I will have to point out some of these.  Thank you. 

MR.KITYO MUTEBI (Mawokota South, Mpigi): I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the amendment, and I thank the Committee for a job well done. 

I will address myself to the issue of democracy. This House and the public at large will realise that the democracy in Uganda is still very young. Our constitutional democracy is only five years old, and the path that we are taking, both political and constitutional, is natural. In the natural path, as somebody learns how to walk, he falls and raises up again to start walking. I do not think we are different from a young child learning how to walk. So, whatever few mistakes we make, if any, we make them because we are learning a new democratic order in this country. This being the case, we have to know that we are going through the trial and error method. People should realise that democracy is just taking root in this country. It is the first time, in the history of Uganda, for a court of law in this country to rule against Government and Parliament and nothing changes. I think this is true democracy, which we should cherish.  

We should also know that this going to be the first time for many of us here to amend a constitution. I do not know how many have ever participated in amending the Constitution.  For most of us, it is our first time, and because of this young democracy we are upholding. I do not want people to say that the democratic order in Britain is like this, because the democratic order in Britain is 400 years old. Ours is only five years old, and I do not think we are going to have miracles. But the Movement has helped us, although we have a five-year old democracy, we are behaving much older than that. I want hon. Members to realise that -(Interruption)

MR.DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving way. Could he just give me some clarification as to whether all our Parliaments from 1960, including the NRC, have not been democratic, until only five years ago? Is that what he really wants us to believe?

MR.KITYO MUTEBI: There is no other Constitution in this country which was made with the participation of all the people of Uganda. The Constitution of 1962 was made by 35 people in Britain. The 1966 Constitution, the pigeonhole constitution, was made by two people, Binaisa and Obote. The Constitution of 1967 was made by not more than 100 people, and maybe Dick Nyai was there. So, the only constitutional democratic order is enshrined in the 1995 Constitution.

We must amend this Constitution and we must do it today. There is a scenario that Members of Parliament have not realised, and it may happen on Monday –(Interjections)- as judges start to listen to -(Interjections)- Okay, I withdraw that statement, Mr. Speaker. But still, there could be individuals or groups of persons who could go to the High Court and tell the judges that they are unconstitutional, and that would be very dangerous. I support the motion. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR.SAM KUTESA (Mawogola County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 

First of all, I think there have been two notions that have been floated on the Floor of this House, which, in my opinion, are erroneous. Hon. Okello-Okello and other hon. Members who spoke this morning, peddled the notion that what we are doing is actually trying to overturn decisions of the courts. I thought what we are trying to do is to really accept the separation of powers as enshrined in the Constitution –(Interruption).

MR.OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Sam Kutesa in order to misquote me? I never talked about overturning the court's decision. I talked about a matter before court. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, if that is true, then you should appreciate that you were misquoting him. As far as he is concerned, you are saying that what we are doing here is to prejudice what is in court, although I said when you are contributing you should not refer to any matter pending in court.

MR.SAM KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I am not referring to any matter pending before the courts, I am referring to matters that were decided upon by the courts, and they are no longer subjudice. I was saying that, rather than float the notion that we are now trying to circumvent or overturn what was decided, the fact is that what we are doing, through these amendments, is trying to put into operation the judgement made by the courts. We are trying to operationalise the judgement made by the courts.  

What did the court decide? The court decided, for example, that we could not vote using yes or no. They did not say that voting using ‘aye’ or ‘no’ is a bad system, they said we could not do so because it is not in our Constitution. They said we can only vote by a method as prescribed in our Constitution. They did not attach any value judgement as to the rightness or otherwise of voting by ‘aye’ or ‘no’. They simply said that in other countries it is done, and it is perfect, although one of them, in his opinion, thought it was primitive. He said that, ‘you do not provide for it in the Constitution, so, do not use it’. So, what we are trying to do is to say, ‘yes, you judges interpreted the Constitution properly, that is how we wrote it, but what we would like to do now is to follow your decision’. We would like to follow their decision by bringing an amendment that provides for ‘yes’ or ‘no’ in the Constitution. So, we are not flouting the courts at all. 

The notion that was peddled here, that we are not observing the rule of law or the separation of powers, is totally misconceived and erroneous. What we are doing is operationalising a judgement by one arm of Government, the Judiciary, which is the only one entitled to interpret the Constitution. Having interpreted the Constitution, we are saying, if we have been acting not in accordance with the Constitution, as the courts have ruled, let us bring an amendment that will make our acts constitutional. I see nothing wrong with that.  

The other notion that I would like to disabuse is the notion that this has not received wide consultation. Hon. Dick Nyai made a mountain of it this morning, when referred to one paragraph in the report -(Interruption) 

MR.DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I respect hon. Sam Kutesa a great deal, particularly when he is the only one on record to have defeated His Excellency the President in a constituency – (Laughter) – but he talks of us belabouring, and he is also belabouring a judgement of a court. The court says, with the voice votes, the louder voices drown those of us who do not have high voices, and therefore, you cannot correctly determine a majority. Is this what we are operationalising?  

MR.KUTESA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Nyai. I just want to correct one other erroneous notion, which is being peddled, that I have defeated an Excellency. I have never competed with any Excellency, I compete with normal ordinary people who are vying for seats, and if they become Excellencies consequently, that is not when I was competing with them.  

Let me get to what I was saying, hon. Dick Nyai got agitated before I had mentioned what he had made a mountain of. This morning, he spoke at length on the issue mentioned in the report, under 3.0 on consideration of the Bill.  That statement says: “Being the first constitutional amendment, the Committee would have wished to interview as many interested civic organisations/persons as possible”.  
He read that statement and he created a mountain out of it, trying to tell us that we have hurried things, and that it is so terrible that society has not been consulted, society has not been brought in. 

Let us look at these amendments. What are they about? They are talking about how we, in this House, and how many we should be before we vote. Really, tell me what civil society wants to say on that - (Laughter) – Really, tell me, what does civil society want to say about how many of us should be here or should not be here?  

Secondly, what do they have to say about whether we should vote using ‘aye’ or ‘nay’?  Surely, for how many months or how many years do you want civil society to contribute to such a subject? I think this notion is being peddled here to make us look like we are cutting corners. No, we are doing our business. The business that concerns civic society should be taken to civic society. I think this notion is being peddled not only to make us appear as people who are cutting corners, but also as people who are undemocratic. Should you consult civic society to find out whether we should vote yes or no!  Civic society!  

I would like to congratulate hon. Mao, and I hope that other people will do the same, because today, he was wonderful in making his stand clear. I hope that when we go to vote, everybody will stand up and make their voices heard clearly, as he did this morning –(Interruption) 

MR.MAO: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I also thank the hon. Member for giving way. I think it is important for us not to have contempt for what is in the Committee’s report.  It is the Committee complaining, and I think it is important for us to know that Parliament is not sovereign, it is the people who are sovereign. We are representatives of the people. We are not here to represent ourselves. We are here on behalf of those who have sent us. You can never be greater than a person who has sent you. I think we must get that clear, and if we do not deal with the civil society, one day the uncivil society will take interest in what we are doing.  I thank you.

MR.KUTESA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Mao for his information. First of all, I am not holding the Committee in contempt. The Committee submitted a report to this House for debate, and I am expressing my views about what is contained in the report. This has nothing to do with contempt of the Committee. In fact, I highly commend the Committee, because, they have improved on some of the amendments that were tabled in the Bill. With regard to doing things for the public and civil society –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This issue of mobile phones should stop. I have been hearing them now and then. You should check your jackets, so that this is not repeated.

MR.KUTESA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As far as I am concerned, it is not because we should not consult the public, and it is not because we should not consult civil society. I am only saying that there are matters on which you need the input from civil society, there are matters on which you need input from the whole population, there are matters on which you need the councils at district level, but there are also house keeping matters. These amendments, as far as I am concerned, are mere house keeping matters.  They are matters that relate to our own procedure and to our own attendance. They are matters that are –(Interruption)

MR.KINTU MUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, Chapter One of our Constitution says: 
“1. (1) All power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution.   

(4) The people shall express their views and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed, through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda.” We have every say in trying to –(Interruption) 

MR.KUTESA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to thank hon. Kintu Musoke for the information. Precisely, there are things that we can do as representatives of the people here, and the same Constitution also spells out these things. That is why they ask for two thirds here, and that is why they do not ask for a referendum on whether we should vote using ‘aye’ or ‘no’. Can we carry out a referendum for that, hon. Mao? Can we carry out a referendum on whether we should vote using ‘yes’ or ‘no’?  Surely, there is a difference. My point is that the notion that we are abusing the Constitution by not respecting the separation of powers, is a notion that has been peddled and I think it is erroneous. As I said, we are trying to operationalise the decision of the courts, which is in order.

The second notion that I wanted to disabuse this House of, is the notion that we have been acting in a hurry. We are not acting in a hurry. We are acting within our own rules and procedures. There in no need to consult civic society or hold a referendum on whether we should vote using ‘aye’ or ‘nay’. I thank you.

MR.OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The issue before us should not be belittled as simply a matter of the interim procedure of Parliament. If it were so, we would not have such an important constitutional decision on this matter, neither would Government have taken such a great exception of what has taken place, and brought a constitutional proposal, which has necessitated the suspension of our Rules and a hasty amendment.

Anything that concerns the Constitution, which is the basic law of the land and of society, must be looked at as extremely important. When we look at it in that sense, we shall be guided more in terms of, not only what we are doing now and possibly tomorrow, but as statesmen. We shall be thinking of the future. In other words, those of us who think of today only and dream of tomorrow, are not great makers of the future. 

When my Friends like hon. Kityo and others before me, talk about building democracy, the procedure we will adopt, however much we talk about it, is extremely important, because it shapes the substance of the society. 

The report of the Committee talks of two things, it talks about uncertainties and it talks about validation. I will first deal with the issue of uncertainties. I do agree that as a result of the constitutional pronouncement, there is uncertainty, which must be cured. I would be the last person to bury my head in the sand and reject the fact that the constitutional decision did not adversely affect our Rules of Procedure. It did. But before we proceed to cure those uncertainties, we must ask a number of questions, so that we do not make the same mistakes in the future.  

The first question I would like this House to ask themselves is, who created the uncertainty? The second one is, why was the uncertainty created? And the third one is, were the uncertainties or the mistakes avoidable? Because of the time limit, I will be very brief. 

I can just say that the House, we, created these uncertainties. Secondly, we fail to listen and respect other views. If we had listened to other views, as part of the democratic process, we would not have made the mistakes we did. Thirdly, it is my humble submission and consideration that the mistakes that were made could have been avoided.  

Having dealt with the questions about uncertainties, let us also look at the method that we are now applying to cure those uncertainties. I think that the methods, which we are applying to cure those uncertainties, are the very methods we used to create those uncertainties and mistakes. I say this because we are proceeding to suspend the Rules in the same way we previously did. We are also refusing, to a large extent, to even listen to each other and respect other people’s views. We may listen to it, but not follow it. 

Also, by the same Rule, which requires us to listen to people outside this House, we are again refusing to listen to people. There are some organisations that asked to be listened to so that people come and give their views. The Uganda Law Society, for example, was very keen to come and give their input on this matter. And we said no! We just need 24 hours.

Finally, I would like to talk about this issue of validation. I was privileged to be co-opted to the Committee, but I made my views very clear. The Committee had this to say about validation: 
“No Act passed or purported to have been passed by Parliament at anytime after the commencement of this Constitution shall be taken to be invalid by reason of the fact that the Bill for the Act was not discussed and recommendations made on it to Parliament by a Standing Committee.”  

This is what we call a validation clause. In other words, Parliament is saying that certain mistakes were made and the constitutional court decided on that and we are trying to validate that. But more so, we are now going to enter into, what I may call, very deep waters –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, has there been any decision in court to the effect that a matter that was never discussed by a Standing Committee is invalid?

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I am simply quoting what is in Clause 5(b), and this is where I disagree to some extent. It is public knowledge that as a result of the procedural errors we made in passing the Referendum Act, there is indeed a constitutional case on this matter. And with your permission, I want to lay before this House a certified copy of constitutional petition No.3 of the year 2000, together with a certified copy of the hearing notice, which is due on Monday –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, you will recollect that when this matter came up, I had earlier said that when we are debating any business here, we should not refer to any matter pending in courts. Now even if you bring this here, what is the purpose? Do you want to invite Members to recognise it and then refer to it? That would be contradicting what we had earlier suggested.  

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker I am arguing, and rightly so, that the amendment which we seek to make in clause 5(b), which I have read, seeks to undermine what is coming before court on Monday! That is my argument! And I am  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I have told you, these papers cannot be received here, because I will not allow any Member to refer to them. I earlier said that, when you are contributing to this debate, do not refer to any matter pending in court.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, you will recall that one of the problems we were facing on that charge is that -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already ruled, therefore, continue with your debate.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Can I lay them before the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

MR.KINTU MUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, I think it is part of our Rules of Procedure that when you are addressing the House, the contributing Member sits down. Is it in order for hon. Omara Atubo to stand up and carry on a dialogue with you when we are actually debating according to Rules?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it was an oversight on his part. Now he has realised.

MR.ADOME LOKWII: Is it in order, Mr. Speaker, for an hon. Member of this House to overrule your ruling and continue to bring up the same matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was not construing the order, but now, I think, he has appreciated it.  Please, wind up.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, finally, and very briefly, while we seek to correct the uncertainties created by the decision of the constitutional court, I think we have gone beyond what we should do. My argument is that, in Clause 5(b), we have gone beyond what this House should do, but since you ruled that I cannot belabour that point any more, I simply want to conclude. In an attempt to validate what has been done, we are indeed trying to correct the mistake that we did. It is being challenged. That challenge, therefore, cannot create a healthy method of work by an aggrieved party seeking remedy in another forum. 
I thank you for giving me the opportunity, Mr.Speaker.   
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We will listen to the hon. Member for Lubaga South, followed by hon.Ongom.

MR.LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala) Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Matters related to how we pass laws in this House are not house keeping matters. They are matters of public concern, and they should not be taken lightly.  Article 84(1) of the Constitution entitles the people we represent to a right to even recall us if we overdo certain things. The main yardstick for that is based on our performance during legislation. So, for anyone to tell us that these are matters not entirely related to the civil society, is not understandable. These matters concern everybody.  

I would like to thank the Committee being sufficient elaborate, especially in their concluding remarks on page 2. That portion reads as follows:
“I wish to reiterate that given the time frame, within which the Committee was expected to present its report, it was not possible to invite civic organisations/persons to hear their views.”  
That is a very important statement. In a nutshell, the Committee was lamenting at the speed at which we have passed a matter of public concern. This morning, hon. Mwandha said that whenever there is chaos, the disabled suffer most. Yes, but even when constitutional developments are haphazardly passed, you could suffer worse, if you are disabled - (Interruption)

MR.MWANDHA: I believe hon. Lukyamuzi followed the trend of my argument. I said that, when there is chaos, it is we, people with disabilities, who suffer most. I was also blaming his chairman of the Conservative Party, hon. Mayanja Nkangi, for bringing the Referendum Bill so late, so that it was not possible for this Parliament to pass it properly. At the end of the day, we end up in court and we end up coming here to pass amendments, which probably would have not been necessary. So, the hon. Member should get me properly. Thank you.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. What hon. Mwandha is reiterating is exactly what I reacted to. The disabled would equally suffer disasters, if constitutional recommendations were haphazardly effected. I stand by that statement.

Uganda should take its time to recall what we have gone through in the past. Milton Obote's pigeonhole Constitution in 1966 was also an action programme by the reigning Parliament. That constitutional development came in to solve a crisis of a constitutional nature. So, for anyone to say that because there is a possible crisis, we should act haphazardly and suspend some rules simply because we want to solve a problem, in my view, is not sound. It is not correct to say that whenever there a crisis, you simply act to solve a problem.

Even now, there is a crisis associated to the referendum court case, why have we not acted speedily to amend the Referendum Act? There is a national crisis in the country because of the Referendum Act. Why do we not effect an amendment to rectify the crisis brought by the referendum?  The presenter of this Bill had to go to exile as a result of the constitutional reform, which was haphazardly passed in 1966. Hon. Mayanja Nkangi went to exile because Obote passed a haphazard constitutional reform in 1966. Why did he go to exile? Does he want other people to go to exile because of this development? (Laughter)

MAJ.GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Lukyamuzi for giving way. I have been reading through the Hansard and following hon. Lukyamuzi's arguments seriously, and when he has not said that, ‘I am serious this time’, I find it difficult to take him seriously. I would just like to inform you that I was waiting for him to say, ‘I am serious this time’, and I have not heard it - (Laughter).

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I regret giving him way – (Laughter) – because if he had nothing to say, he would have swallowed some ashes – (Laughter). 

I would like to quote Article 79(3) in my concluding remarks. Before you pass this Bill, hon. Members, you should recall what the Constitution says about the role of a Member of Parliament the overall role of Parliament. Article 79(3) reads as follows: 
“Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote the democratic governance of Uganda.”   
How can Parliament do so when the emphasis on its quorum arrangement is only meaningful at voting time? We are only emphasising the importance of quorum at voting time. Why not at all times, if we are serious legislators? 

One of the centre codes in my submission is related to the number of Cabinet Members we have now. If we had a Cabinet of about 20, I would have supported this Bill. But in a situation where you have about 70 Members on the Cabinet, if they have a hidden programme, they can cause disastrous legislation by all coming up to deliberate when everybody else is not taking the deliberation seriously – (Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI APOLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is the hon. Member of Parliament in order to mislead this House by saying that there are over 70 Members of Cabinet?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he did not count properly.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr. Speaker, for your wise ruling. I talked about 70 as an estimated figure. 

In conclusion, I want to echo that Article 1 of the Constitution says that all power to rule and to govern this country lies with the people. Because of the importance of this statement, I will not say I am opposed to any prospective amendment of the Constitution. But judging from what we have seen in the past, we should not haphazardly act on a constitutional matter of this kind. We shall stand to regret this, and our children will blame us. I urge you not to support this amendment. Thank you very much, 

MR.OKOT FELIX (Dokolo County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I cannot resist thanking the Committee for the excellent work that they have done. This is excellent piece of work that must – (Interruption)

MAJ.KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister in-charge of the Presidency in order to squeeze the Sergeant-at-Arms and almost throw him off his seat? – (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Sergeant-at-Arms went there to protect the Minister – (Laughter).

MR.OKOT: Mr. Speaker, I want to specifically thank my brother, Ben Wacha, for his excellent and exuberant presentation of this report. I thank him also for his high level political maturity.  May God bless you – (Laughter)

Today is a very important day in the history of this country. It is the first time that the 6th Parliament is debating and discussing amendments of the Constitution, our baby. 

I stand here openly and overly to support this Bill. I support this Bill on the basic premise of logic and reason.  Logic demands that we deal with the uncertainties and restrictions in the business of Parliament. That is why we want Parliament to operate without any interference. That is why I stand here to support this Bill. I am not only talking about logic, but I am also talking about reason.  It is reasonable for us to debate this Bill so that we validate all the laws that this Parliament has passed. Therefore, I would like to urge all Members of Parliament to support this Bill.  

I support this Bill because we have to burglar proof the proceedings of this Parliament. We must isolate this House.  That is why I stand here to support this amendment. 

That was the preamble – (Laughter) – now, I am going to the form and content of my presentation. Many people have been saying that the public will not understand the decision that we are going to make today. But, I want remind Members of Parliament that we are the peoples’ representatives. We must be guided by our own conscience. We must not be guided by what is happening around us. That is why I want to urge all Members of Parliament to be guided by their own conscience.  I urge Members to support this Bill.  

I urge you to understand the following scenario. One time I was invited as guest of honour to a function where there were so many guests. There was a lot of food with many dishes on table, and it was self-service. When we went to serve, one guest, who was my neighbour, was mindful about the public, he thought they would look at him. He served very little food, because he was feared for his image in the public. So, when he went back to his seat, the food was not enough. He looked around because he feared public opinion. He decided again to go and add some food, but he was still mindful of what the public was going to think him because there were so many men around. Today we have a very important issue to discuss here, we should not be mindful of what the public will think about us. The man ended up not having enough food because he was mindful about what the public would think about him. So, when the gentleman went back home at about midnight, he demanded for food from his wife, and this ended up in a fight. 

So, I urge Members of Parliament to think very deeply about these amendments. I urge Members to support this Bill.  Thank you very much.

MR.MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move under Rule 63(1) of our Rules of Procedure that the question be now put. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is that I put the question, we have to vote on this. 

(Question put)

178 Members voted in favour of the motion

8 Members voted against

2 Members abstained.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion was for me to put the question and it has been carried. Now, I am going to put the question, and before I do, I think they should ring the bell so that whoever is out comes in. As I indicated before, the procedure is going to be as follows:  

According to the Constitution, for a motion of Second and Third Reading to go through, two thirds of Members of Parliament must support it. Then after that, if it is carried, we shall go to the Committee Stage. The decisions there are governed by the same provision, but also with our normal way of making decisions.  

When there is a report to the House, that is, after the Committee Stage, then there will be a motion for the Third Reading. That motion will require two thirds, in the same way as the motion for the Second Reading. According to our Rules of Procedure, the voting for a Bill to amend the Constitution is by secret ballot. Those are the Rules.

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move a motion, under Rule 6, to suspend Rule 73 and Rule 77. And I wish to read it. Rule 6 states: 

“In case of any doubt these Rules may be interpreted by the Speaker”.

Rule 73 states: 
“There shall be secret voting in the House in respect of – (a) a Bill…”  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already said that. What is your motion?

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I wish to evoke Rule 8 and suspend Rule 73, and I request you to evoke Rule 77.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How do you want to vote?

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I would like you to evoke Rule 77 so that we vote by division. We the constitutional interpretation and the ruling of the judges –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the motion is that, we vote by division.  That is the motion. It has been seconded. I will now put the question to the motion. Hon. Members, because the Clerks may not see somebody who is in the Lobby, I would invite everybody who wants to vote to come in. 

MR.OTHIENO AKIKA: Mr. Speaker, I think we are likely to enter another very big problem. This a very clumsy method. Is it appropriate for some people to put up two hands and then they are being counted together? People are putting up two hands!  No, this is wrong!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not proper for one person to put up two hands, it must be one hand. But the problem with standing is that, when you stand, she may not be able to see you.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I rise on an issue of procedure. Hon. Mukula, of Soroti, moved a motion for suspension of Rule 73, and he was supported by his Sister from Kumi, hon. Egunyu. This is a very important motion, because it seeks to suspend what we put down in our Rules for an important purpose. There is a reason why we say that, when it comes to a constitutional amendment it should be by secret ballot.  

As I have argued before this afternoon, we are setting a precedent, and I think we should not proceed in the manner that we have proceeded in, in the past, and that has led us to serious problems. I want know why hon. Mukula would like this important Rule to be suspended, because I also want to tell you why it should not be suspended. He must justify his motion, and some of us who are against it must also be given an opportunity to oppose it. We should not behave like a kangaroo court.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can we hear him, because we have not heard his reasons. We shall allow about two people to speak about it. Otherwise, we are going to vote.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, our Rules are very clear. Rule 62 says that, when the motion has been put to vote, no further discussion can ensue, and we had already started voting, we are only waiting to conclude this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have voted. Hon. Members, before the interruption, we had started voting for the motion to suspend that Rule, so that we vote by division. Now, we continue.

182 Members voted in favour of the motion

18 Members voted against

6 Members abstained.

MR.WACHA BEN: Mr. Speaker, I respect all my colleagues who have decided that we suspend the provisions of the Rules and have voted for it. I have just risen on a small issue of procedure, and maybe caution. So far, we have been moving excellently. There has been appreciation, even from some 'doubting Tomases' about the import and importance of whatever we have before us. But small matters of procedure could derail the House and derail the minds of the public.  I urge you, Members, to walk very carefully when it comes to this issue of suspending Rules. It is mucking our very existence in this House.  I thank, you Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion was carried.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure, in support of the chairman of the Committee, hon. Ben Wacha. This is a very important matter.  We cannot proceed on a constitutional amendment without heeding to the internationally and nationally respected means of voting, and because of this, I am walking out of this House.

MR.ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, I rise just to get some clarification or information from you. Before we voted, and before that infamous motion was moved, I remember you advised us that the matter of voting to allow the Second Reading was a constitutional matter. If I am wrong, you can tell me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I told you that we are making many decisions while we are debating this amendment. Certain decisions are made under our Rules of Procedure and its requirements and the majority are determined in the way we have been doing. But when it comes to the Second Reading and the Third Reading, the necessary number that is required in order to declare that the motion is carried, is provided by the Constitution.   

For the Second Reading and the Third Reading in a motion to amend the Constitution, the Constitution requires the motion to be supported by two thirds of Members of Parliament. Supposing this motion is carried, we shall have the Committee Stage, and when we are at the Committee Stage, we will not look at the constitutional requirement of two thirds, but we shall look at the majority, as the case will be. That is what I said.

MR.ONGOM: I thought I also heard you say something about the voting method by secret ballot.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said that the voting method by secret ballot is provided for by our Rules, and that is the Rule that hon. Mukula wanted to suspend.  

MR.WAPAKABULO: I am not re-opening the debate, but I just want to clarify that it would still have required that even during the Committee Stage, we vote by secret ballot on each Clause of the Bill, and that would have made our work very cumbersome. So, this is actually expeditious. Thank you.

MS.EGUNYU: Mr. Speaker, I raise on a point of procedure and at the same time seek clarification from you. The ruling by the court in the constitutional case was very clear on the method of voting. In the circumstances, it would appear that in our Rules of Procedure, which were passed, the ‘ayes’ and ‘nays’ actually no longer obtain, in which case- (Interruption)

MR.KAGGWA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Egunyu of Ngora to start debating, when you have already made a ruling and we are waiting to go to Committee Stage? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She was not making a contribution so that we change this and the other, I think she was just informing other people.

MS. EGUNYU: Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that we had already voted on the matter, I beg to withdraw the clarification I was seeking and to ask that we proceed in accordance with the ruling.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I think the tellers are just arranging, otherwise, we decided on what we are going to do.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, there was a motion that Rule 73 be suspended, and immediately thereafter, you put that motion to vote. Do I now understand that in this House, when somebody moves a motion seeking to suspend a particular Rule, there will be no debate? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Mover did not contribute, he maybe thought that the matter had been understood. 

According to the tellers, those in support of the Second Reading should go through the other door and sign and then those against should go to this lobby. The Ex-Officials and those who intend not to vote should stay here. The motion is that the Bill be read the second time.  

(The House divided)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the exercise has been completed for the motion for the Second Reading. We had 4 Ex-Officio Members, who have no right to vote, and their names are recorded. So, 229 Members voted in support of the motion. 12 Members voted against the motion. So, the motion has been carried.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

Clause 1 agreed to

Clause 2 agreed to

MR.MEDI KAGGWA: I would like to know whether we are following the Bill or the report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We use the two documents, and if there is an amendment by the Committee or any other person, then they can bring in the amendment.

Clause 3:

MR.BEN WACHA: Mr. Speaker, I move that a new Clause 3 be inserted immediately after Clause 2 of Article 88 to read as follows: “Rules of Procedure of Parliament shall prescribe the quorum of Parliament for the conduct of business of Parliament other than for voting”.   

The idea here is this that, while we have already prescribed for quorum of Parliament at the time of voting, for us to have decent discussions in this House, it is necessary for us to also have quorum, but that quorum should not be tied up in the Constitution. The House should be able to have a yardstick for measuring whatever number is necessary for discussions in this House. This is the import of this clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to that new clause. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.BEN WACHA: Mr. Speaker, the report of the Committee had suggested that clause 3 of the Bill be deleted. However, after consultations within the Committee and with the hon. Minister of Justice and with the Attorney General, we have decided on a new formulation, which will take care of everybody’s interest in this respect. 

We are suggesting an amendment to Article 89 (1) of the Constitution. It is important that Members should follow what I am going to say by reading the Constitution themselves. Article 89 (1) reads as follows: 
“Except as otherwise prescribed by this Constitution or any law consistent with this Constitution, any question proposed for decision of Parliament shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting.”  The rationale for this provision is that decisions of Parliament must be made by a majority vote. We want to tie the method of ascertaining that majority to this. 

The new Article would read as follows: 
“Except as otherwise prescribed by this Constitution or any law consistent with this Constitution, any question proposed for decision of Parliament shall be determined by majority of votes of the Members present and voting, in a manner to be prescribed by the Rules of Procedure of Parliament under Article 94 of this Constitution.”  

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I wish to put the question that the Bill be amended as proposed by the chairperson of the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the amendment is carried.  Now, I put the question on the old Clause 3, as amended. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 4: 

MR.WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Committee proposes a new formulation under Clause 4 for the proposed Article 90. The Committee proposes that Article 90 (1) reads as follows: “Parliament shall appoint Standing and other Committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions”  

In other words, there is no change from what is provided in the Bill –(Interjections)- there is, actually, no amendment. We are adopting what is provided for in the Bill. The amendments will come later. In Article 90(1) there is no amendment. 

MR.MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that Article 90(1) be amended to read as follows: 
“Parliament shall appoint Committees for the efficient discharge of its functions.” 

I seek to take out the word ‘Standing’ and make a proposal that Parliament shall appoint Committees generally. Subsequent to that, we will be able to designate Standing Committees, Sessional Committees and Select Committees in the Rules. At this point, I do not see why Standing Committees should be given special preference, and be put in the Constitution as against other Committees. All Committees in the House are equal, and if the House adopts this, there will be very minimal alterations within the provisions of the Constitutions, subsequent amendments will follow.  I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The proposal is clear. Classification of Standing or Sessional Committees should be done by our Rules rather than being put in the Constitution. That is his proposal. 

MR.WACHA: Without running the risk of presuming, could he explain to me what he would want to do with clause (2) in the report. Maybe then I can be able to make up my mind.

MR.KAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, I think we shall run into some difficulty, if we want to change a particular clause when the whole Article is flowing. In my view, it would be more prudent to read through so that we can synchronise the whole Article, and then we can see if the intended amendment is appropriate or not.  I pray so, Mr. Chairman.

MR.MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, once we amend clause (1) to say “Parliament shall appoint Committees for the efficient discharge of its functions”, then clause (2) in the report of the Committee falls by the way side. Clause (2) in the report says:
“The Committees of Parliament shall include Sessional Committees and the Committee of the whole House.”  

These matters will be put into the rules, and then, I further propose that, when the appropriate time comes, what has been taken out, which is currently in the Constitution as 90(3), will read, “the function of Committees shall include…” So, there will be two amendments. 

First, we will keep (3), which lays out the functions of Committees. Also, in (2), we will give these powers to Committees, Sessional, Standing or whatever Committee that this House may decide, and that will be spelt out in the Rules. The Rules say that this House can refer a matter to a Committee. It will be in the interest of this House to be able to refer whatever matter they want to whatever Committee. That would be within the Rules, but for the moment, we would eliminate Standing Committees specifically and retain Committees and their functions, and set out who will handle which business in the Rules. That is my proposal. 

MR.NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I think too much summarising may result into the misunderstanding of this Article. The hon. Member is just fighting to delete only one word, ‘Standing’, and I do not really think what he is saying is something very much different from what this Bill is providing through the Committee. So, I reluctantly oppose his own formulation and prefer the other one of the Committee.  

MR.KUTESA: Mr. Chairman, following what hon. Kaggwa said, the amendment proposed by hon. Musumba does not seem to take into account what is proposed as an amendment in 90(2). When you read 90(1) and (2), as proposed in the amendment, both Committees, whether Sessional or Standing, are covered. So, I do not see hon. Musumba’s fear. 

As hon. Kaggwa stated, it is our work here, so I think the Chairman of the Committee should read all the amendments he is proposing in 90, so that everybody sees how they are integrated. If anybody is going to move an amendment, he will then have a full context of the import of the clause. As it is now, 90(1) alone could be interpreted as hon. Musumba is interpreting it, but if you the Article as a whole, I am sure even hon. Musumba would find that what he is fighting for is catered for. So, I suggest that we do not take on hon. Musumba’s amendment. He should withdraw it temporarily until he is satisfied on the whole meaning of the Article. So, the Chairman should tell us everything, and then he will see whether he has no reason to be worried. I thank you.  

MR.MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, I have no objection to the Chairman running us through with what he wants the whole Article to look like. I can then be given the opportunity to run the Members through what I think it should be, and subsequently the decision will be made.  

MR.WACHA: Thank you, Sir.  We propose as follows:“90(1) Parliament shall appoint Standing Committees and other Committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions.
 (2) The Committees of Parliament shall include Sessional Committees and Committee of the whole House.
    (3) Rules of Procedure of Parliament shall prescribe the composition and functions of Committees of Parliament
    (4) In the exercise of their functions under this article, Committees of Parliament -
    (a) may call any Minister or any person holding public office and private individuals to submit memoranda or appear before them to give evidence;
    (b) may co-pt any Member of Parliament or employ qualified persons to assist them in the discharge of their functions.
    (c) shall have the powers of the High Court for -
    i. enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath, affirmation or otherwise;
    ii. compelling the production of documents; and 
    iii. issuing a commission or request to examine witnesses abroad.”
Even in our present Rules of Procedure, Standing Committees have peculiar positions and yet the rules also provide for a number of other Committees for the discharge of its functions. Besides Sessional Committees, we have Select Committees, we have Ad hoc Committees, and others may come out in the future. 

So, (1) is saying that Standing Committees will enjoy that peculiarity, but there will be other Committees. And in (2), we are saying that these other Committees shall include, but will not be restricted to Sessional Committees and Committee of the whole House. The idea of the Committee of the whole House came in because of recent events. We want it to be indicated as a Committee in the operations of this Parliament. 

In (3), we are saying that instead of somebody, somewhere again questioning whether Parliament did this or the other with its Committees, the functions and the composition of these Committees will be the duty of the Rules. So, if the Rules say Standing Committees, besides what we now imagine, will also do these other things, it is okay. The Rules will be amended accordingly. If we decide that it is only Sessional Committees from now on to deal with Bills, so be it. The Rules will be amended accordingly. That is the import of (3).  Now, (4) is in the original provision, so I need not explain. That is the idea.  

MR.BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have been listening so carefully, and I tend now to agree with hon. Musumba’s argument. In 90(1), he is talking about Standing Committees and other Committees necessary. There, I thought I was covered in all the Committees necessary, but when you come to (2) in particular, you are now trying to tell me what Committees you try to indicate in 90(1), and Sessional Committees and the Committee of the whole House are mentioned. Now, where do you place the Select Committees?

MR.WACHA: Sir, maybe, I was not very clear, but if you read (1) carefully, it says Parliament shall appoint Standing Committee and other Committees. In (2), we are trying to define the ‘other’, but without restricting the definition.

MR.MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, I agree with the chairman of the Committee, however, in order to make 90(2) make sense, in order to link it up with (1), I think there is one word missing and that is ‘other Committees’. If we say ‘Committees’ after talking about Standing Committees in (1), it will create problems. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Read out your amendment.

MR.MUTYABA: ‘The other Committees of Parliament shall include Sessional Committees and the Committee of the whole House.’  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He is suggesting that we should not only have a Committee of the whole House, but we have a Committee of Supply. I think that is the idea, so that the Committee of the whole House is not this Committee, which is currently transacting business, but we could have a Committee of Supply. I think that is the idea.  

MR.MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I do not want to unduly defer from what the chairman and his Committee have presented. My biggest worry, however, is clause 90(3), which seeks to replace the current Article 90(3) of the Constitution.

MR.KINTU MUSOKE: Mr. Chairman, I think hon. Musumba moved a motion, but I do not remember it being seconded, therefore, it cannot be debated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Since we are at Committee Stage, he can move an amendment, but now we are trying to negotiate for a common position to the amendment. This is what we are trying to do.

MR.MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, as presented by the Committee, 90(1) is not contentious. It is not a make or break for me. What bothers me, and this is the crux of the matter, is that the Committee sought to remove 90(3) of the Constitution as it is today. The current Article 90(3) of the Constitution states as follows: 
 “The functions of standing committees shall include the following- 
    (a) to discuss and make recommendations on all bills laid before Parliament;
    (b) to initiate any bill within their respective areas of competence;
    (c) to assess and evaluate activities of Government and other bodies;
    (d) to carry out relevant research in their respective fields; and
    (e) to report to Parliament on their functions.”

These have hitherto been constitutional functions given to Committees. I am experiencing a problem, and I can give my own experience. If we took this out of the Constitution, and retained powers to call Ministers and other civil servants and bodies, without specifically telling under what Article of the Constitution we have powers to assess and evaluate the activities of Government, we will ran into problems. Also, we have to tell them that we have powers to carry out research in our functions, and that we have powers to make recommendations on Bills, indeed as enshrined in the Constitution, otherwise we ran into a problem of having these matters in the Rules, which are for our own consumption as a House. These are not in any way rules that are to be followed by people outside this House. This particular function of the Committee is relevant for ensuring that members of the civil society are actually invited to come and make their input into what we pass as recommendations to this House.

Secondly, to leave these responsibilities and functions to the Rules of Parliament, which we can suspend and amend, God knows we can do all kinds of things, will put the Committees in a position where their work can be undermined. Earlier on, I gave an example of how Members of the Executive called me, and if there was no constitutional provision for me to rely on to present a certain report to this House, they would have preferred this House not to receive that report. But, because the Constitution says so, the report was presented. So, notwithstanding that Parliament has power to widen the functions of the Committee, Article 90(3), as existing in the Constitution should be saved. That is the import of my submission. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think his intention is for certain functions, which are spelt out in Article 90(3), be spelt out in the amendment. The functions, which will be allocated by the Rules Committee, should include this specific function, which he mentioned. I think that is his case.

MR.WACHA: Mr. Speaker, this constitutional amendment exercise has a history. Part of the history is that, this Parliament did not follow certain provisions in respect to Bills going to Standing Committees. I really would hesitate to try and particularise matters, which this Parliament should do, in the Constitution. I would hesitate to do that, because we would not have done anything to guard ourselves from any further problems that could arise.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we had the text of the original Bill, and this was amended according to the Committee, and the amendments were outlined in the report. Now, we have a Member who has also proposed an amendment. So, let us deal with the amendment from hon. Musumba, then we go to the other one. I will put the question to hon. Musumba’s amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to Clause 4 as amended. 

(Question put on agreed to).

MR.MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to propose an amendment to Article 97 of the Constitution. I would like to re-number the existing Article as Clause 1 of that Article and insert immediately after the new Clause 1, the following new Clauses: 

Clause 2: “Notwithstanding Article 41 of this Constitution, no Member or officer of Parliament, and no person employed to take minutes of evidence before Parliament or any Committee of Parliament shall give evidence elsewhere in respect of the contents of such minutes of evidence or the contents of any document laid before Parliament or such Committee as the case may be or in respect of any proceedings or examination held before Parliament or such Committee, without a special leave of Parliament first obtained.”

Clause 3: “the special leave referred to in Clause 2 of this Article, may, during a recess or adjournment of Parliament, be given by the Speaker or, on capacity of the Speaker or during a dissolution of Parliament, by the Clerk of Parliament.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you have a copy?

MR.MUTYABA:  Mr. Chairman, we gave a copy to the Clerks to photocopy for Members. I thought that each Member had a copy.  Members may note that there was a first amendment, but after exchanging ideas, we thought that this would be a better amendment, and will satisfy what we want to do. One of the reasons -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Before you proceed with this amendment, does it meet the standards of the requirements in Rule 95?

MR.MUTYABA:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, Rule 95(1) says: 
“Matters with no proper relation to each other shall not be provided for in the same Bill.”  
The Constitutional amendment that the Minister has brought really deals with one element of the proceedings of Parliament. It is because of what happened in the constitutional court that this matter was brought here. In my opinion this matter just deals with the present and the past, and only touches two issues, which is voting and the status of the Committees. If we deal with only this matter, there is a danger that tomorrow Parliament may be taken to court again on another matter relating to proceedings of Parliament. This is why it is necessary, while we are dealing with those amendments, to entrench the provision, which, as the hon. Member said, insulates Parliament from attacks, from the other agents of Government, and the Judiciary. So, I am not importing anything foreign. I await your ruling on this, Mr. Chairman.

MR.BART KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Subject to the clarification that you will give to the hon. Member, I also wish to draw to your attention Rule 95(2), which reads: “No Bill shall contain anything foreign to what its long title imports.” If this is allowed, then you would necessarily have to amend the long title.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I just seek your assistance here. I desperately want to be insulated, but would this amendment be consistent with the memorandum? Do we also need to amend the memorandum to this Bill in order to accommodate it?

MR.KUTESA: We know that there has been a ruling by the Supreme Court actually removing the provisions of Clause 15 of the Parliamentary Privileges Act. I know that we would like to make sure that we have immunity and we have all this protection. All along, we have maintained these immunities in an Act of Parliament. 

What hon. Mutyaba is trying to say now, is that, despite the ruling of the Supreme Court, we should lift this law from where it is as an Act of Parliament, and make it part of our Constitution, so that the courts can no longer rule against it. If that is the import, I would like to suggest that we really examine this amendment at greater lengths. In fact, we may have to divide what we want to prohibit and what we must allow. 

If we are going to bring it as an omni-bus clause, as he has proposed here, and make it an Article in the Constitution, I think there are certain things we do not want to do. We do not want our Speaker to be dragged to court any day they want, for example. But at the same time, we do not want to say that Parliament can go against the Constitution, and nobody can use the information from here without the same Parliament giving that consent for that information to be used. 

I am not against this amendment. I am not against re-introducing immunity to this House, but I think we should think further through this act and see what we really would like to bring back. We cannot fetter the hands of the courts, because we are the ones who make the laws, and it is the court that interprets the laws. So, I reluctantly oppose hon. Mutyaba, and he knows why. 

Having said that, I think we should give it deeper thought. We should see what we want to protect our officers and ourselves, and then also leave room for courts to be able to inquire into certain things, if they are against the Constitution, for example. So, this is not in conformity with the long title of this Bill. What we are going to have to do is not only to bring in this clause, but also to amend the long title. And I do not know whether the long title has not been gazetted, and whether all these other things have not been gazetted. If they have been gazetted and this particular amendment was not part of the gazette, I do not know whether that does not raise other questions. I would like you to give clarification and guidance on this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I raised the issue of Rule 95. Obviously, it is possible that there are many other Members with amendments that they would have liked to bring in during this time, but Rule 95 requires any amendment to be relevant to the long title. The long title is what you imply and it spells out the policy behind the intended amendments. You cannot amend this when you have not amended the title, because you have already passed that title. 

MR.WAPAKABULO: There are two points being raised here.  This is supposed to be the memorandum of objects and reasons. It is a summary of what the Minister’s speech, so that when you read the Bill, at least, you know the reasons, facts and considerations in summary. They do not form part of the Bill. 

The long title on the other hand forms part of the Bill, but when you are considering a Bill at Committee Stage, you come to the long title last. This is because along the way, you may amend the Bill and that amendment affects the nature of the long title. So, if this amendment were to be passed, when we come back to the long title in this case, we would amend it to include what this amendment provides for. That can be done at the last stage, because when you have finished the long title, then you go to the Third Reading.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But the question is, is this amendment belated, because that is the first question I asked? If you could tell us if it is belated, then we can proceed.

MR.MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, you asked me that question and I replied on the basis of what the amendment itself provides.  I said that the amendment deals with elements concerning proceedings of Parliament, and I said that, how you deal with proceedings of Parliament is related to the amendment. Therefore, it is not something that has no relation at all. 

If Article 95(1) of the Rules is certified then clause 2 does not arise. Like my colleague has said, at the end of the debate, you can amend the long title.  

MR.MED KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have an even more fundamental problem. Apart from what you have said, I am worried that we are sitting here trying to amend a Constitution before the relevant Committee has looked at the proposed amendment. I remember when we were dealing with the hon. Onapito/hon. Mugisha Muntu Bill in the Legal Committee, the Attorney General brought to our attention Articles we had not considered. So, I would be very worried if we start coming here and amending, and then the next day we say there is another Article. You have already ruled this morning that there are other people who are going to bring amendments. I do not see why the Mover does not use that opportunity, and to use the famous word, stampedes to pass an Article that may run counter to other provisions of the Constitution.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, the intention behind this is very noble. The procedure to execute that intention, however, is faulty and cannot be cured. According to the present Constitution, we refer Bills that are coming to us, especially for amendment of the Constitution, to a Committee. 

Secondly, there is Article 41 in the Constitution, which also received a pronouncement from the Supreme Court. Article 41 gives power to Parliament to make laws relating to the matter, which we are now being asked to insert in the Constitution. There is also a Bill going to be brought by the Minister of Information, hon. Basoga, and he has already alerted the relevant Committee. I think it would be expecting too much of us and we would look like we are trying to protect ourselves so much, and taking advantage of the matter, because we have not had a thorough briefing and proper debate in the relevant Committees. In the process, we may really injure the noble intentions of the movers. I call upon my learned and dear friend, hon. Mutyaba, to withdraw this and we move on.

MR.WAPAKABULO: I would like to try and show that this amendment is a logical part of what this Bill is all about.  If the Supreme Court did not strike out Section 15 of the National Assembly Powers and Privileges Act, which protects parliamentary proceedings and guarantees freedom of speech in here, the constitutional court would not have had the opportunity to make the ruling it did. It was on the basis of the directive of the Supreme Court that the constitutional court proceeded to hear the case. The Supreme Court ruled that the constitutional court was able to hold proceedings in which the Speaker of this House, the Clerk of this House and other officials of this House were called before the courts and cross examined, and proceedings of this House were tendered in as evidence. It is a logical conclusion. One flows from the other. 

This is not merely a question relating to procedure of Parliament and the other merely relating to privilege. Section 15 is being reproduced by the Mover, and it is the one that was struck down, and which made it possible for the procedures of this House not to be protected, and therefore everything that we did came to what we have now.  The House is now seeking to validate laws, which are likely to be struck out simply because of the original ruling on this section. And the House is now moving to clean up the Committee procedure and the method of voting, which arises from that ruling by the Supreme Court. So, really, it is a package, as I said earlier on this morning. It is a package of validation. It is a package of insulation and a package of facilitation. The three actually are in one, but it is up to the Mover to listen to the House. Thank you.

MS. EGUNYU: I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wish to draw the attention of the House to Article 97 of the Constitution.  Article 97 of the Constitution provides as follows:
“The Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, Members of Parliament and any other person participating or assisting in or acting in connection with or reporting the proceedings of Parliament or any of its Committees shall be entitled to such immunities and privileges as Parliament shall by law prescribe.”  

I am trying to prove that, this was prescribed in a law outside the Constitution, and now we are trying to bring it inside the Constitution. Because of the problems we have encountered, we find it very pertinent to have it within the Constitution.  I thank you.

MR.WACHA: I continue from where hon. Egunyu stopped. I have a lot of sympathy, as a Member of Parliament, for the proposed amendment. I even find difficulty in having to discuss it now. I would rather look at it in detail, get it refined, and as Members might want to note, even seek further amendment of Article 97 to remove the concept of Parliament prescribing any other law for the immunities of Parliament. 

I do not know whether the method of work that we are trying to adopt now might not cause more furor outside this House. I would rather we go by what you suggested this morning, Sir, that there are a number of other people who might want to raise amendments to this Constitution. We take the Bill, which has already been tabled before this House, and seek to amend the long title to take care of all those other amendments, so that when they come before this House after it has gone to the relevant Committee, we know what we are dealing with. I suggest, very reluctantly, that, hon. Mutyaba and hon. Wapakabulo withdraw this temporarily until next time.

MR.MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, I will have no problem with withdrawing this. However, you must consider that tomorrow or on Monday, someone may actually bring another suit challenging the proceedings of this Parliament, and you may have to come here and make another constitutional amendment. This is not going to be a daily thing, because you do not know when the other constitutional amendments are coming. They are not coming on Monday, and they are not coming on Tuesday. Someone moves a suit in the courts, and it has nothing to do with what you have debated here, but it concerns the proceedings of this House. You will have to bring another constitutional amendment and bring us again here and look for two thirds in order to cure that problem.  

This is not new, Members, and you know it! As hon. Kutesa said, this has really been transplanted from the National Assembly Powers and Privileges Act, essentially because the Supreme Court decided Section 15 is unconstitutional.  As I said, it is Parliament to make laws, and once you put that here in the Constitution, then the judiciary will have no reason to question our actions. 

For those who think that things may be looked at differently from outside, this is not the first Parliament. This provision has been included in nearly every Constitution of every Commonwealth Country. So, actually we are not being over-zealous to protect ourselves. 

Mr. Chairman, when you are looking at democracy, there are three very important tenets. One of them says “ensure that the Legislature can exercise its power freely on behalf its electorate with access to all relevant information.”  That is a very important tenet.  

Secondly, there is need to protect the freedom of speech generally for the Members and of course for the public. Thirdly, the interest of justice in ensuring that all the relevant evidences are available to the courts. In this case, that would mean that our proceedings here should be available to the courts. This is not a court of law, but it was decided in New Zealand and Australia that of all these three tenets, the first one must prevail. 

The first one, of ensuring that the legislature can exercise its powers freely on behalf of its electorate with access to all relevant information, must prevail. So, you may not want to follow this precedent, because we are an independent House, but I think we should be persuaded by what is happening in other Parliaments. And this amendment is really to protect us individually and the House at large. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Members, you have heard the arguments from both sides. A proposal was made by hon. Mutyaba. He wants to insert what he has read to you, and he has said that this is related. That was the first question I asked him and he has justified it. I think it is high time I put the question on the motion. 

125 voted in favour of the motion

18 Members voted against.

21 Members abstained

MR.WACHA: Mr. Speaker, I wish to draw the attention of the House to a small matter, which might need to reflect upon, in view of our decision now. Article 97 states as follows: 
“The Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, Members of Parliament and any other person participating or assisting in or acting in connection with or reporting the proceedings of Parliament or any of its committees shall be entitled to such immunities and privileges as Parliament shall by law prescribe.”

I want to know from you, Sir, what the import of this is, after we have passed what we have passed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, if that remains, it means there may be additional privileges, which Parliament may create by law.

MR.WAPAKABULO: Sir, what the House has done is to lift one section from the National Assembly Powers and Privileges Act and made it constitutional. But there are other additional privileges and immunities, which by virtue of Article 97, are contained in that Act as saved by the saving provisions of the Constitution.  For instance, right now, no one can come and arrest any Member of Parliament because the Member owes them money. You cannot do that within the precincts of Parliament. That is immunity –(Laughter)

Secondly, a Member of Parliament, when proceeding from his home to a session of Parliament or returning from a session of Parliament and proceeding to his home, cannot be arrested for a civil debt. He would be answering a summon to attend Parliament. Those are some of the immunities that are in that Act. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the point has been clarified enough. Do we have other amendments?

MR.BEN WACHA: Mr. Speaker you will notice that under section 3, there is a clause 4, which we did not deal with and then under section 4 - (Interjection) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a lot of noise. Please, let us listen to each other so that we can wind up this issue.

MR.WACHA: Under section 4, there was clause 8, which we did not deal with. I did mention at the beginning that the Committee was of the view that this validation Articles should consist of one particular Article at a specific area of the Constitution. Now the Committee is of the view that we create another Article 257(a) to provide for this validation Article. And 257(a) will read as follows:  
“Subject to Article 92 of this Constitution -
    (a) No Act, resolution or decision passed or taken or purported to have been passed or taken by Parliament at any time after the commencement of this Constitution using the procedure of voting by a voice vote namely, by the voices of “ayes” for those in favour of the question, and “Noes” for those against the question, shall be taken to be invalid by reason of the use of that procedure;

    (b) no Act passed or purported to have been passed by Parliament at anytime after the commencement of this Constitution shall be taken to be invalid by reason of the fact that the bill for the Act was not discussed and recommendations made on it to Parliament by a standing committee.”  

The purpose of this is to validate actions, which were taken by this Parliament, and I enumerated them at the beginning, which my not have conformed to the decisions recently taken. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think this is clear. I will now put the question.
(Question put)

215 Members in favour  of the motion
 
The Title

MR.WACHA: I move, Sir, that the title remains part of the Bill.  
 
MR.MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, in view of the amendments, which we have made and in accordance with Rule 95, I would like to make amendments to the long title. After the last word, Parliament, we have a semicolon and then say, ‘and to amend Article 97 of the Constitution to provide for protection of proceedings of Parliament from use outside Parliament without the authority of Parliament’.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have heard the amendment and I think its purpose is clear.  

MR.KAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, let him read the entire provision so that we can get the gist of it. 

MR.MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The long title would now read as follows:  
“An Act to repeal and replace Article 88 of the Constitution to make provision in relation to quorum; to amend Article 89 of the Constitution to provide for a manner of ascertaining the majority of votes cast on any question; 
to repeal and replace Article 90 of the Constitution, to recognise the role of the Committee of a whole House in passing of Bills and make provision in relation to the function of committees of Parliament; and to amend Article 97 of the Constitution, to provide for protection of proceedings of Parliament from use outside Parliament without the authority of Parliament.”  

That is now the complete long title.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question 

LT.COL. MAYOMBO: Mr. Chairman, we have not yet voted for the amended long title to be part of the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are starting with the amendment. When we amend then we shall put the vote on the amended long title.

LT.COL. MAYOMBO: I agree with you, Mr. Chairman, but I just want to raise clarification. In view of the fact that we have amended Article 257, what is the effect of the absence of that amendment on the long title? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I thought the exercise was to amend that long title. This is what we are trying to do! 

MR.WACHA: Sir, I have another amendment. From where hon. Mutyaba stopped, we remove “and” before Article 97 and put a comma. And after Article 97, we put ‘and to amend Article 257 to provide for ratification of certain Acts relating to proceedings of Parliament.’

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Fine, I will now put the question to the amendment to insert Articles 97 and 257 to the long title. 

(Question put)

214 Members in favour of the motion

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the motion is carried, the Long Title is amended accordingly - (Applause)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee do report there to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the House do resume.
 
195 Members voted in favour of the motion

1 Member voted against

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Motion carried.

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, ‘The Constitution (amendment) Bill, 2000’ and amended it in several parts.  

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is for the report of the Committee be adopted.  

221 Members voted in favour of the motion 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the report has been adopted -(Applause)

BILLS
THIRD READING

The Constitution (amendment) Bill, 2000

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, ‘The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2000’ be read the Third Time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion for the Bill to be read the Third Time. According to the Constitution, in order for the Third Reading be carried, we must have two thirds of all Members of Parliament, and since we decided on this, there should be a division. Those in support go to this side, and those against to the opposite side.

(The House divided)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are four ex-Officio Members who do not vote. 224 Members voted in favour of the motion. 1 Member voted against, and there were no abstentions. Therefore, in accordance with the Constitution, the motion is carried -  (Applause).

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2000.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is carried, Third Reading given, and it has passed. I take this opportunity to thank you for contributing to the debate and all the proceedings. I thank the Committee, which has done work within a very short time. I thank the Minister too and everybody. So, congratulations. Since we have a function tomorrow which you are expected to attend, the House is adjourned until Monday at 2:00p.m. to continue with our business.

(The House rose at 7:34 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 4th September, 2000 at 2.00 p. m)

