Wednesday, 31 August 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairman, Mr Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair.)

(The Council was called to order.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, death has struck again.  It is with a very heavy heart that I wish to announce the death of hon. Ssebagereka, the Minister for Public Service, Council Member for Ntenjeru County, Mukono and a husband to one of our colleagues hon. Victoria Ssebagereka, Woman representative for Mukono District; which occurred at Mulago Hospital early this afternoon.  Arrangements regarding the funeral will be brought to your attention as soon as they have been worked out.  The Council, the Government and the nation at large, will greatly miss his services.  Let us stand up for a minute in silence in his memory.  May his soul rest in internal peace.


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA TOURIST BOARD BILL, 1994

MR TIVU MARK (Youth Representative, Northern Region):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, to give me a chance to discuss on behalf of the Youths on a very important sector of the economy; that is the tourist sector.  At the beginning of this Session, we debated seriously about the poor performance of the agriculture in the economy and that has got a draw back in the GDP and I believe, with the improvement -(Interruption)

MR KATO WAMBI:  Point of order.  A very important debate, is it in order for us to go on without a quorum?

THE CHAIRMAN:  As there is no quorum hon. Members, I adjourn for 15 minutes.

(The Council adjourned for 15 minutes).

MR TIVU MARK:  I was saying, in agrarian economy like ours which suffers from fluctuations in out put and prices, it is necessary to develop a subsidiary sector which can supplement the national income when the agrarian sector is faced with the natural calamities.  In view of this, I do support the Bill.  However, I have noted with concern that, the Board created seems to have taken away all the functions which were prior performed by the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife and this has made me to conclude that, that is why in the Bill the Minister would like to be as a Headmaster on the Board; because it seems after the Board is operating, the Ministry will have no responsibility, because the responsibilities will have to be vested in the Board.  

Now, I am asking the question, what will be the responsibility of the technical staff of the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife, who are supposed to come out with policies and guidelines for the Ministry?  So, it is necessary that the Ministry has to come up with a clear definition of the role of the Board and its functions because it may necessitate that in future when this Board is created, the Ministry now becomes may be a department under another bigger Ministry.

I want to also say something about the management of Tourism Industry today.  Today, we have adopted the orthodox method of managing tourism industry as in other developing countries.  But in an economy like ours which is faced with meagre resources, and also which has land problems, I would have fitted well if we adopted a new strategy in the management in the utilisation of our tourism resources.  

Therefore, I feel that when we want to create similar infrastructures like in the Rhinelands, we may not have the capacity to develop those infrastructures and at the same time, you will find that we may face stiff competition.  

Therefore, I will suggest, we come up with a unique methodology of our own tourism sector.  I will therefore, suggest we adopt the Zimbabwean way, whereby the tourism sector must involve the ordinary people in the management of the affairs.  When you look at the Zimbabwean Tourism Industry, you find that the local population are involved; there is what we call the Tourists Fund, but in the Ugandan case whereby the ordinary people are left out, they get alienated, they are deprived of land with the consequence -(Interruption)

MR SALIM BACHOU:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I do agree with the hon. Member holding the Floor that, we need to evolve a dynamic management approach to be able to realise benefits from the Tourism Industry and I would like to inform him through you, Mr Chairman, that, that is precisely what we are doing.  

Indeed, in the Ministry of Tourism, whenever there is a National Park, under the Ministry of Tourism, we have a Management Committee that just involves representation from the people of the area as well as the local authority in the area.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Sorry, I have heard someone saying that it is not true, but I am talking the truth.  Somebody has to decide between -(Interruption)  

THE CHAIRMAN:  You have made your point.

MR SALIM BACHOU:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform this august House that even if the Deputy Minister for Tourism has said that he is telling the truth, but I can assure the Members here that in Budadiri, there is no that kind of Mount Elgon Park; there is nothing of people being involved, but I look forward to seeing the Ministry putting in place people to be involved.  The point over here is that, if the locals are involved, they will be better managers of National Parks and the Minister and National Park can bring a helicopter to monitor -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  That point is taken hon. Member.  Your information is taken hon. Tivu.

MR TIVU MARK:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and the information from the Minister and hon. Wanendeya.  Why I was emphasising the involvement of the people in the management in the utilisation of this sector is that, in the Ugandan context today, the people feel alienated and deprived of their resources and that is why we have rampant poaching; because you know the sociological thinking of people about Government is that, Government is an oppressor, that is the ordinary peasant’s thinking of what a government is.  Therefore, in order to change the attitude of the people must involve them aggressively and amicably.

I also want to advise that in view of improving our Tourist Sector, our cultural traits and institutions must also be taken as tourist items. I noticed that when we were instituting or re-instituting our traditional institutions, we had the outside world who came in large numbers to admire these cultural traits of ours, but it seems we have not tried to put it as one of our tourists items. Our cultural traits should be deliberately organised and improved so that we do not only depend on the fauna and fora, but we also have our cultural traits as one of the tourism assets.

I also want to request the Ministry - around 1989 when I was a student, I used to sit in the public gallery there, there was a statement made by the Minister that, they were going to import the White Rhino from Zimbabwe and take it to Ajai Game Reserve in Arua and having heard this thing from Public Gallery, I went and mobilised our local population towards improving the Game Reserve there.  Up to today, this thing has not been acted to and people are now not trusting me and not trusting government.  Therefore, I call upon the Ministry and the Government at least -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR TIVU MARK:  You see, Mr Chairman, to improve the economy, it is collective responsibility.  When I read something good on papers, and I feel that it can help my people, it is my responsibility to educate them and, therefore, there should be no murmur that when I was in Public Gallery I should not be educating my people.

I lastly want to say something about the nature of our tourists - the tourists who come to visit these sites.  I am getting concerned about the nature and the methodology of these tourists.  I am becoming suspicious that it seems some of the security problems we have in this country, are being engineered under the guise of tourists.  

What I mean to say is this, yesterday an hon. member made a statement that in Arua there is insecurity purportedly because the society in Arua is a complex - it has got many aliens and so on.  But I want to confirm to you through incidents which happened in which some White men were involved.  

    (i) The death of Forbes, the Canadian Researcher and his colleague was aimed at Europeans.  There is a certain pub called Club Continental; Europeans were seated there and then they were aimed at.  Two months after that, some Europeans were seated in the same place, they were also grenaded and now fourthly, this White Rhino attack.  Now, I am getting concerned, why are these Europeans always been aimed at?  What is the reason?  Why is it that our Europeans are being aimed at?  

    (ii) Now, I have also come to realise that it seems our security issues are not being brought into this House at all.  There are certain issues which are managed outside our notice and then the ordinary men come to know and then begin to react.  What do I mean?  When the Americans were coming here recently, Congress agreed their coming in Uganda; but this House was never consulted, this House was never consulted, the Americans came here, and landed in Entebbe.  Now, they are moving throughout Uganda.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR TIVU MARK:  I am still explaining my point.  Mr Chairman, now we have got the trouble spots in Africa, we have the espionage problem.  Now, the Arabs are getting concerned over the movement of white men in Uganda.  Now, as they are interacting, the people of Uganda are now suffering, as when two elephants are fighting, the ground is supposed to suffer.  Therefore, I demand on the people of Northern Uganda from Ministry of Defence to clearly explain the nature of our tourists and the nature of these people who are coming in our country. (Applause)  How are they coming and what are they coming to do?  Mr Chairman, with these few points, I support the Bill.  Thank you.

MR SIBO (Nominated Member):  Mr Chairman, I stand to support the Bill.  In supporting the Bill, perhaps, I should establish my own credentials in trying to say what I am going to say.  I have been involved in Tourism for a long time.  I started tourism in this country from 1965 for five years and indeed at that time, there was nothing of Tourism in this country.  For instance, we had only one International Airline BOAC - British Overseas Airways Corporation, landing into Entebbe, perhaps once or twice a week in 1965.  By the time I left in 1970, we had 15 Airlines landing in Entebbe carrying at that time more than a million tourists into this country a year.  

So, apart from that, I was involved in the management of East African Airways, again carrying tourists into this country.  So, when I say I have a lot of experience in tourism, I think I have a right to claim that.

I would like to say that perhaps the most important object of the Board is the promotion of Tourism.  This promotion of tourism requires a lot of funds.  We have as we speak now - we are going to repeal one of the parastatals that was set up to do exactly what we are setting this one out to do.  You may say, this is changing faces or changing guards, but probably it is correct, but perhaps we should emphasise the methodology of promotion of tourism.  

We have under Clause 9, spelt out functions of the Board.  Unfortunately, these functions are spelt out in rather general terms and you really do not feel that you are biting something.  I would like to say in those terms, that to realise the assignment that is being given to the Board, we should perhaps go through some of these functions properly; so that we can see the extent to which the Board will be required to operate.  The Board will be required to establish, protect and improve the tourist attractions.  Now, these tourists attractions in the country will include; National Parks, the fauna and flora you have heard of, the scenery, the water sports, water boats, camping tents, vehicles, sites and so on and so forth.  

Secondly, the Board will be required to provide tourist facilities.  These facilities will include hotels and vehicles to move from one part of the country to the other.  It will also be required to facilitate travel arrangements, the provision of visas, the reduction of bureaucracy in immigration procedures and rules.  It will be required to advertise these available attractions in the country.  It will be required to organise the hoteliers, the travel agents, the tour operators and the airlines.  It will, indeed, have to do carry out public relations work among all these operators.  The Board will be required to organise overseas tour operators to come here in order to ensure inclusion of Uganda Tourist Attractions in their own programmes.  

Otherwise, there is no way you can get tourists from Europe to this country for instance.  The Board will be required to organise public relations experts who will publish some of the tourist attractions in this country in appropriate magazines and appropriate media in different countries.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, one of the problems we are facing in this country is insufficient information.  As the hon. Member on the Floor rightly put it.  There is need to improve on the information system.  If there is a way we can have brochures which can be distributed to border posts, Entebbe Airport and even to our missions abroad.  It can be very careful in providing information and this can help in the further enhancement of tourism promotion.

MR SIBO:  Thank you very much.  Mr Chairman, as I was saying, these public relations experts are necessary.  We will need them.  These public relations experts, unfortunately cost a lot of money and to publicise the kind of articles and advertisements in the Vogue magazines, is very expensive.  The Board will also be required to organise shows in tourist and travel exhibitions that are usually held in different countries overseas.  

Perhaps more very, very importantly, the Board will be required to train guides.  Guides are very important.  To train them and make sure they know what is available in this country for tourists to see.  The training of these guides is also expensive.  When there is a question on training hoteliers, the Board will not be required to train these hoteliers themselves but to ensure that the hotels train their hotel staff to be able to behave as these fellows are expected to behave; to ensure that there is attraction of these people to this country.  That is the product that the Board will be selling.  When I say the product, it is not only hotels.  All these that I have enumerated, are the product that the Board will be required to sell overseas.  

Now, to sell that product is going to require a lot of money.  We see that the Minister is providing for finances for this kind of thing and Clause 13 - grants for government.  I do not expect grants from government are going to be added.  If we go by experience we have had, government has failed to capitalise its parastatals and I do not expect that the tourist Board is going to be any more capitalised than the other parastatals.  

Consequently, the Board will have to look for funds from other sources.  It will have, therefore, to levy certain taxes from those people who are involved in the tourist industry.  The Minister, therefore, will have to be aware of the necessity for these levies.  The levies will have to be in form of taxes collected perhaps by the Revenue Authority or perhaps collected by the Board itself in one form or another but the main source of the funds of the Board will definitely have to be levies from those people who are involved in the hotel industry.  We have for instance, the Civil Aviation Authority -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up please.

MR SIBO:  I will soon be winding up, Mr Chairman.  Civil Aviation Authority is collecting, I think, adequate funds.  I believe the Board should also levy taxes from Civil Aviation Authority. The point I want also to make here is that the Bill gives too much power to the Minister.  I have counted the frequency of the appearance of the Minister in the Bill.  It is something like 27 and all this, in respect of powers given to the Minister.  That is a bit too much.  We seem to want the Minister to manage the tourist Board.  I think the Minister should try and reduce these powers to the level where the Board will be managing the industry, not the Minister.  The Minister has no time to manage the industry.  

I hope I will be able to suggest some amendments in this but I think that it is necessary to allow the Board to run its business instead of getting the Minister involved in management of the industry.  I would like to stop here and leave the rest for the Amendment.  I support the Bill.  Thank you.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill in formation of the Board but I straight away would like to propose the abolition of the most ridiculous sounding Ministry called the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.  First of all, I do not find the difference between the Board and the original co-operation that was there but I find a lot of duplication, wastage of funds and -(Applause)- not clear demarcation between the work by the Ministry and the work supposed to be done by this Board.  

First of all, the Ministry is called the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; as if wildlife can exist in isolation; as if tourism can just exist separately, as if antiquities can be taken as a separate department, when all those fall under almost all the Ministries in one way or another.  I think, tourism as an industry is multi-sectoral.  It cannot just be confined in one particular Ministry.  It involves security, it involves transport, it involves environmental protection, it involves natural resources, water, culture, education and so on.  

So, to make it confined to one particular Ministry and it is said that somebody is only looking after the tourist industry, I think is not only wasting a lot of resources on running a Ministry, but making it very ineffective.  There are some Boards that have been formed which I think are serving -(Interruption)

MR MANZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor as to whether it is possible to have a Ministry which is not already at any other Ministry, and whether you can actually manage tourism without having a way that you can organise it and have it properly organised and attract people.  Because if you do not regulate tourism, and you put it under environment, then Agriculture, then Defence - how will it actually be tourism as a sector and be profit making?  Can you clarify Sir?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  If the hon. Member was patient enough, we would have heard the clarification very clearly and I was going to say it.  I was going to say that it is good to have a Board which is handling a multi-sectoral area and it could fall under the Prime Minister’s Office.  Examples; there is the Uganda Veteran Assistance Board which is under the Prime Minister’s Office and it is multi-sectoral and it has recorded 98 per cent success for the last period.  

What I have said is not only from my mouth, but it is on record by the international and the government of Uganda; but what I am saying is an example of how a Board can do much of the work that does not have wasted money on in form of a Ministry.  I do not see the reason why there should be this Board and then there should be a separate Ministry for this.  Much of the -(Interruption)

MR SALIM BACHOU:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  May I, through you, Mr Chairman, inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that whereas I do respect the ideas he is putting forward, I would like to inform him that there is a Ministerial Restructuring Committee whose work is to do precisely what he is trying to do in here and, therefore, I would like, through you, to advise him to submit his otherwise excellent proposals to this Committee.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  In that respect, hon. Tumwine, please do not be too extensive on that line.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am glad that some people have already thought about that and that emphasises the point that I am making.  I would like to talk about the internal tourism.  Yesterday, I mentioned briefly on how much money is being spent on trying to attract tourists of a particular character who would bring in foreign exchange and so on.  

But moreso in order to develop the industry, we need to develop internal tourism.  Uganda happens to fall around the Inter-lucastrine Region which is thought and there is a theory that that this region could be where human life first started.  The recent discovery of the skull in the region dates far back than any earlier discovery that has been made and it is explainable that because of the water, because of the nature, because of the climate, it attracted life faster than anywhere else in the world.  

As a result, this region has a multi-cultural aspect or outlook than any other in the whole world because the different cultures moved from different parts of the world in search of good environment, in search of water and in search of the climate that we have here.  

What are we looking for in tourism?  It is what some people cannot get in their own places and what do we have, therefore, that cannot be got in other places?  The first one is the weather.  Uganda might be having the best weather in the world!  But what has happened is that while it might be too hot, sometimes in Karamoja and too cold in Kabale, Ugandans have not enjoyed that difference in climate within the same country.  While it might be -(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that he is making a very crucial point here but I wanted to inform him that a lot of our people are so busy looking for food for a day that to get money even to travel between here and Mbarara is going to be a problem.  

The second one is the test of going to look at animals.  It is something that we have cultivated because when we see snakes, we run away.  So, I would like to propose to the gentleman that we must have an education.  Thank you very much.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr Chairman, why am I emphasising internal tourism not to make people poorer but make them look for better opportunities within the same country.  If it is -(Interruption)- I think if you could allow me to finish my point.  If it is a point of looking at animals, I would like the Ankole people to go and look at the Karimojong cattle and the Karimojong people to look at the Ankole cattle.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.  Hon. Member, please refrain from reference to horns of cattle only.  It causes a lot of disturbance in the House.  Please go ahead.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr Chairman, it is a very important aspect of my life and when you refer to the long horns, you touch my heart.  So what I would like to say is that, it is important for the people to tour and see what they can benefit from different parts of Uganda.  The question of poverty is one point but if you take the example of this Lottery, which has just been established of 500/-.  He is raising two billion in a very short time!  Because they - an example of, if somebody planned cheap methods of touring within Uganda and it is planned for, it can be achieved.  

I will give you another example. Many of our people have not exchanged the different cultures that we have here and tried to look for what is good in this culture and what is not good in my culture; and culture has not been emphasized in the Ministry of Tourism as an attraction, as a centre for attracting tourism.  Cultural tourism is one of the biggest sources of income in many countries.  If I may take an example, our foods many Chinese Restaurants are mushrooming in Kampala, what the Chinese did is that, they popularised, marketed, and promoted their cooking in the rest of the world.  I know that in Uganda here many people cook very well and what a tourist would like to see is how he can eat different food from what he has been eating from where he stays.  Now, I do not know of any hotel in Uganda that offers all the different dishes that are cooked around Uganda.  

Now, what I am talking about is that emphasis should be laid in trying to do what has been done in the rest of the world.  We should always try to do what characteristic of Uganda, what is special of Uganda, what is special about us.  I told you one time here that when I went to Washington, I found in the Simisen Institute they were selling the ‘Engata,’ this banana fibre ring that we use carrying water.  They were selling it 3 dollars and I stood there to observe how many people were buying ‘engata’ and very many people were buying as I watched; and it was imported from Kenya.  Now, what is important is that we should emphasize things that are special to Uganda.  

Recently, we opened a cultural village behind the National Theatre, as an example, we are recording a minimum of 50 tourists every day there, minimum 50 on average, just who are coming to see what different crafts we have in Uganda; and they would like us to see developing that type of industry as part of tourism.  Culture can be a commodity to market; if Members were not instead of trying to copy, if the Board is not only going to copy what is happening in other countries, but is going to establish what should be happening in Uganda, I then will support the Bill and think that they will be doing their function as on page 5 and page 6 when they are talking about promoting marketing and popularizing Uganda.  

If you look at page 5 on the composition will be able to see where emphasis is being laid.  Emphasis is being laid on the tour agent, on the travel agent, and on the hotel.  That shows you what type of tourism people are thinking of.  They are not thinking of the environmentalists who should really know where to preserve the environment and where to take tourists.  They are not thinking of how to dig and research about our old cultures and our old sites, there are historical sites in Uganda as mentioned by some Members here, which are not at the moment as we speak are not catered for and are only found here in the whole world, but are not well attended as we speak today.  

That is why I was saying that I think if we were to have the Board, then we should abolish the Ministry.  I am not happy with what they are doing in that respect.  If you look at the antiquities and at Uganda Museum which was transferred from the Ministry of Culture and put to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, it is in a sorry state.  Not only for tourism but also for the education of our own people.  It is not properly utilized, it was rehabilitated a little bit but most of the things that were put there were put there before the 60s and they are the ones which are now deteriorating and no new things are being put there.  We should have looked at royal things that were kept there, how badly they were looked after.  Just to show an example of things which are so valuable and which would be bringing tourists from all over the world to come and look at how we are looking at them.  

I am saying this to emphasize he point that Cultural Tourism should be the leading tourist strategic planning than any other.  Why?  Many of these countries which are called developed are now looking for their routes because they destroyed their culture with modernity.  They destroyed their own environment with development.  Now, they are looking for nature, they are looking for things which are real on the ground, which are from the grassroots.  If you travel in some parts even of Mbarara district these days, it is becoming very difficult to get grass thatched housed.  But you go to South Africa, the most expensive houses are thatched in grass.  Now, if we do not develop that, if we do not develop even thatching with grass because our environment can - is best suited for thatching with grass.  If we do not develop that as part of tourism and create architecture, develop architecture which will preserve our environment, which will be healthy and which cannot be found in other places which have already been spoilt, then we shall not be laying emphasis where emphasis should be laid.  

If you look at the swamps, some of the tourist attractions in the world now is going and finding where people can find natural life.  Some of the swamps are now being destroyed while they will be the ones, which would preserve nature.  There was a programme on TV last night called ‘Capital City’ one of the investments - it was about a business enterprise and what they were going to buy, they were going to buy some land; and one thing they were interested in was how many insect species are in that piece of land.  And they said, there were thousands and thousands of insect species in that land and became one of the credits or positive signs for that investment.  

Now, in Uganda here fortunately, because we were not thoroughly colonised to have even big shambas, we still have some natural forests.  We can still talk of natural food.  If you advertise one of the attractive things for tourism to come in Uganda here is that you eat natural food, organic, which is not chemically contaminated; you find that one is not emphasized in the Tourism Industry.  

So, I would like to propose that the Board should emphasize on trying to make the environment, on trying to make our climate the biggest aspect of its promotion.  If you go to the equator, the point on Kampala - Masaka road, I am wondering why the Ministry or any private enterprise has not developed there some important - has not turned into an important place for tourism.  If you stop there for one hour at the Equator, and I did recently, to count how many vehicles stop there in one hour.  Seven different convoys within one hour stopped there to take photographs there, but they had nothing else to buy or to enjoy around the area.  There was nothing to really attract them that depicted the life around the equator, and there are very few places in the world, which have such an advantage to know that you have your head on the North and your feet in the South.  If you were to put there a restaurant, -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  It is a very important subject because in Uganda people have discovered the source of Nile, but the Europeans are interested to see where Nile joins lake Kyoga, how does it penetrate an then come out alone to go as far as West Nile.  This one should make feasibility study to discover, this is a very interesting site.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want just to give supplementary information. I think now with the spirit and error of liberalization, I think it is incumbent upon our private investors to take advantage of the type of situation which hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine is talking about.  Thank you.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you.  Mr Chairman, I am winding up by saying in the functions of the Board, something specific should be added I think as number 5, for research in tourism.  They are talking of any other that Minister might tell them to do.  But I think there should be research in tourism and research in tourism, which is only characteristic of Uganda.  There does not seem to be any emphasis on what the Board is going to do about researching in areas of tourism.  

I wanted to take this opportunity to inform this House that in 1998 Uganda is scheduled by UNESCO to host the International Folk Art Festival.  Now, this is going to bring all people from all over the world, but how prepare are we?  How prepared are we to take advantage of this festival?  In 1996, we are going to host the Pan African Movement Art Festival here, how is the Tourist Industry prepared to take advantage of that?  In the Caribbean, they make a lot of money during festivals every year, they have yearly festivals and carnivores where people come from all over the world to come and participate in these yearly festivals, and it brings in a lot of money.  How it pointed out here in the functions of the Board, they are only talking of travel agents and tourist agents.  They are not talking of how the Board is going to encourage tourism in many other aspects.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO (Makindye Division, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Before I speak on the Bill, allow me to pay my respects to our departed Colleague and Friend hon. Sam Ssebagereka.  It is fitting to do so at this juncture because he was - during his lifetime a Minister of Tourism, and when I was the Minister responsible for Housing we worked very closely with him in the rehabilitation of our hotels, particularly Lake Victoria Hotel and Nile Hotel Complex.  

Hon. Ssebagereka has been known to me personally for a very long time, in primary school where we first met, he was only two years ahead of me.  We met at Ndejje and he went to Buddo, I also went there, then he was one of the very few Africans who chose to study for a course in Accountancy.  At the time these kind of courses were discouraged by the authorities which were here at that time. He has been a good professional man, he has risen to very high ranks, he has served this nation, he has been dedicated as a person he was very friendly, some who would not know him very well, would think that he was arrogant, but he was not.  Sam Ssebagereka will be greatly missed.  May his soul rest in peace.

CAPT BABU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, yes the hon. Minister Ssebagereka will be missed greatly.  When I first joined the East African Community in East African Airways as a young man joining the engineering section, hon. Ssebagereka was one of the very few Members who were right at the top of the East African Community ladder and he eventually became the Director of the East African Income Tax department.  The first black man in fact, to be a professional.  

He was a very kind man and some of us who knew him at that time as young men, had a lot of respect for him; and we used to go and visit him and he would invite us as Ugandans in Nairobi to go to his home on certain occasions, especially, those occasions that were so dear to us as Ugandans, the independence occasion especially.  

I remember him vividly, with his other friend called Mr Balidawa who became the Director of Civil Aviation, the other one was a gentleman called Ssempiira who was the Director of the East Africans Literature Bureau who is now a deceased; this gentleman made an impact on the East African scene and for that, they will be remembered.  May their soul rest in peace. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Restrict your remarks to a few words please.

AN HON. MEMBER:  I rise to share the sentiments expressed by hon. Sebaana Kizito on the untimely death of Sam Ssebagereka, because I have had an opportunity in life to work with Ssebagereka in the East African Community.  I was a member of the East African Legislative Assembly with the hon. Sebaana Kizito and quite a number of Ugandans.  We found Ssebagereka in our Public Accounts Community a very useful Director of Income Tax; his section always came the best in the whole of East Africa.  So, he is really a great son of Uganda whom we have lost, we pray that God rest his soul in peace.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  Mr Chairman, allow me now to talk about the tourism Bill which is on the Floor of this House.  Unlike my predecessor, the hon. Member who spoke before me, I would like to abolish the Board and maintain the Ministry.  I am sorry I cannot support the creation of the Tourist Board.  To begin with, we have decided in Uganda that we are going to reduce on the number of parastatal bodies and this is going to be a parastatal body, which will be expensive to establish.  

Secondly, I think that the job which is enlisted in the Bill as what is going to be done by the Board can be well done by the tourist industry itself.  You recall, Mr Chairman, that in this country, we have got several professional bodies -(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Sebaana Kizito that because normally employees in the Ministries are miserably underpaid they do not work, and it is assured that when they are in parastatals in which case they are well paid, that the parastatals will work.  That appears to be the theory. 

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  Thank you very much.  I was going to tell you, Mr Chairman, that in Insurance, the industry to which I belong, we do not have a parastatal body to control insurance, rather we do have the insurers association made of various insurers private and parastatal and the regulation is done by the Ministry of Finance.  So, I would think that in the case of tourism, professional and promotional duties could be well catered for through the private industry; and the regulatory duties could be done by the Commissioner of Tourism, an office which I think exists in the Ministry of Tourism.  

Therefore, I think that the promotion of tourism, the training of personal and all those related matters can be done by the industry itself, after all, if you think that tourism is profitable we know it will be able to attract good investors who are ready to invest money in it for the sake of making more money.  

I know what will happen after passing this Bill.  If it passes, it will go to the President for his ascent and immediately after that, the Minister will go a hunting trip for the Board of Directors.  When they come, their first duty will be to sit and fix their own allowances -(Interjection)- yes, because it is even provided for in section 22 of the Bill that they will fix their allowances then, they will go also -(Interruption)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Considering, Mr Chairman, that allowances are always there, but in his particular Board, if you look at that particular Clause, Clause 22, you will find that, the allowances of the Board Members, if any, so by putting that particular two words ‘if any’ it may insinuate that it is going to operate as charity organisation and the allowances may not be there.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  Mr Chairman, my worry is about the expenditure on this Board, when as a matter of fact, it may not be doing a lot more than the Ministry is doing.  For example, this Section 22, which I refer to, reads as follows; ‘A Member of the Board may be paid such allowances if any in respect of attendance at meetings of the Board as a Minister may approve in relation to that Member.’  So, each can fix his own allowance and the Minister -(Interjection)- so, actually -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to take this opportunity to inform the hon. member in fact, that Section, I do not know why it was left in the Bill, because Section 4 already says that, the Minister is going to determine, then they added on that Clause, I do not know how many terms and conditions they were going to get, I have ended up thinking that maybe, definitely as the hon. Member is saying, is on their own and decide, and maybe advise the Minister –(Interruption)

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  It is possible and I am sure that Members who will be appointed to the Board will be able to exploit this Section to the full and then that Board will sit, and what will they do?  They will begin looking around for officials, General Manager, Chief Accountant, what not and their terms and conditions, housing allowances, vehicles, they will look for offices, probably they will even come to the Sure House, who knows?  So, all in all, this is going to be a very expensive exercise -(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that, as I walked down to Parliamentary Building today, I cast a look at the IPS Building, and I saw a large sigh reading Uganda Tourism Board, they are already there, they have not come to Sure House. (Laughter)

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  So, if the information is correct, the Bill is fait accompli, which means that the Board is already there, and we are not just underwriting something which is already in existence, yes, if the information is correct.  Now, can the Minister tell us - I think he will tell us when he comes to reply to the debate.  

But I think what promotes tourism in the country has already been enumerated, but one thing, which has not been enumerated, is the appearance of the receivers of tourists at customs and people at the immigration.  We should look at the way they behave, the way they talk, the way they address.  Do they welcome people who come here, do they want them or to they think themselves bothered by people coming to Uganda?  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

MR KABUUBI:  Point of information.  I think, Mr Chairman, we may be rubberstamping this Bill, because if you read, refer to Clause 24, (1) and (2), you will find that on 2, they are saying, ‘The Board may continue any action or thing commenced by the Minister for the purposes of the Board, and uncompleted or at the commencement of this Statute, as if the action or thing has been initiated by the Board.’  So, it means, you cannot query what has already been done, and whatever is there, is there so, Mr Sebaana Kizito –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, this is general debate, and you are exercising exactly that right at this moment.

MR SENDAULA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to make simple clarification so that we do not get derailed.  In 1974, the decree, the Body which is almost similar to this was created by the name Uganda Tourist Development Corporation, and it is that Body which has a sign post on the IPS Building as stated; and if there is any new sign, there is no Board in actual fact, in action that is in existence, even if the Board may be leading very similar to the Board that we want to set up, but for sure, the Board has not started functioning.  So, I think we should not mislead others.

MR MARWAS:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I am seeking for clarification from the Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry.  I know when we started this House in 1989, he was one of the best and very brilliant back benchers who could take Government to task, but after that, the Minister knows for sure, the former Minister of Tourism who is now the Chairman of the CA, inaugurated this Board, recently it was on the radio.  Now, you are telling us it is not there.  Is it fair for the Minister to stand up and say things which are here, that are not there? (Interjection)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, further information to hon. Marwas’ comment.  I would like the Minister in charge to clarify to this House whether or not a General Manager is in fact, not already in position.  

MR BACHOU:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I believe that, my hon. Colleagues are aware that before one institution leads to another, there has to be a period of transition, and what we are trying to do in this House now, is to repeal the 1974 Decree that established the Uganda Tourist Development Corporation which itself -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Minister in order to misinform this House, when in actual fact, the Uganda Tourist Board is already advertising for posts as seen in this New Vision of today here?  Uganda Tourist Task Force urgently need  -(Interjection)- this is government paper.  It is Government paper, Uganda Tourist Board, vacancies, page 18 or New vision of today and they want people with minimum qualifications of HSC Certificate or Diploma in Tourism, must be able to speak second language preferably French, Germany, Italian or Arabic, female or male pleasant disposition, must be prepared to travel extensively and work anywhere within Uganda’s borders.  Is he in order, Mr Chairman, when he has already gone ahead and advertised this information?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.  Hon. Members raised issues which compelled me to ask the hon. Minister to answer, and I think you do not have to interrupt him, he had started answering, I have no way of telling whether he was going to be in order or out of order.  So, please, let him answer first.

MR BACHOU:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  As I have started informing this House through you, I have indicated that in order to move from one stage to another, a period of transition is necessary and when we discovered within the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities as well as at the Cabinet level, that the Uganda Tourist Development Corporation which had been established by Decree in 1774, had failed to function as an entity vis-a-visa the excellent performance of its predecessor, called the Uganda Tourist Board, and which had performed very well  indeed, and when we, therefore, thought that it was necessary for us to be able to generate any impact at all in the Tourism Industry, that we must revert back to the era of the Uganda Tourist Board, we started this idea within the Ministry of Tourism and what the hon. Member is referring to as having been existing already, is simply a department within the Ministry of Tourism which has been performing certain aspect of the Board, that we would like to establish using this Bill and, therefore, the two are not one in the same say, except that what is a unit right now under the Ministry of Tourism is a procussor to what we would like to establish.  I hope the distinction by way of information, Mr Chairman, will help our understanding in the House.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, the Minister had just finished to answer the query, which was raised.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of order.  The point of order I want to raise, Mr Chairman, it seems as if the Minister is playing on our intelligence.  There is no way he can convince us that the word Uganda Tourist Board which is being inserted in this Paper is only a terminology and it concerns a department.  I am raising seriously, because this is not the first time this phenomenon is happening, that to come here to Parliament assuming that we shall rubberstamping this Bill, and he goes ahead to appoint, he goes ahead to advertise for posts in the hope that this Bill will sail through.  This is an abuse of Parliamentary privilege and in view of this very important development, there are two things, either the Minister withdraws this Bill or he apologise or else this Bill we throw it out and we see how he shall organise himself. (Laughter)  Is it in order for that hon. Minister to come to Parliament on the assumption that we shall rubberstamp his Bill -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.  Hon. Members, I have considered the point of order raised by hon. Butagira and the hon. Minister has had a chance to explain what he called a matter of transition.  The position, hon. Members is that, there is a Bill before the House and we are very far advanced in the debate of the Bill.  In view of the circumstances, the House will be at liberty to do one of two things, either pass the Bill or not pass it, so that in that state of affairs, the hon. Minister is in order.  Hon. Sebaana Kizito please proceed with your submission.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  Thank you very much. I wish to thank all the points of information and orders.  It is apparent therefore, that the Board is already in existence, and therefore, if it is not in existence,  if it is just the Tourist Board he is referring to is just a department in the Ministry, then it goes to confirm what I was trying to say that, I would rather prefer that there must be a department in the Ministry rather than a Board which will be expensive.  

A lot of tourist attractions are in this country.  Some of them are on land and others are within the lake Victoria.  I am referring to Ssese Island, which is very - so the story goes - very attractive, and it is possible that a big tourist industry can develop on those Islands.  However, it is a very sad story to say that our water on lake Victoria is not passable at the moment.  It is covered by water hyacinth.  If you go to lake Victoria now, this water hyacinth is a real menace, it has prevented water travel, it has killed the fishing industry, it is even causing a lot of water evaporation from lake Victoria.  

Therefore, I would like to appeal since as it has already been explained, Tourism is multi-sectoral, I would like to appeal to the Ministry concerned to take into account the fact that, this weed is a big haphazard, not only to fish, but to tourism also, because people would like to go to Ssese, but they cannot go to Ssese because water is covered by this weed.  

I would like to wind up by saying that this Uganda Tourist Board would be working well if Uganda Hotels were in existence.  I would like to say that, I am sorry to witness the demise of a very big institution like Uganda Hotels because I have seen people coming to Uganda because of the existence of Uganda Hotels.  Uganda Hotels has been having a lot of units strategically placed in various parts of the country, and therefore, a tourist coming from abroad to Uganda would be conveniently housed in one of the units either here or in Kabale or in Pakwach or some place else.  Therefore, the demise of Uganda Hotels is something to regret.  

I also wish to warn that before we are very enthusiastic about selling our National Park Lounges to foreigners, and I hear PERD is very busy doing that, before we are very enthusiastic about that, we should think that it is not possible that we can have economic sabotage.  Supposing a group of foreigners came and bought all the lounges in our National Parks, and supposing they refuse to operate them and we find ourselves with no accommodation in the National Parks, would our tourism still be there?  This is something to think of; it is food for thought - and I leave it to the Minister responsible.  I am very sorry as I said at the beginning and I wish, I could, but I cannot support the creation of Uganda Tourist Board.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR KARUSOKE (Ntoroko County):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me this chance to talk about this Bill which seeks to establish the Uganda Tourist Board.  I have all along been wondering Mr Chairman, whether we people in Uganda really want to utilise the resources of tourism for our development and advancement.  One day I was with a group of friends at the source of the Nile in Jinja and we had a picnic there.  We took about an hour in that place and within that one-hour I was able to count fourteen vehicles, six of which were mini-buses full of people who had come from outside Uganda to come and look at the Source of the Nile.  But what was there at the Source of the Nile?  

During the colonial days, some colonial administrators has put there some kind of steps, concrete steps, which were now falling apart and when these people were moving down, they were almost falling off.  They could not even be repaired.  I was wondering what sort of people really live in this country.  So many people who come all the way from Europe, America, and other parts of the world to come and see the Source of the Nile.  It is a very famous thing, which would be capitalising so much on to make a lot of money.  They cannot even repair the steps that lead tourists down to the place.  

Down in Bundibugyo, we have the very famous Sempaya Hot Springs.  Those of you who have been lucky to see them you wonder what a great gift God had given Uganda.  You walk anywhere in the world, you will never see such a wonderful thing.  But when you go to the hot springs and ask yourself what has Uganda been able to do to facilitate tourists coming so that we can get money out of them, we have done completely zero.  

If we want this Board we intend to create to do the needful for us, let us raise up from our long sleep and do something.  We want to see the Minister at least doing some face lifting of some of these things.  Let us not wait until the Board is created that wonders will be made.  So, we must really aim at face-lifting things before we can attract many people to come in here.  

I also think part of the reasons why we have not been able to do much to face-lift our facilities is because we have not trained personnel.  I wonder whether we have anybody trained in Uganda here, in the field of tourism to the level of graduate.  I wonder!  I stand to be corrected.  So, I think the industry is being manned by people who do not belong.  If you want to develop this Industry to its maximum, greatness you must emphasize training.  Of course, training and face lifting and all this go with funds.  The general song that has always been sang in Uganda is lack of funds.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House with effect that, it is not the question of the Board now being proposed.  But since the current Government took power, it has not been consistent to be precise, for example, the Nile Hotel here, while the Kampala International failed to run despite the 32 years of Independence.  Why?  Because it is within the mismanagement of manpower and political power to be productive.

MR KARUSOKE:  I thank Mzee Obwangor (hon.) for that information.  Mr Chairman, we have continued to lose a lot of things to those countries under the reason of lack of funds.  I am wondering whether when we create this Board, there is going to be enough funds to enable it to do the needful.  Because what I am seeing is we are trying to create one of those usual parastatals which normally fail.  So, I am wondering how it is going to manage where others have failed. Because we are changing the name from the Tourist Corporation to the Tourist Board.  Is it the change of the name that really is going to make the miracles?  The way we are going to fund it; the way we are going to nurture it.  

One of the things I would expect this Board to do after it has acquired the trained personnel is to fly out of this country, go to Europe, to America with films, pamphlets, books and show films to people there.  But are we going to do that with that kind of funding so that many people come here.  We are not going to wait for them to find out and come.  We must go to them and ask them to come.  First of all, there is going to be money to make films; I know that very well.

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I have for the hon. Member is that, to form the parastatal outside is sometimes to invite for some friendly countries to give us drugs and one of the things they are doing right now, is that the Parks have received grants from foreign donors.  To develop our Industry it is going to require a lot of money - tourism industry.  To do that, some donors might not want to give us that money through the Ministry.  But if we do set up the parastatal, they might be more willing when it is efficiently run. I do agree that there is some fear in the management.  I think this House through you, Mr Chairman, should make sure that the Government this time gives us the management that can enhance tourism in this country because it is extremely profitable.  Thank you.

MR KARUSOKE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Another matter which I would like the Minister to look at very seriously is the role of coordinating the tour operators.  I am happy this country has had a lot of tour operating companies and all of them seem to be happy with the job and they seem to be developing on very well.  But my fear is that as we continue, as Industry continues to grow and expand in size and volume, we need to coordinate the activities of these companies, because right now, there is no coordination.  Each of them is operating on its own and at times in conflict with others.  I am an interested party.  So, I know quite a lot that goes on in these companies.  In this Bill, I do not see any Rule where the Board will be coordinating the activities of Tour Operators.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the floor that, the proposal on page 5, is that, one of the six members - other member is a tour operator.

MR KARUSOKE:  Thank you for that information.  When we create these facilities whose purposes are very well known to us here, these purposes are not so clear to the rest of Ugandans.  For example, when the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities was about to establish the new National Parks including the Rwenzori National Park.  We were asked by the Ministry as representatives of people of these areas to go and sell this idea to the people and it took us time to convince people.  

What I am trying to say, is that when we create these facilities, it is important that the Ministry creates a sense of belonging among Ugandans.  The Ugandans begin to feel that the National Park being created or a Forest Reserve being created there is for the good of us.  So, it is not a punishment.  But where something is created today and tomorrow the staff of the Games Department is going around harassing everybody to get out.  It rather defeats -(Interruption) 

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, in Budadiri - Mount Elgon Forest Park, they harass the people over there.  They cut the crops in May and June and there is nowhere they are going to be compensated like they compensated in the Lake Mburo area.  This is a very serious point which I want the Government and the Minister to take up because we are not poachers in our own country.  I thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR KARUSOKE:  Mr Chairman, I am not here to plead for encroachers on our facilities.  But what I am trying to say, is that, the staff of the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities must feel it - their to educate the masses of Uganda about the need and the importance of having these facilities around and that these of Uganda must be made to feel that these facilities belong to them.  For example, recently when I was on my consultation tour of the constituency, near the lake Albert shores, people of Kanara fishing village have been asked by the Regional Game Warden to vacate the place.  Now they are saying the boundary of the Game Reserve is here.  Forget all about the mark-stones.  They are ignoring the mark-stones.  They are going inside the fishing village and harassing people to leave.  What are we trying to create?  Why do we not observe the mark-stones?  They are there clear, but they have refused to observe this.  People were about to get the school by PAPSCA; they have stopped the construction.  

So, these are the sort of things we are asking the Ministry to look at very seriously.  Let us not begin to make people feel that these things are really inconvenient to them and, therefore, they must fight them.  This is a very important matter.  But surely where the matter is clear, we must cooperate.

In Bundibugyo we have the Pygmies who are human beings like us except that they are shorter than the human being and they live in an environment, which is different from the rest of us.  But they are human beings in all respects.  I would like to ask the Ministry concerned to join hands with NGOs which are already there to begin creating an environment that does not perpetually keep these people a tourist attraction centre.  It is not good surely having a people within your own country to serve as the tourist attraction.  I think it is in a violation of human rights.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The information I want to give to the hon. Member is that these pygmies are used to living in the forest.  Thank you.

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, it is not the policy of the Ministry to re-classify living species in this country. The pygmies are not classified as being among the wildlife fauna and flora, which are under the responsibility of the Ministry.  So, I want him to go and mobilise the people in his constituency and re-assure them that they will be protected and their rights promoted just like we put it in the Constitution this morning that they are not things to attract tourists.  They are human beings and we would like them to be given opportunity to develop in this country.  Thank you.

MISS ALIU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member on the Floor and the House that when Kidepo National Park was created in 1965, one of the adverts then was that if you wanted to see life in its raw form, you would have to go there and partly is responsible for the backwardness of Karamoja because we have tried to keep it in this raw form and they meant life people.  Not just animals.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The hon. Member, Mr Karusoke from Ntoroko is raising a very important matter about pygmies.  Pygmies are an endangered people; they are an endangered minority who live in this country.  They are not many people like the pygmies in the World.  The population of the pygmies has been going down, there have been some studies carried out by some NGOs about these people.  Our country has not shown any interest about the trees future and threatened lives are at stake in our country, instead there is always everything being made to keep these people as tourist attractions, and yet past to show concern about the endangered minority of the pygmies.  We have got some Americans and some NGOs groups who are working there.  

Recently, the pygmies staged a resistance and started shooting and using their arrows on some of the people who were disturbing their environment.  I would like to know what is being done to save the minority group, which is very unique from extinction.  It is very important that this matter be addressed, and I do not think it should be addressed by the Minister of Tourism far from it nor should it be addressed by the Minister for Wildlife and Antiquities far from it, these are human beings who should be addressed and the matter should even go to Cabinet and a discussion be discussed there.  

MR ASIKU:  Further information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Really, I wanted a clarification –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR ASIKU:  I wanted a clarification on this issue of pygmies in Game Reserves.  I thought we have been extremely very unfair, very unfair in the sense that we are using force not education to remove the pygmies from this environment to throw them in open so that is that.  But the area you are throwing him in, you have not made provisions, and that is why this group of people are getting instinct.  

Now, I wanted to know from the Minister, what damage do the pygmies do in their own environment before they create this very human being it has been there for hundreds and hundreds of years, and maintained the environment.  I know that they know that their environment must be so attractive to tourist attraction in the way they live.  Why have they to move away?  That is the clarification I wanted to know.

MR SIBO:  Additional.  Mr Chairman, I want to dispute the allegations made by hon. Karuhanga here.  It is not true to say that nothing has been done for the pygmies.  I for one, organised a settlement for the pygmies in Bundibugyo back in 60s, now these pygmies - the so-called pygmies -(Interjection)- you call them pygmies; the name is by those people who call them so.  These people who want to extract money from the tourists by showing these people, are the ones who got them out of settlements.  They organised them and show them to tourists, and by that organisation extracting them from others, they identify them as tourist attractions.  And that is the problem we are having by those what I would call money hungry, money extortions.  To use them as tourist attractions, and would like to keep them like that.  

But we have had other people - you hear of Batwa in Kisoro, these people were kept like that for some time, but lately, they have been integrated in the community in which they live.  They are just human beings like everybody.  So, if these people in Bundibugyo who allowed to integrate in the community in which they live, they would be able to do so.  It is a problem of those who want to make money out of them.  Thank you.

MR KARUSOKE:  I thank all those who have given me pieces of information, most of which I value very much.  These pygmies live in the forest; that is their home.  This forest has been gazetted as a National Forest Park; in which case, the pygmies are being gradually removed - Adra did the job of removing them and building them Baati houses, Baati huts some where else, and making burdens for them.  And they have abandoned all those beautiful, huts and the gardens and gone back to their usual environment.  I want the Ministry to give a clear policy on the pygmies vice versa, a gazetted park, because it not clear. Let the Ministry give a clear policy on the Park and vice versa, the existence of pygmies in that Park.

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  It is very interesting that we have got Members from Bundibugyo in this House, and some of you have not been lucky enough to go to meet these people.  You will not know much of what is happening in Bundibugyo; I would request fir clarification from hon. Karusoke to tell us exactly what are the measures of his government to put these pygmies into normal life than asking us -(Interjection)

I am seeking clarification from the person who knows these fellows more than we do, because as I toured Bundibugyo with hon. Karusoke, it was difficult for me to go to these follows camps.

HON. MEMBERS:  What were you going to do there?

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  To find out exactly what is happening to these people.  Now, if hon. Karusoke can enlighten us on this, I think it would help Members of this House.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Karusoke, can you wind up on point of pygmies?

MR KARUSOKE:  Mr Chairman, I will wind up by saying that when we create these facilities for the good of our country, we must not forget the fact that we should create a sense of belonging amongst our people.  And in the case of pygmies whose correct and goodness is found only by living in the forest, which forest now has been gazetted as a National Park, we need a clear policy from the Ministry concerned about the living of these pygmies in what is now a National Park.  Mr Chairman, I thank you.

MR KAIJA (Kibanda County, Masindi):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to thank the Minister who has moved this Motion.  Again, I would like to thank the Members who have talked about the people who live around Game Parks and Game Reserves.  There are a number of people who contributed saying that, this place must remain intact as their natural climate.  Roads should not be constructed, because buffalos can move better on bad roads.  Tractors could be stranded, and this was made yesterday.  But I beg to oppose this.   

If we are to develop tourism within the country and outside the country, we must make proper accessibility to these game parks and reserves.  You cannot imagine a man living in Kampala to go to a place like Kabalega National Park through say, or Mburo or even Kidepo, you expect him to go with is Mercedes, leave it in Masindi and then walks up to Karuma or something or Kyobe.  

So, I would suggest that this Ministry embarks on actual road construction, tarmac if possible.  And then we must create a buffer zone where people living around the Game Reserves should be facilitated to up-grade their economic status.  These people were exterminated in some areas.  If they are diverted in mind to concentrate on developing their areas through agriculture, these people will forget hunting, because they regard hunting as an economic activity for them, and indeed very much profitable.  Here, if the Board is to succeed, it must first settle these people and go on educating these people who live in and around the Game Reserves.  Otherwise, the tourists will not also be able to cooperate with the same, because they will look at the tourists as being good, and immediate enemies who are trying to disturb their activities as regards poaching.

What do we really need in such areas?  We need health units, because in some areas you will find that we do not have even the dispensaries around there.  We need schools, when a man from a Game Reserve is educated, he comes to Kampala, he gets a nice job, he goes to Masindi, he becomes a General Secretary of something, I do not think he will be poaching.  I think you are failing to know what affects our tourism.

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, this new economics coming up, is against people moving from their natural habitats to the urban centres in search of employment.  Therefore, it is more meaningful if you can advocate for creation, for sustainability and co-existence between the people who are near the game parks, nothing that some of the activities they do are actually cultural, and there is a cultural revival even if it means hunting some of the animals.  I think the point is co-existence between the animals and the persons neighbouring the Game Parks, but not migration.

MR KAIJA:  Thank you very much, hon. Magezi for that information.  But all of us came from where we came from and we are here in Kampala.  These are also human beings; we are not saying we are clearing them away from their places.  Therefore, in a way you are supporting me, of course, when I say we should construct roads, we should construct schools in order to up-grade the economic status and exploit the environment, I think you are alright there.  So, I would only say and give a blessing to the creation of the Board, if the Board could look into such problems not merely going in to make money for the Ministry selling the movable and the immovable assets, because it is already stipulated there, it may include even selling or divesting land.  So, thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Dr Salim Bachou): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I wish to thank hon. Members for some very important points they have raised and for their support generally.  There are some issues which were raised of common interest, which I am actually just about to clarify to hon. Members.  The status of those particular issues they raised. But I think what seems to be of immediate importance is the clarification on a point that was raised by hon. Kanyomozi about the existence - sorry by hon. Butagira about the existence of the Uganda Tourist Board and hon. Kanyomozi of course, indicating that there was an advert in that respect.  

I must assure the House through you, Mr Chairman that the advertisement that appeared today was put in the papers - the Uganda Tourism Promotion Task Force which is a unit of the Ministry of Tourism.  It is a department of the Ministry of Tourism.  So, I think that perhaps hon. Kanyomozi was using the wrong set of glasses and he just looked at -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, while the point was raised, there are a number of signs that show that the Ministry has gone very far in establishing this Board before it is passed here.  And they are a number of indicators one being that in the paper, but moreso, a signpost and an established office at IPS written, ‘The Uganda Tourist Board Information Centre’ is hanging right now, instead of him apologizing.  Is it in order for him to continue telling us lies?  

Is he in order insisting that this Board is not yet in the formation?  There is already a signpost saying ‘Uganda Tourist Board’ in capital letters, and adverts and staff established.  Instead of saying that this was the pressure - the information is that, it was because the funding and the funding agencies insisted that they are not willing to give money to the Ministry but they are willing to give money to a Board which will be managed, which will manage the money, which will be accountable, which can be sued and therefore, it forced the Ministry to set up the Board and bring this paper here late, but went ahead to expert it, is which the point instead of them telling us that they are trying to defend what is already in the process.  Is it in order for the Minister to continue doing that?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I had warned that, it is very important to allow the Minister to explain.  Now that you have raised a point for that purpose, I will now interrupt the debate and ask the substantive Minister who is here to explain a little more.

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I am not standing here to clarify because my Colleague the Deputy Minister is not in the know how of what is happening in the Ministry.  But the facts are as follows; Government got assistance to review the Tourism Industry in the country, because we know that it used to be a prime forex earner after coffee and cotton.  A report was submitted by a technical committee which was set up to do this work, and they came with this report which is called the Tourism Master Plan which recommended that the Ministry sets up a committee to look further into what has been found out about the Tourism Industry and this committee which was set up is called the Uganda Tourism Promotion Task Force and, this task force is manned by Mr Irumba under the Ministry.  He is not the Board, he is not the Tourism -(Interruption)- Mr Chairman can you protect me please?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order hon. Members.

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Mr Chairman, hon. Member know that there is no way a Ministry can set up a Board without a statute.  In actual fact, when I was told that there is an advertisement by the Uganda Tourist Board, and I was taken aback.  We wish to apologise on behalf -(Laughter)- I wish to apologise on behalf of my colleagues here and the whole Ministry that whoever put in place this advertisement is ignorant, they do not know that there is no Tourist Board which exists because, in my capacity as a Minister, I have not taken a statute to the President to rectify or to sign to enable to put a Board in place and we shall keep the House appraised of what happens after this Bill has been signed.  Thank you very much.  (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.  Hon. Deputy Minister please proceed with your winding up.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Dr Bachou):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I thank you also for giving a chance to the substantive Minister to explain to you what I had endeavoured and tried to explain to my hon. colleagues, I hope they do appreciate it and I think their applause did indicate that they do appreciate the clarification by the hon. Minister.  

Mr Chairman, Sir, there were a number of issues which were raised in common and I think that I would be doing myself and this House a disservice if I do not perhaps indicate what the position is with respect to those issues raised.  One was the role of a Minister.  A point was raised by several members including hon. Tiberondwa, Kawanga and so on about the Minister appearing to actually be the General Manager or the proposed Tourist Board and I wish to state that there are some amendments that the Task Force on Natural Resources and myself made and at the appropriate time, will bring these amendments to you which do remove the Minister from overseeing the day to day operations of the proposed Board.  

A major issue was raised about the difference between the proposed Board and the Uganda Tourist Development Corporation.  I wish to state the following that, prior to the establishment by a Decree in 1974 of the UTDC, Uganda Tourist Development Corporation, there was a Uganda Tourist Board that undertook to oversee the promotion of tourism in this country extremely satisfactory.  Its mandate is similar to the mandate of the Board that we intend to recreate.  

In other words, we are I think recreating what was abolished in 1974.  In between, of course, there was the Uganda Tourist Development Corporation which was established as a business entity and if there was sufficient time, I have a copy of the Decree here with me, I would read to you the functions of the Decree hon. Members will realise that that organisation was dramatically different from the one that we are trying to create and for that reason, it did not succeed in performing the task assigned to it because its mandate was amorphous, it was supposed to undertake investments in several areas, manage directly any tourist related enterprise, be it beauty saloon or a kiosk, a run kiosk etc., and for that reason it did not quite succeed.  

So, there is a major distinction and instead of reading the functions of the defunct what we are trying to, the Decree that you are trying to repeal regarding the Uganda Tourist Development Corporation, I would like to request the hon. Members to take time off after sometime, after here, to read that Decree and they will realise the functions are drastically different.

The hon. Member from Tororo raised the question and that was repeated today of selling Uganda Hotels.  I think the hon. Sebaana Kizito raised the same point today and I wish to say that the Ministry of Tourism operates within the umbrella of the policies of the Government of Uganda.  The current policies emphasize liberalisation of the economy and the commanding height of the economy that are under the jurisdiction of the Minister of Tourism include the hotels.  

However, we would be glad in the Ministry of Tourism to receive submission from hon. Members regarding modalities of how the Uganda Hotels could be availed to private developers of private business people whether they are Ugandans or people from the International Business Community.  

There are several formats we are proposing in disposing of these hotels and I think the most acceptable one, what I would say is most amenable to perhaps the judgement of nationals is the one which involves joint ventureship or perhaps management arrangement and Ugandans as well as foreigners are equally invited to participate in these joint ventures.  The interest is a noble one. It is to make sure that the system functions, as you very well know Mr Chairman, Sir, that the ministries are not business entities and the reason why we try to create Boards for example, is to make sure that the Ministry is equipped with a business arm that can undertake the normal day to day running of tourism promotion.

The issue of security was also raised as you will recall, by several Members but I think there are relevant departments, undertaking Ministries of Government that will attend to this issue.  We are equally concerned about the security situation in the country like everybody else but it is not really the mandate of the Ministry to ensure that this is there.  We would like it to be there, we would also like to appeal to the relevant authorities to join hands with us to ensure that there is security countrywide.

A number of members like the hon. Kawanga and Rwakakooko as well as hon. Babu did point out several areas in which the Ministry of Tourism should start functioning and these include promotion and establishment of basic infrastructure, training, easing the formalities of tourists coming here, improving and enhancing the welfare of people etc.  These are precisely what are among the things that the Ministry would like to do but, of course, as I mentioned yesterday, the Ministry is curtailed like any other Government Ministry today on account of limitation of funds.

One Member raised another important issue that, the levy for Tourism Promotion that is being proposed in the Bill versus a concession that the Uganda National Parks is charging developers who are going to manage the Uganda National Parks or the Forest Parks.  These are distinctly different, one is development oriented and the other one is more of a recurrent revenue source.  

The same person also raised concern about a levy that we intend to charge and CTL, whether or not these two combined together would not overburden the tourists.  I think that my senior colleagues as well as relevant officials in the Ministry of Finance, Tourism and other relevant Ministries will look into this and see whether or not we should, for purposes of promoting tourism in this country not limit ourselves perhaps to the promotion and training levy which we should be talking about hopefully next week under the context of the next Bill.  That whether or not we cannot limit our taxation policy to the levy that are being proposed rather than in addition to the CTL as per certain establishments are concerned, like catering facilities, hotels etc.  

And on the question of Government grants I think, the answer would be a standard one.  We are looking at a situation where there is competition for the same revenue source, the competing needs are becoming many and obviously this Board will become another competitor for the same literary fixed income level but what we would like to do is actually go into, we would like to explore other avenues of raising funds and that is why we are suggesting that as an independent body, the proposed Board will be able to charge this levy and will be able to undertake other income generating activities that will limit its dependence on the Government as a source of revenue.  

The role of people is a very important issue which was raised by several Members and I would like to assure the House, through you, Mr Chairman, that the modus operand of the Minister of tourism now is that the people in areas adjoining National Parks must be involved in the management of those National Parks.  There might be flows at the beginning like what hon. Wanendeya has been pointing out and hon. Karusoke but these are flows not as a result of Government Policy but perhaps because of certain administrative bottlenecks that we are bound to realise from time to time.  

The policy I emphasize, Mr Chairman and hon. Members is that, people must be involved in the management of these parks; people must be involved in the income-generating activities emanating from these parks etc.  We believe in that kind of management style and I hope that hon. Members will keep us posted in case they do realise incidents which are in contra distinction with this particular Government Ten Points. 

A number of issues, which were raised today, some repeated what was said yesterday but one or two areas need special mention.  The restocking of Ajay with White Rhinos from the Zimbabwe is an issue that the Government is trying to pursue and I believe the hon. Member was aware of it when he raised the matter.  Obviously, there are logistical problems, funding problems, etc., and all issues as you know very well, do take time, time is very important dimension of policy implementation and we hope the hon. Member and Members of his constituency will bear with us, with the Government while this policy is being perused.

The abolition of the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, I do not know whether hon. Members would like me to explain to them what the functions and the objectives of the Ministry as an umbrella institution are because I think that perhaps it would not be amenable at this point.  

As I mentioned earlier, there is a committee which is attempting to restructure government Ministries and I think if the hon. Members who raised this issue, one or two that raised this issue are extremely concerned about the future or the need to retain the Ministry of Tourism under whatever name, perhaps, they should submit their concern to this particular committee.  

However, I feel that like any other Ministries, for example, the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the Ministry is normally concerned with policy making and with several issues like setting standards etc., which the Board would not do and the Board is going to be, we hope, the business arm of the Ministry of Tourism.  

So, while hon. Sebaana Kizito would like the Board not to be abolished, I think if you look at the pros and cons, we want the Ministry to stay, so that it is facilitated enough to promote tourism because right now we know that the main hope of Uganda as a country as far as the economy is concerned, is that tourism will be revitalized and it is tourism which will help us to generate foreign exchange earning that we need for our development more than any other sector of economy particularly the real sector of the economy.  

By real sector of course, I mean, the productive sectors of the economy and tourism is a productive sector of the economy.  Tourism is a stationery export industry and I think we should take that into account.  The ratio of return on tourist industry is extremely high compared to perhaps the other enterprises.  So, I think the two should be perused simultaneously.

Does the Board exist?  I think my Minister has answered that question extremely well and I would like to thank her for it and again retaliate my gratitude to you, Mr Chairman, for giving her the chance to underscore the fact that the Board does not exist because the Board cannot exist without any statute and hon. Members must realise that the role is to establish Boards and other state organisations which would otherwise be illegal without their own participation in their creation.

The co-ordination of tour operators etc, hon. Karusoke, should be able to realise that there is an association for all tour operators, travel agents etc.  

So, with these clarifications, and perhaps just before I wind up, the issue of pygmies; experience can show all of us that it is difficult for one to decide what or who constitutes a tourist attraction particularly among people.  It is difficult for one group of people to decide whether they are a tourist attraction or the other group is a tourist attraction.  One time I was caught up at the border of Kenya and Tanzania in a place called Namanga when I was working for the East African Community something close to about 20 years ago, and there were several Continental Europeans crossing into Tanzania from Kenya and at the border there were also a lot of Masaai women, men and children.  The Masaai children had a lot of mucus from their face and a lot of flies, and according to the central European women, they constituted a tourist attraction because they were amused by that appearance.  

On the other hand, the Masaai people also considered those Continental Europeans also a tourist attraction because they were abnormally packed according to the Masaai, they were supposed to be lean, muscular, energetic.  So, on the one hand, one group was laughing at flies on the faces of children and those people whose children had flies on their faces considered that perfectly normal on the contrary they were wondering why human beings should wear something cross to half a tonne, so that is not really - that is not the portfolio of the Ministry, it is not the prerogative of the Ministry of Tourism to decide which people constitute a tourist attraction and which do not and I hope that the relevant departments of Government will take note of this and perhaps help us in the process.  

I believe that this answers some of the major issues which I think were of common concern among Members that contributed, I thank them all for the support they rendered to us.  I now beg to move that the Council do resume and the committee do report thereto. (Interjection)-

Sorry Mr Chairman, I am sorry but that is not as you know, it is my first time to present a Bill here and so if there are procedural issues that you know, I am not sure of, I do not think that is a crime.  So, thank you very much. I beg to move. (Applause)  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Bill entitled: ’The Uganda Tourist Board Bill, 1994’, be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to.)


BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA TOURIST BOARD BILL, 1994

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4 agreed to.

AN HON. MEMBER:  It is in order, Mr Chairman, for us to pass this important Bill without a quorum?

DR SALIM BACHOU:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee do report thereto.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  On that, I adjourn the House to next week in the afternoon.

The Council rose at 5.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 1 September 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

