Monday, 30 August 2004

Parliament met at 10.31 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I regret to inform you that the hon. Medadi Omadi, who was the Member of Parliament for Pallisa and Butebo for nearly 30 years and was last here in the National Resistance Council, died yesterday the 29th of August 2004 at 2.00 p.m. He will be buried at 2.00 p.m. at Kakoro in Pallisa, his home district. So, I would like to ask honourable members to stand up for a minute of silence in his memory.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Secondly, honourable members, you know that last week we had some difficulty with the communication system here. I would like to inform the members who sit on the last row to my right that the address system there is not working. That is the row where hon. Okupa, Nuwagaba and the others sit. Those members will have to descend and use the other microphones. The rest of the microphones on that side, and those to my left, are okay. It is only the last row to my right, which has a problem.

In the gallery we have our people from the internally displaced persons’ camps in Aromo trading centre and Ayami trading center in Aromo sub-county, Lira District. Their visit has been co-ordinated by hon. Charles Angiro, the Member of Parliament for Erute County. You are very welcome to Parliament. (Applause)

Honourable members, I do have a very serious problem, a very serious time constraint with the passing of the Budget. My deadline is 5.00 O’clock tomorrow evening, and five committees have not yet reported. So, I want to propose that after the Committee on Local Government and the Committee on Presidential Affairs, we should go to the figures, deal with them and get them out of the way. Then I will give you from Wednesday, Thursday, until Friday to come back to the general debate of those ministries, which we shall not have handled and those other ministries, which we had directed to come back to us for a session.

And as usual some people are not here and when they find us working they will go up in flames. So, is it okay, honourable members, if we do that? Hon. Awori, is it okay?

MR AWORI: I do comply with your ruling on the matter, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us now have the report from the Ministry of Public Service. We would like to finish it before lunch so that we can do Presidential Affairs, then the minister will wind up and we will go to figures.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2004/2005

10.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE (Capt. Charles Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With your permission I will summarize the report, but I beg that the full report forms part of the Hansard. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is the report of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the policy statements and budgetary provisions for fiscal year 2004/2005.
  
The report covers Vote 005 – Ministry of Public Service, Vote 025 – Ministry of Local Government, Vote 146 – the Public Service Commission, Vote 147 – the Local Government Finance Commission and Votes 501-764 covering all local governments. 

The committee appreciates the input by the honourable ministers of various ministries –(Interruption)

MR KIZIGE: We do not have the report, Madam Speaker.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: This report was given out last week; I do not know whether the member was around –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the report was distributed last week -(Interjection)- he should come near you? You are being invited to go and sit next to Mr Wopuwa. Please, proceed.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the committee appreciates the input of the ministers and the technical people of the various ministries and commissions, Members of Parliament, the press and the general public, whose opinions enriched this report. 

The method of work is on page 2 but I will directly go to the considerations of the policy statement of the Ministry of Public Service.  

Pensions and pension arrears for civil servants:  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the ministry through its compensation department manages matters to do with pensions, terminal benefits, defence pensions and survivors’ benefits, and compensation to former employees of the defunct East African Community.  

It was observed that government was not adequately addressing matters pertaining to compensation and payment of terminal benefits to retired civil servants/senior citizens. The ministry informed the committee that while it could meet a larger part of the monthly pension payments, the unpaid portion would be rescheduled to subsequent months. It was further reported that it could not contend with the problem of arrears, which have become unmanageable. It was revealed that the pension arrears currently stand at Shs 313.4 billion, and continue to grow.  

Madam Speaker, the failure to settle these arrears was attributed to cash flow problems and the failure of the Ministry of Finance to make adequate provisions to meet this statutory expenditure.  

The committee noted that while the Minister of Finance in his budget speech was concerned with reducing external borrowing, government is increasingly borrowing from pensioners without their consent and at no profit, in contradiction to the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, the committee was informed that following hon. Dora Byamukama’s motion on pension arrears, of 26 February 2004, Cabinet had authorized the Ministry of Finance to explore the possibility of securing a soft loan in the range of US $150 million from our development partners, to offset the debt. However, no timeframe was given, which implies that the predicament of the senior citizens is the same, if not worse, and continues to deteriorate. 

Attempts to get a response from the Ministry of Finance on the progress were futile. And, Madam Speaker, information from circles in the Ministry of Finance is that the World Bank and IMF did not give authority to borrow this money but the Ministry of Finance has kept quiet. It is not informing the Ministry of Public Service; they did not inform the committee and they have not informed these senior citizens of their predicament.  

It is the considered view of the committee that the money should be availed to solve the problem once and for all. We shall make a recommendation hereafter, to that effect.  

The ministry said they are trying to reform pension management and customer service due to the outcry that was there, and the ministry officials told the committee that they are trying to work it out with the human resource department and the compensation department to see to it that there are no delays in pensioners accessing the pension pay roll.

Madam Speaker, on the Parliamentary Pension Service the committee was informed that the Prime Minister is handling the issue with the Parliamentary Service Commission. I hope the Prime Minister would from time to time brief Parliament on how far he has gone.  

On the local government pension arrears, the committee was informed that pension arrears had accumulated to Shs 21.4 billion as per last financial year, and this figure continues to rise. There is also the worsening situation in local governments; they cannot raise enough revenue to meet these pension arrears. So, the predicament of pensioners in local governments is also bad. However, the ministry says they are trying to address it through the Public Service Pension Fund and the Pensions Authority Bills, which I hope will be brought to the Floor of this Parliament.

The committee, however, observed that this pension reform has been on for the last six years without any tangible results and there was no timeframe given. It is still a problem and I hope the Ministry of Public Service will come out with a tangible timeframe on how to address it.

Madam Speaker, point 2.3.4 is the East African Community Arrears. This has been a long-standing issue since July 1977, when the East African Community collapsed. In 1984 a mediation agreement to share assets and liabilities resolved that each partner state should settle the claims of its nationals from the funds realized from the sharing agreement. While Kenya and Tanzania settled their obligations, Uganda has not done so because we were told government diverted the funds to other purposes. It was revealed that to-date a total of Shs 61 billion has been paid out, and there is a balance of Shs 45.5 billion. This outstanding balance attracts an interest of seven percent per annum. So, this figure will have gone up by next year.  

Madam Speaker, it was further observed that the bill had escalated from Shs 7.7 billion in 1995 to Shs 45.5 billion in 2000, and to-date the figure is Shs 105 billion; and it continues to accumulate. It is the considered view of the committee that if the situation is not urgently resolved, the amount may - just like any other pension arrears - escalate to unmanageable figures. Madam Speaker, in the wisdom of the Ministry of Finance, this year they made a provision of only Shs 4 billion to cater for pension arrears for the East African Community pensioners.  

Madam Speaker, the inspectorate role of the ministry. The committee noted that although it was the official policy of government to have all government institutions inspected after every two years, this has not been the practice. It was also reported that the inspection carried out last financial year in two ministries, two commissions and the local governments of West Nile, it was discovered that 362 officers who drew a combined annual salary of Shs 533,591,020, had irregular appointments.  

The categories included 46 officers who should have long retired but continued to earn salary, three who had died, four who had absconded, three who had left Public Service for the private sector but continued receiving pay, and others were recruited without established posts. The biggest culprit in this saga was the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, which had 36 officers irregularly appointed. The inspection report indicated that payment had been stopped but fell short of revealing the culprits and what action had been taken against them.

Madam Speaker, although the Ministry of Public Service gave inadequate funding to the Inspectorate Department as a reason for not carrying out the inspection, the committee was not convinced as to why inspection of ministries, which are located in Kampala and Entebbe, had not been done regularly. It is the considered view of the committee that the Inspectorate Department of the ministry should be strengthened and adequately financed to save resources, which are paid through irregular appointments.

Madam Speaker, 2.3.6 is selective salary awards. The committee noted that it has become common practice for organized groups or unions of civil servants to meet His Excellency the President and demand for salary increments. Those who had succeeded are health workers, Makerere University lecturers and primary school teachers. 

It was also noted that His Excellency the President had announced or promised salary increments to the civil servants without consultations of the Ministry of Public Service, their mother ministries and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This is not only against the established procedure of government but it also directly contradicts government’s own policy of the job evaluation exercise under the single spine structure.

The committee noted that these promises for salary increments from His Excellency the President were not captured in the budget of financial year 2004/2005 and this has not only turned out to be “air supply” but it has also destabilized the public service as the beneficiaries are threatening to strike over pay. We have got very many calls and cries from teachers in particular from various districts. Madam Speaker and honourable members, the selective salary awards have also had an effect of demotivating a larger part of the public service, who are not the beneficiaries of these awards.

It is the considered view of the committee that the ministry should develop a wage policy for all the people who draw salaries from the Consolidated Fund within this financial year.

Madam Speaker, 2.3.7, His Excellency the Vice-President’s housing complex. The committee noted that although it has been the recommendation for years that His Excellency the Vice-President should get an official residence, no serious effort has been put in to conclude the procurement or construction of the residence of the His Excellency the Vice-President of Uganda.  

The ministry reported to the committee that government has earmarked the former State Lodge at Makindye for renovation as the Vice-President’s residence. However, it was reported that funds for preliminary works and construction of the former State Lodge at Makindye have not been provided this financial year, which shows lack of seriousness on the part of Government.

Madam Speaker, the absence of the official residence has necessitated the Vice-Presidents to reside in their private premises where government not only pays rental value as determined by the Chief Government Valuer, but colossal sums of money have been spent to upgrade those residences to acceptable standards for their security.

The National Records and Archives Center: 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Bill establishing the National Records and Archives Centre was passed in 2000. We passed it towards the end of the Sixth Parliament, in a hurry, and we were told that was because they wanted to establish this center. But it is four years down the road since we passed this Act and there has been no center, leaving Uganda the only East African country without a national records centre.

Government offices:

Several ministries and departments continue to spend substantial amounts of money on rent payments in the absence of their own office structures/complexes. For example, the Local Government Finance Commission pays close to Shs 1 billion in annual rent. It would, therefore, be important if the Minister for the Presidency decided on a cost effective policy to enhance the establishment of “homes” for each ministry and department’s offices.

Performance standards and policy guidelines set by the Ministry of Public Service:

The committee noted that the Performance Standards and Policy Guidelines, which date back to 1998, are only followed by the Ministry of Public Service. In particular the committee was concerned with the standardization of vehicles for ministers, ministers of state, entitled officers and projects, and the use of the Government vehicles beyond office hours. The ministry reported that since the decentralization of procurement of government vehicles to mother ministries, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Public Service sent circulars to all accounting officers attaching the standards and policy guidelines. However, the committee notes that these policy guidelines have not been followed, which caused government to lose colossal sums of money in maintenance and fuelling of heavy-duty vehicles and replacement of vehicles, which are sometimes stolen outside office hours parked in some places.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommends that:

1. Government should expedite the process of offsetting pension arrears due to retired civil servants as pension is a constitutional right enshrined in Objective XIV(b) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, and Article 254 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

2. The Rt hon. Prime Minister should update the House on the steps he has taken to implement the Cabinet decision on the pensions of Members of Parliament, and the modalities thereof.

3. The Ministry of Finance should urgently borrow money to make a supplementary funding of Shs 45.5 billion to offset the East African Community arrears, which continue to attract seven percent interest per annum.

4. The Ministry of Public Service should strengthen the Inspectorate Department to enable it carry out its inspection role, and the department should inspect all ministries this financial year to ensure that the officers on the payroll are properly recruited and the posts properly established.

5. The Ministry of Public Service should always give advice to His Excellency the President on policy guidelines of the Public Service, and due consultations should be made with all concerned ministries, especially Ministry of Finance, before promising salary increments to particular categories of civil servants, which is a rising concern in most circles.

6. The ministry should in consultation with the Public Service Commission expedite the Public Service Bill and forward it to Parliament for consideration within six months.

7. The ministry should harmonise the liaison between the human resource and compensation departments to ensure that every civil servant, who is struck off the payroll, accesses the pension roll on retirement.

8. The ministry should carry out a cost-benefit analysis on the idea of government building their own offices instead of renting, within this financial year, and recommend possible action. 

9. The committee restates its last year’s recommendation that government takes over payment of pension and gratuity arrears due to local governments. They had done it for some local governments but others were left out.

10. The committee restates its recommendation that the ministry should reinforce the provision of circular Standing Instruction No.1 of 1999, requiring the standardization of vehicles for ministers and entitled officers, and further recommends that accounting officers who violate this standing instruction should be held personally responsible for the loss accrued to government.

11. The committee restates its recommendation of 2003/2004 that the ministry liaises with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to initiate the establishment of a fully-fledged National Records and Archives Center as per the requirement of the National Records and Archives Act.

12. The committee restates its recommendation of last financial year that the Ministry of Public Service in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should expedite the decision of procuring the residence of the His Excellency the Vice-President to save government resources being spent on private residences.

Vote 146 - Public Service Commission:

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee looked at the responses of last financial year. The commission adequately addressed issues raised in the recommendations. It could, however, not adequately address the concerns over the job adverts due to financial limitations. Financial limitations also meant that the commission could only carry out induction programmes in 44 district service commissions.

The Structure of the Commission:

Whereas the Constitution stipulates a membership of nine commissioners, only three still hold office after expiry of the term of office of six members. However, His Excellency the President nominated individuals to fill the vacancies. They were accordingly vetted by the Appointments Committee of Parliament and are awaiting their formal appointment as Members of the Public Service Commission.

The Legal Framework:

Whereas Article 166(4) of the Constitution mandates Parliament to make a law to empower the Public Service Commission to make regulations for effective and efficient performance of its functions, to-date the Ministry of Public Service has not come up with the Public Service Commission Bill. This has left the commission to carry out its mandate under the 1968 Public Service Act, which has undermined its independence and operations. 

This was evidenced by the fact that the policy statement of the commission had to be signed by the Minister of Public Service and the commission had to be led by the minister to present its policy statement, instead of the chairperson of the commission. It looks as if the Public Service Commission is a department under the Ministry of Public Service yet Article 166(2) and 166(3) clearly talks of independence of the commission and mandates the commission to report to Parliament respectively.

It was also noted that while Article 155(2) and 155(3) empower the commissions set up under the Constitution to submit their estimates to the President to be laid before Parliament, the Public Service Commission, unlike other constitutional commissions, submits its budget estimates through the Ministry of Finance like a department under the Ministry of Public Service. This anomaly has also undermined the independence and operations of the Public Service Commission.  

The committee noted that consultations on the Public Service Commission Bill have been going on without adequate consultations with the Public Service Commission who are the end-users, which is an oversight. It is the considered view of the committee that these anomalies should be urgently addressed and that the Public Service Commission Bill, which will address the concerns of the Public Service Commission should be brought before Parliament for urgent consideration. 

Point No. 3.5 on page 13 looks at the relationship with the district service commissions. According to Article 198(2) of the Constitution, the Public Service Commission is mandated to approve the appointment of the members of the district service commissions. Article 166(1) compels the commission to guide and co-ordinate the work of the district service commissions. This mandate has been simplified by working closely with the Association of the District Service Commissions of Uganda.  

It was also noted that some district service commissions and the leadership in some districts violate set standards developed by the Public Service Commission. Kapchorwa, Pallisa and Kabarole provide vivid examples of some of the notorious district service commissions.  

Senior appointments: 

Those are appointments in U1 salary scale. It was noted that although the Public Service Commission had no authority to recruit officers of U1 salary scale without approval of the President, district service commissions, which have less qualifications, do recruit public officers of U1 salary scale without recourse to any authority. This raised serious concern in the Public Service and relevant amendments to the Local Government Act are needed to correct this situation.

Rationalization of recruiting commissions: 

The commission informed the committee that they had presented their views to the Constitutional Review Commission. We are waiting for the White Paper to see how cost effective this rationalization will be.

Employment policy: 

It has become one of the commission’s policies to conduct regular, graduate recruitment. In the last financial year it conducted two of the exercises with a view of filling existing vacancies in the ministries and departments. In a bid to further the exercise in the current financial year, it has directed all ministries and departments to declare vacant posts by 30th September, with a view of filling them.  

It was, however, reported that the ministries together with their departments were reluctant to responded to this call. It ought to be noted that delays in filling vacancies meant that some public servants assumed extra responsibility hence getting overworked leading to high stress levels. It was also reported that this problem is widespread in government institutions thereby preventing their effectiveness and affecting their efficiency levels.  

The delay in filling vacancies was attributed to the desire to make budgets based on existing positions, which funds are later diverted to other uses. Such action cannot rule out unauthorized diversions.  

Madam Speaker, the desire by some junior officers to continue in acting capacity also perpetuated the reluctance in filling vacancies. It was reported that the practice is widespread in the Public Service as a measure to draw duty allowances. It is absurd to note that some officers in the service have without authority from the commission acted for periods much longer than the legally stipulated six months. This anomaly was attributed to wrong internal administrative procedures without notification of the commission.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, point No. 3.9 is on disciplinary cases. The committee noted that there were a number of public officers who have remained on interdiction, sometimes without the knowledge of the relevant commission. Others have remained on interdiction for a period of over three years.  

The commission reported that unless the cases are before court, no public officer was supposed to remain on interdiction beyond a stipulated period of three months. It was observed that such negligence on the part of the chief executive officers may not only be a potential source of future legal battles but also exposed the Government to financial loss through salaries and allowances made to persons who are later dismissed. While expedient measures are ideal, the committee concurred with the commission that exceptional cases be limited to only those before the courts of law.  

It was further noted that there are officials from the Ministry of Justice who have spent a remarkably long time on forced leave without resolving their cases. Interestingly, the Public Service Commission reported that when the posts were advertised these officers responded to the adverts because no case had been brought against them, and they were suitable candidates but could not be recruited, based on the advice of the Solicitor-General.  

It is the considered view of the committee that the laxity in handling disciplinary cases by government institutions causes anxiety to the affected persons as well as wastage of human, time and financial resources. It was also noted that the situation is worse in districts.

Job advertisement policy: 

All public service jobs that fall vacant are brought to the notice of the commission and are made public in fair manner through advertisements in the press, notice boards in districts, ministries and department, and Uganda’s Missions and Embassies abroad. 

The commission reported that their efforts to enhance fairness were a nightmare and a great concern owing to the persistent under-funding from the Ministry of Finance. While it is expected to advertise all vacancies in major newspapers at a cost of Shs 2.5 million per page per newspaper for the specified number of days, it could only afford a few adverts with the hope that they are widely publicized.

Budget performance for financial year 2003/2004: While Shs 317 million had been approved for the entire development budget last financial year, Shs 54 million of this total was never released, which affected the commission’s activities. The Ministry of Finance never gave a convincing reason for this action.  

Budget estimates for financial year 2004/2005:

The committee noted with concern the under-funding of the commission in particular the development budget where the commission was given funds “equivalent to half a vehicle” and yet the commission is about to receive six new commissioners who include among others a retired judge of the Supreme Court. If this is not addressed it will affect the operations of the commission this financial year. 

It is the considered view of the committee that supplementary funding should be authorized in the course of the financial year, to enable the commission perform its functions.

The committee recommends that:

1. The Public Service Commission Bill should be urgently brought to Parliament after adequate consultations with the Public Service Commission.

2. The budget proposals of the Public Service Commission should be sent to His Excellency the President and laid before Parliament as per Article 155(2) and 155(3)of the Constitution.

3. The Public Service Commission should not only be seen to be independent, but should exercise its independence as stipulated in Article 166(2) of the Constitution.

4. The concern raised by the Public Service Commission concerning recruitment of public service officers in the U1 salary scale by district service commissions should be studied by the Ministry of Local Government with a view of amending the relevant Act.

5. All disciplinary cases in government institutions should be forwarded to the Public Service Commission, who have the mandate of exercising disciplinary control in any case not later than three months from adoption of this report.

6. The Public Service Commission should adequately be facilitated to perform its functions as mandated under Article 166(1) of the Constitution.

Vote 011 – Ministry of Local Government:  

Madam Speaker, on the issues raised last financial year, the Ministry of Local Government did not comply with section 62 of the Budget Act 2001 to provide data on value for money. The ministry reported that they did not have the requisite expertise to carry out the value for money assessments and audits. They instead presented an expenditure analysis, which fell short of the law.

The national policy on capacity building in local governments is not yet in place. However, the ministry reported that consultations on the draft policy are currently going on with a view of refining it, but it did not give a definite deadline when these consultations will end. Madam Speaker, the committee was not happy with the words “going on”, and we do not know when the consultations will end.

On the Local Governments Rating Bill, which is currently before Parliament, the Ministry has organized a one-day workshop on 16th September 2004 for all Members of Parliament, to sensitize them on the need for the population to pay property tax to local governments. The invitation is going to be extended to all Members of Parliament to attend this one-day workshop.

Although the Ministry of Finance has improved on timely release of funds, the committee noted that the release of funds to local governments, particularly of the last quarter, was still a major problem to local governments. The committee further noted that release of funds is sometimes as late as the 21st of June, when the local governments are supposed to submit final books of accounts. 

The Ministry of Finance normally recalls these unspent funds at the end of the financial year. Local governments raised concern on the legality of returning grants, which are passed to districts through Votes. It was also noted that there was a problem at inter-district and intra-district levels where funds are kept for long periods on collection accounts, and even take longer to be remitted to lower local governments and/or spending units. Part of this problem was attributed to the delays in accountability by lower local governments.

Restructuring of local governments:

The committee noted that this has been a longstanding issue since the enactment of the Local Government Act in 1997, which developed a wider range for powers, functions and responsibility to local governments without matching them with the requisite staff to handle the new responsibilities. The ministry reported that in consultation with the Ministry of Public Service, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and other stakeholders, three new structures to be adopted by local governments have been developed and they await Cabinet approval.

Participatory development planning at lower local governments:  

The ministry reported that a framework for community participation in the planning process has been developed and will soon be disseminated to the lower local governments. The framework will further be refined using the results of the baseline survey by the National Planning Authority on establishing minimum development standards and indicators.  

The committee noted that this framework will undoubtedly enhance local participation in planning and budgeting and should be disseminated to lower local governments urgently. 

It was also noted that although the parish development committees exist, their impact was not felt since many of them were inactive.

Grants to local governments:

The three sources of grants are the conditional, unconditional and equalization grants. It was also observed that while unconditional grants are supposed to supplement district budgets in paying salary and service delivery, salary payments consume almost the entire release at the expense of service delivery. 

Conflicts in local governments:

The committee noted that there were conflicts in local governments, particularly arising from the misinterpretations of various laws for selfish interests, even against the advice of the ministry, and the Attorney-General’s Office. The districts mentioned in the conflicts were Mubende, Mukono, Mayuge, Mbale, Kitgum, Kamwenge, Pallisa and Tororo, to mention but a few. Some of these districts have defied advice and have had to suffer the agony of court cases and orders. There is, therefore, urgent need to amend the Constitution and the Local Governments Act to bind the local governments to lawful advice from established, higher authorities.

Physical planning in local governments:  

The committee noted lack of physical planning, which has increased slums in most of the local governments, sites of potential disasters. 

The committee commended the improvement made in Kampala City Council notwithstanding the financial problems. It was, however, observed that for Kampala to develop as a modern city it needed special funding from the central government as a city and not as a district. It was further observed that even if Kampala City Council collected 100 percent of its budgeted revenue, the funds would not be sufficient to deliver services reminiscent of modern cities.

Capacity building in local governments:

The committee noted that numerous workshops have been carried out in local governments, without a lot of influence. This was mainly attributed to the education standards of most councilors. The ministry reported that in a bid to harmonize capacity building interventions of local governments, it has developed 26 generic training modules and materials that cover a wider range of fields including financial management, planning, budgeting, project proposal and management and human resource management. It is the considered view of the committee that capacity building intervention in local governments should be undertaken in a standard, coherent, systematic and consistent manner.

Procurement weaknesses in local governments:

The committee observed that there was a serious outcry from various stakeholders about the inept procurement and tendering system in local governments. This procurement accounts for 60 percent of the local government expenditures on civil works, goods and services. It was also observed that the district tender boards are engaged in arbitrary tender awards without due consideration of the cost effectiveness and the quality of service. The ministry reported to the committee that they have made amendment proposals to the Local Government Act and developed new procurement guidelines, which are now before Cabinet.

Remuneration of district chairpersons and other politicians in the districts:

The ministry informed the committee that Cabinet has approved a proposal to pay district chairpersons a minimum salary of Shs 2 million monthly. However, this will be from their locally generated revenue and not the central government as had been requested by the chairpersons. 

It was also reported that corresponding adjustments would be made for the district speakers, councilors and LC III chairpersons. These new changes will also give the Minister of Local Government powers to determine pay levels in local governments in consultation with the Ministries of Public Service and Finance.  

The committee observed that this would require amendment of the First Schedule, Regulation 4 of the Local Governments Act, 1997 as this increment would not be possible within the 20 percent contained in the schedule.  

On the role of CAOs as returning officers, the committee observed that this had affected their efficiency and effectiveness in carrying out their statutory mandate as accounting officers. It was further observed that this has been the source of conflict between the chief administrative officers, the district chairpersons and other politicians. 

The committee is of the view that this function should be withdrawn from the chief administrative officers and the Electoral Commission should instead appoint their staff to conduct the elections.

On graduated tax and declining revenues, the committee noted that there has been a decline in revenues generated locally by local governments. This was attributed to the performance of graduated tax, which is a source of revenue to most of local governments, which dropped from Shs 80 billion in 1995/1996 to Shs 37 billion in 2001/2002. The performance of graduate tax is mainly due to political interference and more so, the many national and local elections.  

The Ministry of Local Government reported that government was considering suspending graduated tax with effect from financial 2005/2006, for a period of ten years. However, the committee noted that this was mere politicking because the law could only be amended but not suspended as envisaged by the ministry. 

The ministry also reported that a consultancy to study and determine alternative sources of revenue to graduated tax was about to be commissioned and the results would be incorporated in the formulation of next financial year’s budget. The committee noted that numerous studies on graduated tax have been conducted by the Local Government Finance Commission and wondered whether it was cost effective to commission another consultancy instead of using the results already in place. 

The committee further noted that the tax base of local governments was low and there was need for a deliberate effort from government to widen the tax base. However, it was noted with concern that there is a lot of political interference from government functionaries, in particular presidential aides and RDCs who make pronouncements stopping taxes and fees levied by local governments. The most recent case is the issue of boda boda fees in Kampala and other local governments. Although the minister reported that the boda boda fees had been suspended to streamline its administration and management, the committee noted that this action would interfere with the budget processes of local government particularly because it was politically motivated. There should be clear guidelines to the RDCs on how to handle policy matters in government.

Special grants to districts in insurgency areas:

The committee noted that districts affected by insurgency did not only lack capacity to generate revenue but also had no absorptive capacity to utilize grants from the central government. It was also noted that most of the grants to these districts are returned to the Treasury as unspent balance at the end of every financial year. This is a source of imbalance in service delivery.

According to the synthesis report for the national assessment of local governments done last financial year under LGDP II, only Lira District was found to have retained sufficient absorptive capacity in these districts in insurgency areas. It was reported that Cabinet had decided that SFG and PHC grants for the districts affected by insurgency namely Gulu, Lira, Pader, Soroti and Katakwi be re-allocated to fund emergency relief requirements and security roads in those areas.  

The committee, however, noted that the re-allocation was done by central government without consultations with the districts, which already have the funds incorporated in their budget. It was further noted that these re-allocated funds are mostly spent on security roads and not priority areas of the districts.

Resident District Commissioners (RDCs):

The committee noted that most RDCs have abandoned their roles, which are clearly stipulated in the Constitution and section 72 of the Local Governments Act, 1997, and have instead resorted to politicking. It was further noted that some RDCs do not comprehend their roles because of their poor academic qualifications, and are only acting and/or behaving as politicians. 

It is the considered view of the committee that the Minister for the Presidency should re-direct their activities as civil servants and compel them to superintend government activities in districts, and desist from politicking, which has negatively affected their normal operations.

The inspectorate role of the Ministry:

The committee noted that inspection and support supervision  role of the ministry is not adequately funded. This has led to the raising of a number of complaints in most local governments, and the ministry has resorted to the fire brigade methods of resolving conflicts. This is not only expensive but also counter-productive because it stalls development activities in local governments.

The committee recommends that:

1. The Ministry of Local Government should build capacity to comply with section 6(2) of the Budget Act, 2001 to avail data on value for money.

2. The ministry should put in place the national policy on capacity building by the end of this financial year.

3. The ministry should in consultation with the Uganda local authorities and other stakeholders, finalize the amendments to the Local Governments Act, 1997, which are undermining the proper functioning of local governments.

4. The Ministry of Local Government should strengthen the inspectorate and support supervision of the ministry to reduce conflict in local governments other than resorting to the fire brigade approach.

5. The Ministry of Local Government should liaise with the Ministry in charge of the Presidency to issue guidelines on the functions of RDCs and warn them to stop interfering with local revenue generation.

6. The ministry should liaise with that of Finance and local governments affected by the insurgency on the release and prioritisation of special grants to those local governments.

7. The Government should increase on the timely release of funds to local governments for effective implementation of their budgets.  

8. The chief administrative officers should be relieved of the duty of handling elections to enable them concentrate on their statutory mandate and reduce conflicts within local governments arising from elections.

9. The Minister of Local Government should provide proper guidance to government on the issue of graduated tax and should urgently give guidelines to local governments on administration and management of fees to enhance local revenue generation.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Vote 147 is the Local Government Finance Commission. Article 194 of the Constitution sets up the Commission to, among others, advise the President on all matters concerning the distribution of local revenue between the central government and local governments; and the allocation to each local government of monies out of the Consolidated Fund. It is also supposed to advise the local governments on appropriate tax levels to be levied.

Observations and comments:  

Value for money:

Examination of the commission’s policy statement revealed that there is still lack of capacity to conform to the requirements of section 6(2) of the Budget Act revealed that there is still lack of the capacity to conform to the requirements of Section 6(2) of the Budget Act. Although the Commission showed its achievements, it did not disaggregate data on value for money in respect of tallying with the budget against expenditure items and actual funds.

5.2.2 Advisory Role of the Commission:

The committee noted that the advisory role of the Local Governments Financial Commission as envisaged in Article 194(4) of the Constitution has not been fully utilised by both His Excellency the President and the Local Governments. This was evidenced by the fact that the minimum tax of Shs 3,000 and the idea to suspend graduated tax next financial year were announced without seeking advice from the Local Governments Finance Commission.

It was also noted that the creative idea of Local Governments in expanding local revenue through boda boda fees had neither been gazetted by the Minister of Local Government nor had the blessing of the Local Government Finance Commission. The suspension of the boda boda fees will create a budget deficit in most Local Governments during the financial year 2004/2005 because Local Governments had included it in their budgets as a revenue source. For example, in Kampala alone, they will meet a deficit of Shs 450 million arising from this suspension.  

5.2.3 Grants to Local Governments:

The committee observed that the performance of the Central Government Grants to Local Governments was still affected by: 

a) Too many conditionalities, 
b) Late releases although it is now less frequent,
c) Occasional budget cuts and, 
d) Unrealistic formula and criteria used in consideration of Unconditional And Equalization Grant.  

The committee further observed that most Local Governments are faced with declining local revenue and thus rely 90 to 95 per cent on grants from the Central Government to finance their budgets.

The Commission informed the committee informed that there was improvement in release of funds by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, except the last quarter, which was attributed to low collection by the Central Government.  

The committee was further informed that although it was a requirement by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to return all unspent balances by the close of the financial year, all funds that are committed through award of tenders by Local Government Tender Boards are not affected, as they were already committed funds.

5.2.4 Graduated Tax:

The Commission informed the committee that in most Local Governments, graduated tax was a major source of revenue contributing 60 to 70 percent of the local revenue, and therefore abolition or suspension of the tax without a viable alternative was not welcome.  However, the committee noted that this was the major source of revenue that was mostly abused by many Local Governments as the grants are subject to audits, hence have resisted its abolition.  

5.2.5 Standardisation of Services:

The committee noted that standards and performance indicators, which form the criteria for grants to Local Governments, have not yet been developed except a few components of SFG and health units at sub-counties.  

The Commission informed the committee that the performance indicators have to be developed by line ministries whose functions were decentralized, but most of them have never developed these standards or actually do not know the level of service they are supposed to provide and the costs attached to these standards. 

It was noted that this has been a major hindrance to the distribution of conditional and equalization grants to Local Governments as the services are not costed.  

Madam Speaker, if I could comment on this, the distribution of conditional and unconditional grants to Local Government is supposed to follow these standardized services but apart from SFG, where we know the cost unit of a classroom, for example, most Local Governments do not know the service level of the Ministry of Gender; they do not know their provision for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  Therefore, it becomes difficult for the Local Government Finance Commission distribute funds because ministries have not given them the standards of their services in these Local Governments.

5.2.6 Facilitation of the Local Government Finance Commission:

The committee noted with concern the inadequate funding of the Local Government Finance Commission receives from Government yet it plays a vital role in the decentralization process and in particular, the implementation of the Fiscal Decentralization Strategy (FDS). It was noted that since 1996, only one vehicle has been provided to the Commission by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This financial year only Shs 51 million, which is enough to procure half a vehicle has also been provided. The Commission has mainly relied on donor support in fulfilling its mandate.  The four vehicles provided by DANIDA in 1998 are also old and yet the Commission has to implement the FDS programme.  

It is the considered view of the committee that the Commission should be adequately funded to realize the mandate for which it was established.  

5.2.7 Recommendations:

The committee recommends that:

1. The Commission complies with Section 6(2) of the Budget Act to avail data on value for money.

2. Advice should always be sought from the Commission before any pronouncements are made on decentralised services.

3. All ministries should come up with standards and performance indicators to assist Local Governments Finance Commission in allocation of unconditional and equalization grants.

4. The Local Governments Finance Commission should adequately be funded to implement the FDS.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, hon. Members, I beg to move that the House considers and approves the committee’s report together with the respective budgets for the financial year 2004/2005, covering the figures, which will be read when we are approving the figures, because it is another long list. But I think, we shall read them when we are approving the figures.  I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson, and your committee.  I want to certify that the report has been duly signed by at least one third of the Members, satisfies Rule 170(1) of our Rules of Procedure, and members may debate it.  

MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I want to start by thanking the Committee for a very comprehensive report. I can see that there is a change for the better in terms of qualitative presentation.  

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to address some of the issues that the Report has highlighted; and maybe before I do so, let me in accordance with the Rules of the House declare my interest that I am a pensioner, and when I talk about pension I talk from the heart because I know what it means to be a pensioner, and I know the suffering that the pensioners out there who have been denied their pension arrears are facing.  For the Government to have accumulated pension arrears of Uganda shillings 313 billion, and yet continues as if nothing is happening, I think is almost tending towards criminality.  Article 254 of the Constitution makes payment of pension mandatory and it does not give Government any discretion whatsoever on the matter.  

I will therefore be very happy, Madam Speaker, if the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who has undertaken to secure a loan for offsetting these arrears could give this House specific dates as to when this will be realised so that the Committee on Government Assurances can call the Minister to order if he defaults.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Wagonda Muguli for raising this question. I want to rise at an early opportunity because I know very many Members are going to raise the same concern. I have this to say: 

Since hon. Dora Byamukama’s motion and for quite a long time now Government has been concerned about the arrears of pension. I do not want to go into the causes of the accumulation of the arrears, but I want to say that it is as a concern to us as Government as it is to you hon. Members. 

Needless to point out, the figure of Shs 313 billion, almost a quarter of the entire national budget, is so big that we cannot wake up one day and settle it. But since Members started raising concern, Government has put in place a highly consultative forum of seeing how we can settle these figures. 

Members know that there is a restructuring process taking place, but at the same time we are consulting with all our partners. We are looking at all the prospects of ensuring that we start paying the arrears. It will not be possible to pay these amounts in one financial year, but the undertaking I can make is that before we close this Session Government will have presented a way forward on how we intend to solve this issue, and certainly come next financial year, disbursements on settlement of these arrears will start. 

We are consulting with our partners, we are consulting with world Bank, we are looking at all possibilities including borrowing, including making savings in so many other sectors to accommodate this. But, as I said, we can only roll out the payment in say three years’ period. I undertake that though we have not concluded the negotiations come next financial year, a big chuck of the arrears will be accommodated and paid. For the present, honourable Members, that is all I can say. I want to assure you that we are equally concerned.  I thank you very much.

MR WAGONDA  MUGULI: Well, I thank the hon. Minister for that information, I know it is not exactly what I expected, but I think it is a step in a right direction. May I remind him that he should also put into account the Shs 21.4 billion due to the Local Government pensioners. Some of these were former central government employees who through no choice of their own found themselves being de-linked to local authorities which cannot afford to pay their pension benefits. 

Madam Speaker, let me also take up the issue of RDCs. RDCs have been mentioned in numerous reports; newspapers are awash with reports of even some RDCs picking up guns and shooting into crowds allegedly to disperse them; and these are alleged to be civil servants. I have not heard any report where the Minister of Public Service has come out to discipline these people as civil servants. This leads me to pose the question: Are these RDCs civil servants appointed in accordance with Article 172 of the Constitution?  

Madam Speaker, I beg that I read verbatim the provisions of Article 172, and I would like the Minister of Public Service to lay on the Table evidence that the procedure for appointing these senior civil servants has actually been so followed.  It states as follows;

“The President may, acting in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission, the Education Service Commission or the Health Service Commission as the case may be appoint, persons to hold or act in office in the public service of Uganda of the rank of the Head of Department or above other than those referred to in Article 200 of this Constitution including confirmation of appointments, the exercise of disciplinary control over such persons and their removal from office.”  

The relevant provision here is whether the President has received the advice from any of the Service Commissions and has therefore proceeded to appoint these RDCs in accordance with the Constitution.

Secondly, what are the ranks of these RDCs in the Public Service? RDC is an assignment; it is not a rank in Civil Service and if they are senior civil servants, can I get clarification from the Minister whether these are promotion posts to which other civil servants in the Service an aspire; and, what are the minimum educational standards? This has been brought to question by the report.   

Madam Speaker, some time back when I was in charge of providing office accommodation in the Civil Service, the argument by the Minister of Finance then was that it was cheaper to rent office space for Government than to construct. I want the Minister of Finance to tell this House whether that position is still true, and if so, why have you failed to clear rent arrears for office accommodation? 

There was a proposal known as BOT (Build Operate and Transfer) and indeed Government had even secured investors who were ready to bring in money to build office blocks, operate them for 10 years after which they would transfer them to Government as Government property with Government putting in no resources. What has happened to this proposal?  I am aware of it because I participated in its negotiation, why is the government still spending colossal sums of money renting accommodation with no hope of getting –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, since I had very long interruption from the Minister of Finance I beg to recover my time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Wagonda, I forgot to remind you that you only have three minutes and really our standard has been three minutes.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I appreciate that Madam Speaker, but the Minister’s intervention was more than three minutes so I should be compensated, and I thank you for your indulgence. 

Madam Speaker, we have been told about selective enhancement of salaries for civil servants, and yet I am aware that for a long time Government has been trying to work on collective bargaining legal framework. This has not been finalized, but still in their wisdom, the Chief Executive in Government continues entertaining these pressure groups in total disregard of the legal provision, which is required, which would be for the good of all public officers. Is Government really not undermining its own policy of a single spine salary structure?  Some of these undertakings sometimes make us wonder whether people are serious or not.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, the question of restructuring; the Ministry of Information, for example, Radio Uganda and Uganda Television were supposed to be merged into a Commission. This took more than five years to realize. The Local Governments; the exercise of restructuring has been on the papers for a very long time, and since decentralization was based on persons who were in positions at the time of decentralization, districts which did not have people in positions have found it extremely difficult to recruit before the exercise of restructuring is completed; and this is affecting service delivery in the field.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the question of standards in this country.  At the time of decentralization and de-linking of staff, all Central Government ministries were supposed to issue national standards against which the performance in the field would be evaluated. It is saddening that up to now very few ministries have tried to undertake this exercise. That is why you hear of district such and such being quoted as being notorious in flouting the expected standards of performance. I would urge that Government takes up this as a matter of extreme urgency so that Ugandans in Kisoro, Kotido can all have the same quality of standards.  

For example, if Radio Uganda is enhanced –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wagonda, please let us have hon. Sabiiti.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Lastly, Madam Speaker, I served on a committee that looked at Kampala as the capital city of this country, and there were recommendations as to what was required to bring Kampala to the standards expected of national capitals. What is happening to that report? I think the Minister of Local Government should tell us. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.46
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee for the good report, and for having raised the standards of report writing. I also thank the Ministry of Public Service in particular for the good job they are doing. 

But allow me, Madam Speaker to touch on two issues.  One is about poverty and Government denying our citizens to access their money, that is pension and other allowances; and two, I will talk about taxes.

Madam Speaker, for a country to be poor, you look at a number of factors. You look at the type of food they eat, if they have enough water, the shelter they are using, how they are clothed, the medical care, whether the people are inflicted by insecurity, lack of education and the poor information, to mention just a few. If you look at all these, out of 25 million people that we have in this country, we say about 22 million are poor; and yet every year we borrow money from the World Bank, we drain the little money that the people have, bring it at the centre, mess it up; and even go further for the money that they are entitled to like salaries and pensions, we even do not pay it.  

So, I find it strange, Madam Speaker, for a Government that is supposed to make people rich - I think generally their policy is to make people poorer so that they continue begging instead of enriching our people.

Madam Speaker, pensions, gratuities and allowances granted under the 1995 Constitution are a right to the citizens of this country. If you look in our Constitution under the objectives and principles enshrined, it is one of their rights; pension is a right. Therefore, for a government to deny a Ugandan his salary, pension, gratuity, is a violation of that right. 

I have been hearing the Minister saying, “We do not know how to handle this matter.” I find it very strange. If the East African Community sends money to this country to pay the citizens of this country who served in the East African Community - money is available, they say, “Please give this money to those public servants, who served the East African Community” and you do not give it to them, why?  You borrow from the bank; you even go and borrow from the citizens! You use that money for 10, 20 years, you do not bother whether that citizen has clothes, food, is sending his children to school!  I find it very strange.  

So, Madam Speaker, gratuity and pensions are a right. Why should my money not be given to me? I have served this country; it is a legal requirement, it is a statutory requirement; it is a constitutional requirement that I must get my money. Why are you keeping my money; why do you have my money, you as a Government? Why don’t you want to give it to me? It is mine; it is there.  

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, what do we call “by Statutory budgeting”? You have never seen on this Floor of Parliament the Minister of Finance talking about money, which is paid statutorily. That is the money that is supposed to be paid as a salary, in some instances, and pensions are supposed to be paid direct from the Consolidated Fund. What does that mean? It means whenever there are arrears, every month money for a retired person is supposed to be paid direct to him. That means the Minister of Finance has failed in his duty to make sure that the money, which is supposed to be automatically released to the pensioner, is send to him/her.  

Madam Speaker, I would propose that the Shs 300 billion owed to the people of this country, we should and I hope to present a motion later. That percentage should be deducted from the over all budget so that the citizens get their money. You cannot make me poor, begging every day when I have money. So Madam Speaker, later I will request you, we shall move a motion that that percentage of the money, which is Shs 300 billion be directly deducted from this budget so that the citizens of this country access their money.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, taxes. You have heard the chairperson talk about the lack of funds in local governments. Most of this money we are talking about which come to the centre originates from districts. It comes from the taxpayer in the districts, in the parish. But the districts continue without money, only small grants you send them, -(Interruptions)

MR KAKOOZA JAMES: Thank you, hon. colleague for giving way. I would like to be educated about the taxes, which he is talking about, which come from the districts and go to the centre.  

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, the money that comes from the gorillas in Kigezi is from that area. The taxes from Katuna are from that area; taxes from the border, from national parks, from the gold and whatever minerals are all from various districts. So Madam Speaker, what I am talking about is this; if you look at the percentage that is sent to the Local Governments and the amount of money you leave at the centre, the centre is supposed to look after our security, law and order and maybe the foreign relations, that is it. Since the decentralization, most money is supposed to go to the districts. But if you look at the amount of money we are sending to the districts, I think we must reconsider, as Parliament. Actually, 60 percent of all the funds collected as taxes are supposed to be going to the districts. But what we send there is just peanuts. That is why some of us are saying “federal” - the federal I studied in political science, not the monarchism and whatever is the answer, so that we retain the money in the districts and send less at the centre.

So, Madam Speaker, I want this Parliament to consider the question of taxation very seriously. We cannot bring money here and it is only in wars, it is only buying helicopters, sending our doctors abroad to go and deliver; this is dangerous for this country. We must leave money in the districts, in the regions; send little money to the centre -(Interruptions)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Sabiiti for giving way.  I would like to be clarified on whether the people of Rukiga Constituency have asked for federal? Thank you.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I represent the people of Rukiga County and I do not know why the hon. Minister is trying to question my capacity to understand what the people of Rukiga want.  

Madam Speaker, as I finish –(Interruptions)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Sabiiti, for giving way once again. I would like to inform hon. Sabiiti and this House that I represent Kabale District where Rukiga County constituency is a unit. Thank you.

MR WACHA BEN: Maybe in answering the hon. Minister, hon. Sabiiti would want to tell whether the hon. Minister whose representing Kabale District has got a go ahead being a Minister in this government, for this government to negotiate for federal.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much. That is a good statement you have made. For the hon. Minister, may be let me know whether Government has already decided that there would be no federal and we know that there will be none. But as far as I know, it is this Parliament that should grant it.  Therefore, when we come here to talk about federal, I will articulate the views of the people of Rukiga as far as federal is concerned, and you as a representative of Kabale, you will play your role.  But as far as I am concerned, I am going to inform the people of Rukiga about the resources that have been squandered at the headquarters here in Kampala and their poverty - you know how poor a Mukiga is. Rukiga is very, very poor. You know that and I am trying to struggle to make sure that the money go to them, and now you are telling me that money should not go to our people in Rukiga –(Laughter)- and it should just remain at the top enjoying in your Pajeros and whatever. So this is a very serious matter, Madam Speaker.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the matter of RDCs has been talked about and I need not put more emphasis on it. The law of RDCs is very, very clear in the Constitution. I find it very strange for the government with highly educated people such as professors, lawyers, doctors, who know the value of education to come and appoint or advise the President to appoint a person who has no capacity whatsoever to manage even the smallest unit. My area of training, Madam Speaker, is management.  I will give an example, in Kabale District we have an RDC who has become a problem to the society. I tried to look at his CV to know what he is and I found out that this man’s education is about primary seven.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Is it in order for an hon. Member of this House to ridicule a public officer of Government, who is extremely competent and is in fact doing very well? He is one of the best RDCs we have in this country, who is executing his duties very, very well. Just because he has disagreed with hon. Sabiiti politically, and everyone knows that, is it in order for hon. Members of Parliament to keep bringing up people here to ridicule them, who have no access to the Floor of this House to defend themselves? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, whoever that person you are talking about has no audience in this House. So I would appeal to you to concentrate on policy issues and leave individuals out of this debate.

MR SABIITI: I will abide by your ruling, Madam Speaker.  But this matter was clearly stated in the report for Public Service.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the particular RDC of Kabale?

MR SABIITI: They talked about lack of education and I am trying to reinforce the committee’s work, Madam Speaker. But I abide by your ruling.  

Madam Speaker, it is high time that the Executive seriously looks at the qualifications of the type of RDCs that are being appointed to go and serve in districts. They have been a source of conflict, a source of dividing our people, a source of rigging elections, a source of ridiculing our people.

So, I request the Office of the Presidency to seriously handle this matter and advise the President. Some of us worked as District Commissioners; you cannot compare that time with the current appointments like the RDCs, they ridicule. 

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof Mondo Kagonyera): Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Sabiiti, for giving way. He has told us he served as a District Commissioner; can he go further and tell this House the record of the Government in which he served and the role he played in the havoc they caused in this country?

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I am one of the senior public officers, and one of the most well trained administrative officers in this country. I have served in the Movement Government as a civil servant, I served in the Obote Government as a civil servant, I served in Amin’s Government as a civil servant; a public officer serves any regime. This gentleman, who is talking, was a Professor at Makerere during Amin’s days; he should have run away. So, Madam speaker, that is why -(Interruption)

 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, focus on policy issues; I do not want these attacks.

MR SABIITI: That is why, Madam Speaker, the RDCs that are being appointed, serve as if they belong to an individual and that is dangerous for the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will take that to the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

MR SABIITI: With this, Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for availing me this opportunity to talk about these issues.

MR WANJUSI WASIEBA (Mbale Municipality, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the Committee for the work well done. I do appreciate the political leadership in these two ministries.  

Madam Speaker, on page 21, 4.6 “Conflicts in Local Governments” this issue is live in many districts, but it is a way of transferring democracy to the lower levels.  As a middle-aged country, because it is 42 years since we got our independence, this is what we go through in order to arrive at good governance. 

The recruitment of Chief Administrative Officers by the district: Although we provided for it in the Constituent Assembly, I think it needs to be looked into again, because when an LC 5 picks a District Public Service Commission, which also picks the Chief Administrative Officer, and eventually the Chief Administrative Officer is answerable to the Chairman; therefore, you can work hand in hand to bring some bad kind of governance in a district.  I therefore I agree with the committee’s report that such local governments should abide by what is communicated from the centre because once the centre detects there is a problem going on in the district, they also give advice. But if that advice is not given by the centre, then it is only better that the centre recruits the CAO in order to be able to be answerable to the centre.

Madam Speaker, on item 4.7 on the same page, about the physical planning in the local governments, we are having a lot of problems especially in municipalities where senior civil servants have been a bit scarce to be got. Therefore, the planning of those areas has been a problem; that is why you find that people have resorted to having containers in the middle of town, which has becomes a problem.  Sometimes these developers convince the engineers in the Local Governments to be able to disorganize a well-planned district or Government.  

Mbale as a municipality is going through phases and there are certain qualifications, which a municipality goes through to become a city - I am sure it the same just like Kampala City Council went through. But Mbale Municipality has those qualifications, and when I read in this report that Kampala District or Kampala City is going to be allocated a special fund, I thought it would be of interest for certain municipalities to access such kind of a fund because since independence these municipalities have never had any development at all.  What has happened is the Government to keep on upgrading them from town to municipality, and once they gain that status, that is the end of it.  When you get in a town, the potholes that you meet and the infrastructure that has been disorganized leaves a lot to be desired. I therefore request that this committee in the next financial year come up with a proposal of how municipalities can also improve on their infrastructure.

Madam Speaker, on page 22, on item 4.9, “Procurement weakness in the Local Governments;’ we are trying, as a policy of Government, to encourage some locals to get involved in the development of the infrastructures. Although they do not have the right qualification to be able to run such firms in order to develop an area, I think it is important for a local government also to consider the experience of a firm that has been awarded a contract. You do not only go by the lowest bidder because somebody might have tendered the lowest simply because he just wanted to get a job to learn from. 

It is important for the Government to spend public funds on an organization that will be able to do work. So, I feel that the Local Government should be able to evaluate a company that has bid for a certain project; not basing only on a how much it has tendered but at least on what can enable that organization to complete the work in order to earn the public funds that have been earmarked.

Madam Speaker, I feel that if we did this, it will be able to give good governance at the lower governments and therefore to get a good outcome out of whatever has been done. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.11
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga county, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for having come up with this report.  However, my concern is on the selective salary awards and where they put it. It has become a common practice for organized groups and unions of civil servants to meet His Excellency the President and demand for salary increments. Whereas this could perhaps be of no problem, my concern is over how this matter is being handled. It is as if there are no criteria to guide the Public Service to determine the kind of salary and wages to offer according to our wage basket. On several occasions the President has made promises and it has come to pass that these promises for increments were not captured in the budget of the financial year 2004/2005.

The other day, Madam Speaker, I was in Mulago Hospital. I had gone there to see some friends of mine who are doctor and they were looking forward to receiving this increment. So, at the end of the day, if it is not really realized who is misleading the other? Did the President make the pronouncement out of thin air? What happened? Aren’t we turning out to ridicule the stature of the presidency, if he only makes empty promises?  

Madam Speaker, this is a matter of concern – (Interruption)

MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I want to give is that the President’s promise has been fulfilled, because when the Committee on Social Service was presenting its report, it pointed out that the government has given the Ministry of Health Shs 38.6 billion. It also explained how that money has been divided. Part of it is going to salary enhancement and another to staff recruitment. So, I think the information the person holding the Floor is giving is not up to date. I would request him to refer to the report of the Social Services Committee for actual figures.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, when hon. Ssekikubo talks about empty promises by His Excellency the President it becomes very important for the Ministry of Local Government to do what it is supposed to do on presidential pledges, particularly on the issue of Kaliro District – (Laughter) - which has been outstanding. Madam Speaker, since you are the MP for Kamuli District it is very unfortunate that the people who actually cherish His Excellency the President Museveni so much, the Ministry of Local Government is actually rendering – (Interruption)

MR AGGREY AWORI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for my hon. colleague to bring a matter, which is coming in the next report of the Committee of Foreign Affairs?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I don’t know what is coming in the next report because I have not read it. He has a habit of talking about that matter, so let him talk about it.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to further clarify and confirm the statement by hon. Tibarimbasa that pursuant to the President’s pledge to improve on health workers’ conditions, a figure of Shs 38.6 billion was put in the current budget and even before the Vote on Account health workers in Mulago had benefited from the improved emoluments. So, I don’t know when my colleague hon. Ssekikubo went to Mulago and found them complaining. To the best of my knowledge health workers are very satisfied and thankful to the President.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: For purposes of clarification, hon. Tibarimbasa could tell us if in their Social Services report they included money for increment of teachers salaries, which was also promised, and the Makerere University lecturers?

MR TIBARIMBASA: Madam Speaker, the chairperson of the Social Services Committee is here. I think you can allow her to expound on this because she is more conversant with the business of the Social Services Committee than myself. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. chairperson, I thought your problem was that there is a discordant way of negotiating? Is that not the case you made in your report?

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, what I would really like to point out is that I would be much appreciative if those pledges were honoured, but his is not the ideal way of handling business matters. We cannot handle them on ad hoc basis.  How about those civil servants who are diligent at their work and services, who do not have a muscle to meet the President? Who will present their views to the President for redress? That is the point I was making. I do not care whether it was met or not but we should have normal procedures – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PENSIONS (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the hon. Sekikubo for giving way. The information I want to give is that the Ministry of Public Service is continuously reviewing the salaries of all civil servants. So, those who do not make noise are catered for by the Ministry of Public Service continuously. It is not true that it is only those who will make noise who will have better salaries.  The Ministry of Public Service is mandated to look into this issue on a continuous basis. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think the problem of the committee and hon. Ssekikubo is that there are those who have the capacity to go and bargain but the bargaining takes places without your input as Public Service and the Ministry of Finance. Consequently, the increments may not be reflected as has been agreed. That is the case as per the committee.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam, it is not true that the bargaining takes place without consulting Ministry of Finance. I am in the Ministry of Finance, I know that before figures are arrived at, consultations are held between all the relevant ministries; Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Finance, the Presidency – sometimes when the President has been approached - and a common decision is arrived at. It is not true to state that the President just decides figures –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague rose to give information. But in the process, he introduced himself as a “Minister of Finance” and yet in our records we know him as otherwise. Is he in order, before we get a directive from His Excellency, the President - Is he talking about the in-coming government or out-going government? Is he in order to introduce himself in such a capacity?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you please clarify on the status of the Minister of Finance who is here, and the one who is not here?  (Laughter)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I am a Minister of State for Finance, but in this House I represent the Ministry of Finance. I am the only Minister of Finance here. (Laughter).

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, for record purposes, it was the concern of the committee; the salaries of teachers are not reflected in the Budget. Can the minister inform this House here whether that promise of the teachers’ salaries is reflected in this year’s Budget?

MR WAGONDA: Madam Speaker, could the minister clarify whether the selective enhancement of salaries has not distorted the single spine salary structure?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you going to answer now or you are going to answer later? But maybe to get this out of the way, have you provided money for the teachers?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, as my colleague the Minister of State for Public Service has said, there is a procedure for continuous revision of all salaries across the board, whether they are teachers, whether scientists each and every category has a salary revision every financial year. 

Now for teachers, the promised salary enhancement has been handled in phases. I know that there is an amount of money we put in this budget for enhancing salaries for teachers, but I have to check with my technical people to know the figures. But as I stated, with or without meeting the President, with or without a pressure group, government revises salaries across the board of each and everybody. If the complaint is on the preferential treatment the President talked about for scientists, then that is a different thing altogether and I will give the justification when I come to answer.

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I came in my colleague, hon. Avitus Tibarimbasa, was giving information as far as the report of Social Services is concerned, and I thought it was necessary to give the information, which was captured by Social Services regarding salary enhancement of medical workers. We gave a comprehensive report. This financial year, Shs 38.6 billion has been put in the budget, which we recommended and I thought Parliament has approved.  

Out of Shs 38.6 billion, Shs 32.4 billion is basically for salary increments of all medical workers and we even gave a structure. The lowest established medical worker would get, that is enrolled nurse, a minimum of Shs 300,000. A new entry of medical officers would receive Shs 700,000. The highest is Director General, whose salary will be increased from Shs 1.8 million to Shs 2.2 million. Arrears were not accommodated for, and when we interfaced with Public Service, with Ministry of Health, with the Uganda Medical Workers whom we referred to meet the head of executive, it was agreed that salary arrears for medical workers would be put in the Budget next financial year.

Regarding salary enhancement for the teaching staff in Makerere University, it is not only for Makerere University. Shs 5.0 billion has been put in the Budget, and it was distributed to all teaching staff in all the four public Universities: Makerere University, Mbarara University, Gulu University, Kyambogo University and Makerere University Business School (MUBS) - of course, MUBS is part of Makerere University. We recommended, Madam Speaker, that as far as we are concerned, that amount was still very little given that the original first negotiator was Makerere University and we thought it would make the rest uncomfortable. So, we recommended that let all the staff in all these four public universities be catered for.

When Finance brought the matter in the Budget Speech by the Ministry of Finance, they had in mind that it would only go towards Science teachers or whatever, which we thought would make the rest uncomfortable. And if you followed the report, which I presented last week, we strongly recommended that all the teaching staff, both Arts and sciences and also the support staff be catered for.

Coming to the third category, Madam Speaker, the primary teachers. If you followed my presentation on this Floor, the President had promised increment of Shs 200,000 to each primary teacher. It was not accommodated for and the answer we were told, which is in the Hansard of Parliament is that, negotiations are ongoing between Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Public Service and the entire government to make sure that they are accommodated for. 

But throughout the series of meetings we had, Public Service was wondering how they would distribute the little package between all the workers. I think they could not accommodate all the teachers. We strongly recommended that let the negotiations be as fast as possible which I thought by the time, the committee responsible for Public Service would have pursued to tell us exactly how much is within the sector of Public Service catering for salary increment, catering for recruitment of all workers both teachers and the rest.

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, when the Budget Committee sat, where all of us chairpersons were ex-officios, we strongly recommended - and I thought it should not be captured as supply of air - that let the increment of salaries of civil servants be taken as a whole not only selective. So, I was also wondering the supply of air whether it is specifically for teachers because it is a blanket statement and yet medical workers have been catered for. Makerere is not alone but we should be talking of all the teaching staff and support staff in the public universities and the primary teachers. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you for purpose of this debate be categorically very clear, which are the people you have catered for so that we know what areas to focus on.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I do not want to be categorical at this moment before I look at exactly the figures. But what I want to say is that, consultations have been going on, even as I talk today, the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service is attending a meeting chaired by none other than the President himself to do with harmonisation of salaries to civil servants. After the consultation issues which were cleared were catered for, areas which we thought we should do further clarification, were left pending for government to consult further taking into consideration the size of the purse.  

Honourable members, it is not a question of saying that we must enhance or increase, it all depends on what we can afford. So, those consultations have been taking place, they are continuing to take place but as I said earlier, each and every category has been accommodated in a manner that there is an enhancement across the board. I have the figures, which I will provide when I come to answer, of how much we have accommodated salary enhancement this financial year.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, with respect to the Minister of Finance, the comfort of Social Services was that, by the time the committee of Public Service comes on board these negotiations should be over. Now, when we finish pronouncing ourselves on figures, shall we have a supplementary for teachers? Because you told us the negotiations were going on, for us we concluded our report and we thought that by the time we come to conclusion, that matter would be brought on board. So, as a Chairperson Social Services, can I know whether this Shs 200,000 promised to teachers will come as supplementary because now we are coming to the conclusion of the Budget?

CAPT.BYARUHANGA: One, Ministry of Public Service has got a policy where it has to enhance all the salary of all workers. Number two, what should come before should it be the announcement or the consultations?  This is exactly the problem of the Committee of Public Service; announcements come before consultations now they are on fire brigade approach.

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue which has been raised by hon. Sekikubo, which relates to selective salary awards, is being addressed fully by my ministry. From a policy point of view, we believe that we must consult and harmonize. And in relation to pronouncements already made by His Excellency, the President with regard to health workers, this is being implemented and it has been accommodated in this financial year 2004/05.  

With regard to enhancement for professors and lecturers of public universities, the Shs 5.0 billion, which my colleague the Minister of Finance announced or the chairperson on Social Services Committee has stated is true, it has been appropriated. When we answer comprehensively, I will give you the level of that appropriation.  

With regard to salary enhancement for primary school teachers, we are still at consultative levels. We believe that this process will continue and may be implemented in the next financial year that is 2005/06. This is the position in as far as the consultative process is going on. But, Madam speaker, as we wind up the debate, maybe other issues will arise, we should be able to answer them comprehensively.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to confirm you have now said that the question of health workers has been handled. So, debate should not go on the health workers. You have also said the question of the lecturers has been handled so the debate should be on primary teachers. Okay. Let hon. Sekikubo proceed we have forgotten actually that he is on the Floor.

MR WAGONDA: Madam Speaker, the clarification I wanted to give was whether -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wagonda, let hon. Sekikubo finish his contribution.

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I thank you so much and for having forced the front bench to elucidate and come out strongly on these matters that are affecting the people. But further concern was this syndrome is not only with central government, but it is spreading down as you can see the remuneration of district chairpersons under sub item 410 on page 22 of the report. That Cabinet approved a proposal to pay district chairperson a minimum of Shs 2.0 million, and that they will still have to make adjustments for the district speakers, councillors LC IIIs. But this time round, they conveniently try to dodge the responsibility by saying that it will be the districts to cater for this. (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I think we must avoid innuendos of bad faith. When you say they “conveniently” avoided, it looks like there is a conscious effort of trying to do a mistake or being mischievous. Government cannot do that especially, the type of government that you have. 

Secondly, I will be answering this. The logic behind a minimum for the districts and why the districts should raise the money is very much based on two points: 

One, that if you are going to milk a cow you must feed it, you must take it to mate, you must take it to water and finally, when it delivers then you can get milk. Districts must generate the money that they need and we are doing everything to encourage them to do that. Secondly, decentralisation simply says that the powers go down to the districts. Now, if the districts leadership become simply employees of the central government that undermines the decentralisation. So, we cannot sit here in this Parliament and undermine the very policy that we put in place.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, you have a government, which listens to everybody. When people come to the President and make demands, and the President promises to solve them, that is not the same thing as saying “it is here and now”. Promises must be implemented in the light of the economy. You are here sitting, discussing a budget, how much of this budget do you have that can afford all the needs that we have in this country? Even Members of Parliament have been actually pushing for consideration of their salaries. But this has not been forthcoming because we look at the piece of cloth and we talk about the coat we can wear.

MR SEKIKUBO: I really did not mean to disappoint the minister, but why I came up with such a statement is that as we speak now, we have abolished the boda boda tax and we are about to abolish the graduated tax. Now, from where does the minister expect the local governments to obtain their revenues?  

As I speak, Madam Speaker, in the case of Sembabule, the district chairperson receives Shs 0.5 million and that is the maximum he obtains. And that one I can tell you that the district has not been able to perform for nine months due to shortage of funds. Can the honourable minister, therefore, be kind enough to inform me whether they have carried out the feasibility study across the board to carry out - not only looking at Kampala, but let them look at Sembabule, Bundibugyo, Kalangala and many other districts not forgetting those Northern and north eastern. Can the honourable minister come straight on that point and inform us whether such a statement is backed empirically and with practical terms, or it is just for these purposes of budgeting and politics?  Madam Speaker, at his own leisure and time he will answer that. 

But I was also concerned when the report was talking about the Vice President’s housing complex His Excellency, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya. But recently, I saw in the press the former Vice President complaining that she is not being catered for, despite the fact that she retired honourably.  Up to now the state is not taking care of her benefits and privileges. Do you want her to first write a petition? Do we want her to first mobilise people to come to the President? What is the way forward in such circumstances? Madam Speaker, I challenge the ministry to come out strongly on that.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would just like to note one small thing about the Ministry of Local Government. It did not comply with the value for money as mandated by the Budget Act 2001 Section 6(2). My good friend, the honourable minister, as he is here, can he tell us what guidelines we as Parliament shall follow when auditing and guiding his ministry? What will be our supervisory role if up to now he cannot come up with strong guidelines to enable us because when they present the expenditure analysis, this is not enough and he is saying there is lack of requisite capacity to carry out the value for money assessment and audits. 

Now, Madam Speaker, for how long shall we continue in this manner, since it is now across the board that all ministries must follow this. They give Parliament guidelines, tallying the budget against the expenditure items as well as the actual money released to the ministry and items. Now, honourable minister, for how long shall we be patiently waiting for you to come on board? Why do you not take the clue from other ministries? There are other ministries that are problematic, but they have managed to do their way. 

Mr Minister, this time around I am not ready to wait for anything short of that, and when the committee says the “Local Government should” - I think we should make a stronger recommendation that they must. We give them the timeframe two/three months within which they should come on board. This should be strong to guide us in our oversight functions. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.45
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you. Madam Speaker, suffer me the indulgence to commiserate with some of our colleagues, especially those on the Cabinet, who may have seen an authoritative paper associated with powers that be, that their names are missing on the list of the new Cabinet. I wish to console them and to assure them that there is another chance. They can always come back to the Cabinet. (Laughter)

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, is hon. Aggrey Awori in order to malign this House and start debating things, which are not related to Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Local Government, and discussing rumours in this House, Madam Speaker, in front of you? Is he really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I fear you are actually intimidating Members of the front bench and they may not be able to answer questions when you make that statement.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is why I started -(Interruption)

MR MIKE SEBALU: I would like to inform hon. Awori that in this House people normally debate a wide range of issues, and the common one is the District of Kaliro, which comes in even when you are discussing foreign affairs.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague. As I was saying, Madam Speaker, I requested that suffer me the indulgence of commiserating with those whose names may not have appeared on the list that was published by a paper, which is fairly authoritative in its publication or its information. However, I take this opportunity to point out once again that the Public Service, especially the appointing authority, have been oblivious of a very important phenomenon in this century called gender equalisation.  

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Public Service has been the slowest in recognising the role of women in public service. When you look at the recruitment, the promotion of women in public service, it leaves much to be desired. I can challenge the minister responsible and the appointing authority, how many out of so many ministries - a minimum of 24 ministries - how many women are permanent secretaries? Or even percentage wise definitely they are below 30 per cent. This is undesirable. 

When it comes to promotion again how many women have risen through the ranks to the top of their departments? Almost nothing! When we look –(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to inform hon. Aggrey Awori that Ministry of Public Service three quarters nearly of their heads of departments are women.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I could be very comfortable if that information was made available.  I am challenging what I see and if you have an answer you come up with the figures. I have said 33 per cent now you are saying 90 per cent. If at a later day you can come up with the information, I would be most appreciative. 

Over and above that, another concern is that when you talk about the pension again women who have worked longest in the service, those sectors where women are predominant like Teaching Service Commission, again their benefits are not being realised. I am just expressing concern. I know as far as the Cabinet is concerned which is beyond the minister’s capacity to appoint or elevate, again women at the cabinet level are definitely fewer. 

MR SABIITI: I am finding it a problem, Madam Speaker, for hon. Awori to just make a blanket statement. I would have expected him to come with facts and figures to say, “In ministry A the situation is as follows, in Public Service it is like this, in Education, the head teachers it is like this” then what he is trying to put across would be understood. And as far as I understand –(Ms Namaggwa rose_)- the Uganda Public Service –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is giving information.

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, I can amplify his clarification –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he is giving information.

MS NAMAGGWA: He is giving information but, Madam Speaker, he was wondering whether we can substantiate what hon. Awori is saying. I can give the example of Masaka District that actually out of 33 chairpersons of the sub-counties, only three are women. So, I think hon. Awori has got some figures to use. (Laughter).

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much, for that information. I was talking about Public Service and in this case the civil service. Now, as far as I know, in the whole of Africa, it is the Uganda Public Service that started long time ago to make women take up important positions. I can bet! That is why I am asking my old brother Awori to come with facts so that maybe the permanent secretary, the minister and Cabinet can look at it properly and give an answer. But as far as I am concerned, in the Public Service of Uganda women actually could be more than a third and given at various levels. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us be serious about this matter. How many ministries have reached one-third in this country, you tell me?  Hon. Sabiiti, I can tell you that in South Africa, the Cabinet is 24 men and 22 women. I have been looking here, suits, where are the dresses? One dress or two dresses! So please, I will not allow Members of this House to gloss over the question of women’s rights. We have not reached 30 per cent and we must reach 50 per cent. So please, do not gloss over that matter that one I will not allow and I must declare my interest over that. (Applause)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I could agree with you more, this has been the problem in this country. Women’s rights are taken for granted; we gloss over them. I am glad am a man I can talk about it freely because if I had been a woman, one would say, “Ah! Another woman is talking about their rights” am a man and I can talk about their rights I know their oppression.  

Madam Speaker, this question of Cabinet is just a serious matter. I know it is beyond the minister’s capacity. I do not know who is the Leader of Government Business this morning. But whoever it is please, convey the concern to the appointing authority that the next reshuffle whether it is tonight, tomorrow or next year or not at all, we want more women in more senior positions like the Attorney General. We want a woman Attorney General –(Laughter)- yes, I know we have got women lawyers in this country whose papers are not questionable at all, and they can make better Attorney General in this country. And as a Member of the appointing committee, I will have no problem clearing them at all.  

Madam Speaker, these are serious issues but people tend to belittle them. Now, if I go back, this question of the Public Service I have been challenged by my honourable colleague, hon. Sabiiti, that I should come up with data. I am the one saying I am hungry, I am asking those with food to give me food. I do not have to tell them how many kilos of meat I am just saying I am hungry and it is up to you to see what you have to give me. That is why I am saying, as far as I am concerned, if I talk about specific ministries; who is the Permanent Secretary in Foreign Affairs? Who is the Permanent Secretary in Internal Affairs? Who is the Permanent Secretary in Agriculture? Who is the Permanent Secretary in Finance? Who is the Governor, where is a woman governor? We have never even had a woman governor of the Bank of Uganda.  The highest we have ever had was a Director and when she was just about approaching the position of Deputy Governor she was told, “Well, you are now 53 years old you have only two years left to reach the retirement age, therefore, we shall give you a contract of 2 years and then you can go home and retire.”  

Now again, Madam Speaker, these are tactics. I do not have to repeat the point I raised during the time we were discussing Social Services report. We have a problem at Makerere we do not want to face it. We have   got a problem at MUBS, who do we have as a woman in position that matters at Nakawa. Almost none! Now, when you talk about it oh, no!  In UPC we took note of the gender factor long time back even before it became fashionable talk.  

Madam Speaker, let me come back to another issue, which has been bothering me. The question of sending people on indefinite leave contrary to regulations in place. Three months, you are either called back, you are fired, you are tried or so forth. Again to assure hon. Sabiiti, let me speak in specific terms. We have two senior state attorneys. Senior State Attorney Chebron, Senior State Attorney Byamugisha Deo. These senior state attorneys, chief litigation officers of the government were sent on leave more than six months ago. 

Up to now we do not know what is happening to Chebron, we do not know what is happening to Deo.  What is going on?  Why do you not take them to some kind of court and say, “This is what you did and, therefore, your punishment is this” or that. 

Again talking about gender, we have no women at senior state attorney level in the department of the Ministry of Justice –(Interruption)  

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, the honourable Member of Parliament from Samia-Bugwe North, when he was ambassador potentially in UPC government, he really never tried to do the affirmative action. Is he in order to say that now he is the champion of affirmative action when we know when he gets back to power he will actually cancel the affirmative action? Is he really in order to start promising us air?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I can say is that he has consistently been for affirmative action in this House. He has been very consistent, that one is a fact.

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, there is a growing trend in this House.  Whenever a Member raises on a matter in good will and in good faith, someone raises up to tell him, “Your past is a, b c, d, e.” With due respect to my colleagues, Madam Speaker, I would like you to put it strongly that let us not contribute on matters of the past, forgetting the present. We should be absorbed in matters, which are pertaining now because we are all contributing to moving Uganda forward. We should not use our colleagues’ mistakes in the past to mean that they are bad, therefore, they have no moral authority to contribute on matters of the present. In fact, I would like you to make a strong comment on that.

MR AWORI: Madam speaker, I do understand the concerns of some of my colleagues on matters pertaining to gender. The insensitivity is not new but it can be improved upon. This question of accommodation - let me leave alone the firing of people, interdicting them and then you do not fire them, you do not reinstate them, you just leave them in a state of ambience contrary to the regulations in place. This is a major concern and I hope these two cases are taken up, be followed up and see whether they can be reinstated and be sent away to go and start private practice or whatever the case.  

Madam Speaker, this question of accommodation both residential and office for senior persons of the state such as the Vice President, is a serious one.  The Government is losing a lot of money. We invested a lot of money in conversion of a chicken house into an office for a former Vice president but now it has been abandoned. We spent a lot of money again in improving on another person’s property but it has been abandoned. At the moment, we are investing a lot of money in the incumbent Vice President, and soon or later we are going to abandon it.

Madam Speaker, often we have come up with the proposals. We came out up with two properties on Nakasero but we abandoned; we came up with the property on Mbuya Hill, it was abandoned; now the last one we are talking about is improvement or refurbishing of Makindye lodge. As a Member of the committee concerned in that particular aspect, we have to visit the site, we have to construct a new residence from scratch. There is nothing at Makindye for rehabilitation; all we have is a site and decrepit buildings. So, the only thing we can do is to start from now. But meanwhile, instead of disrupting the private life of the incumbent Vice President at Kakiri and in Ntinda - he happens to be my neighbour in Ntinda and I see the troubles he is going through - why do we not - even for the time being there are properties which go for less than $3000. (Interruption)

MR KAGIMU: I am seeking clarification either from you or from the Speaker. Madam Speaker, in 2006, I heard that the State House in Entebbe will be finished and the new President will be moving to Entebbe, whether His Excellency, the President continues or not. Now, do you not think that instead of building another state house this one of Nakasero will be for the Vice President? How does the honourable Speaker think about that? Instead of building another state house costing us billions because if he abandons it, then it will also decay.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would like to assure my honourable colleague that as much as we talk about moving the President, it will be a little while before he can move to Entebbe. Putting up anything at Entebbe for a head of state and his visiting colleagues cannot take less than 18 months; as a matter of fact a minimum of two years. We are literary day-dreaming if we think we can move him there within such a short period. My concern right now is, we can actually rent a property at less than $4000 a month, for a period we are putting up a new property at Makindye for the residence of the Vice President.  

Again, office accommodation; now this is scandalous, Madam Speaker. We are committing serious offences against the people of Uganda when we misuse their scarce resources. The other day my honourable colleague here, Minister of Local Government, moved out of Uganda house at less than Shs 10,000 per square foot and moved himself and his office to a luxurious building called “Workers’ House.” It is a luxury building, which should be meant for the private sector that can write off rents in terms of taxes. But for a government, which is conscious of scarce resources, he should have stayed in Uganda House notwithstanding the political difficulties between the tenant and the landlord. The building is immune to politics.

Again another abuse of public resources, we were offered - it is on private conversations and correspondence that the British High Commission is moving from Parliament Avenue to the new site.  Privately, for two years, they approached senior members of the Government in this Cabinet that they will be prepared to donate the existing High Commission building especially as soon as Americans left. They said they will be prepared to give it to us as part of pay if we considered worthwhile giving them two acres of land elsewhere within the city of Kampala. We waited, up to now they are about to give up. If we approach them right now, they will say, “Look, we are about to move and we shall consider a quid pro quo. This building is excellent for the Vice President’s Office.

Madam Speaker, the current arrangement, and I have seen efforts to that effect that the President is now moving to the fourth floor of parliamentary buildings. Again, security wise it is not advisable to have the President, the Vice President, the Speaker and Parliament in the same neighbourhood or locality. Why are we waiting for the accident to take place before we think about it? It is important that we think about it. As a matter of fact, I would discourage the Government that they should stop the idea of renovating this wing for the President to move in. Let him stay at Nakasero until Entebbe is ready. 

We can tolerate, we can co-exist with the Vice President in this neighbourhood. But for the President, even for my personal convenience, I do not want PGB in this neighbourhood. I know what they do whenever they move to the neighbourhood. But for security purposes, I think they should think twice before the President and Vice President can move in the same building less than two metres apart in terms of flows. So, that one leave it out.

Madam Speaker, again going back to the two ministries, why would the Ministry of Gender -(Interruptions)- I know when I touch sensitive points some of my colleagues become a bit uncomfortable. But call a spade a spade. Why are we wasting money renting Simbamanyo near the courts when we have got our own building here, Crested Towers, which is going almost to waste? We refurbished that building at a doubled cost. The original cost was $10 million but eventually it cost us $26 million. As a result, the rent we are paying in that big property is negative return.  Instead of having negative return in rents, why do we not move the two ministries in Workers House and the another one into Crested Towers, to save the money we are paying out nearly a billion shillings a year, and if you add the two ministries, it will be close to Shs 2.0 billion.

Again IGG has left another government building, they have gone into another expensive building, the Agha Khan building on Parliament Avenue. Madam Speaker, are we really conscious of public resources when we get into this kind of arrangement?

This august House also I must say, Madam Speaker, I am expressing concern to the Parliamentary Commission. Why can we not get official residence for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of this august House? We talk about it, but when we come to the welfare of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, we become too modest to mention it. Why should we be modest about it? Let us call a spade a spade.  These people should not be inconvenienced, entertaining their visiting counterparts from abroad in hotels and other places. They are entitled to official residences. Let the Speaker of the august House have an official residence, he is number three in the country. Let the Deputy Speaker have an official residence, she is number four in this country in terms of hierarchy. Why are we scared of mentioning these things we parry here and there? Facts are facts, they may be called - but they are facts.

Last but not least, this question of district service commissions. They have become a law in the Constitution; they are supposed to be independent.  But they are now becoming too independent of the national public service commission. I have noted with concern, especially in my own district, that people who have been interdicted elsewhere in the public service are now being recruited by the district service commission. A person has been fired for misuse of public resources by IGG report and everybody is agreeing he should have been prosecuted, instead Busia District Service Commission has employed the same person. This was the financial officer who literally embezzled resources in the district, he was fired then he went to the town council of Busia and he was recruited as the town treasurer. Now, this kind of situation really defies my understanding. Why do we make these people so independent that they can defy the order of the day? This is a serious matter. (Interruption) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I think the report we have on the Floor has already indicated that some district governments refused to take advice tendered genuinely by the central government, and that there is a need to amend the Local Government Act to make sure that tendered advice is taken. I think this is one of the areas the honourable Member is pointing out. We are already aware and we will address that problem. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up hon. Awori.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to express my gratitude to the honourable colleague in charge of local administration, but he is aware of the problem. Being aware is not curing the problem.  He could be aware of it one year, two years until it becomes a culture of awareness. So, I hope you will do something about it.  

My concern is this question - maybe it has been exhaustively dealt with - of selective salary increments. As I speak now, the vice chancellors of public tertiary institutions are in a meeting with His Excellency, the President on the account of this pledge of increment of salaries of the tertiary institutions lecturers or academic staff.  

According to my intelligence, the same issue of pledge - notwithstanding the minister’s assurance that he has been aware of these negotiations and talks between various institutions and the President. I am beginning to wonder because I have confidence in the intelligence of the President. There is no way he can be talking like that after consulting the relevant minister who is the Minister of Finance. Definitely, there has been a minimum consultation because the guidelines that the President normally uses on these issues seem to be totally oblivious of the situation that the minister is talking about.

Madam Speaker, last but not least, the RDCs. The RDCs should be subjected to some kind of order.  They must be subjected to some kind of public service order. These people should either be politicians, cadres of the Movement or the party, mobilisers of the President or public servants.  They cannot keep floating between the two sectors.  When you pin them down, they plead to the public servants; when they want to do mischief, they become mobilisers and cadres of the Movement. This matter must be rectified. The Constitution is very clear on the qualifications but again the appointing authority has been oblivious of that.

I took up this matter with the committee, with the President himself and I said, “Mr President, you decide. Should these people be public servants, subject to public service code of conduct or should they be political agents responsible to you and you alone?” He said, “I prefer the latter. I want mobilisers, I want cadres, I do not want these civil servants who will be doing all kinds of things not obeying me.” So, Madam Speaker, we either revisit the Constitution on the matter of the RDCs or we force them to abide by the public service code of conduct. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.15
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As one of the Members of Parliament who represent Kampala, let me begin from the very start to express concern over the delay of the report, which we have been expecting on Kampala. It was supposed to be produced by the Committee on Local Government. So, before we pronounce ourselves on this report, they must have said something or else I will mobilise so that no report is passed.  

Madam Speaker, my concerns are three.  One is about the equalization grant and then the pension and the capacity building within the local governments. Madam Speaker, let us be open, from year to year, since I came to this Parliament, in every report of the Local Government Committee on Budget, there is a provision on equalization grant. Let the minister tell me whether practically that grant is functional.  The amount of money associated to it is so negligible that nobody should talk about it, and it is unfortunate that we go on playing about it from report to report.  We are just cheating the people we are representing.  We should talk about realities in terms of practicality.  Otherwise, I am unhappy to see this contention from report to report.  

Madam Speaker, the pension scheme. I have been listening very attentively about proposals related to pensions.  Nearly every Member of Parliament is saying something on pension. As if that was not enough, I would have expected some one to talk about the welfare society. How do we guarantee a welfare society in Uganda? How do we guarantee a pension scheme in Uganda?   I want to advise the Government on how we can guarantee a pension scheme.  One, we need to guarantee good democratic governance so that people stop going to the wars.  We need to guarantee the equal distribution of the national cake so that every part of Uganda is generally covered whenever we mention the word “a national cake”, include Karamoja and other places in northern Uganda.

Today the Government of Uganda should feel ashamed for not understanding what I am talking about because we have a Ministry in charge of northern Uganda, for what perspectives?  We have the Ministry in charge of Karamoja, what specifically?  We have the Ministry in Charge of Luweero, what do you do when you cannot address the vanilla scenario?  These are the issues –(Interruption)

 MS AKELLO GRACE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank my hon. brother, Ken Lukyamuzi, for giving way.  I think he just wanted to provoke me to remind this House of how much the Government of Uganda is putting in northern Uganda at the moment.  Perhaps he had forgotten that the last time I stood up to speak here, I said that under NUSAF alone, the Government of Uganda has put nearly UShs200 billion into poverty eradication programmes for northern Uganda. Out of this now, I can say very confidently that once the people had understood the concept of NUSAF, Government actually disbursed UShs200 billion to northern Uganda. Now that the people have understood the concept of NUSAF, they have already accessed UShs13 billion.  

Now under Karamoja, Government of Uganda put in place a Karamoja project implementation unit where there is UShs 10 billion for Karamoja alone for the three districts of Karamoja. In addition to that, we also have in the Acholi area another project worth UShs12 billion for the north.  That is the north that he is talking about. So the Government of Uganda is doing quite a lot for the north.

MR AWORI: I am seeking clarification from my honourable colleague in charge of the north on the matters pertaining to NUSAF. How much money has been borrowed from that account by state House, and has it been refunded?

 MR SABIITI: How can the honourable member quote figures without doing a comparative analysis? If the whole of northern Uganda gets UShs 200 billion, have you looked at other regions? I want you to tell me a given period when this money has gone to the northern Uganda and it has done anything, and then during the same period look at other areas- because you are talking about money which is already on the budget, but we are no longer talking about poverty in that part of the world - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just realized that the question of Karamoja and the question of NUSAF are matters that are covered by the committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, which is sitting in the afternoon.  Can you hold your fire until afternoon so that we can finish the report on public service and the others?

MR SABIITI: I agree with you, Madam Speaker, but I would request her to give a comparative analysis of how much money is given in all the regions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think she is on notice between now and the afternoon; she will do the needful.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, in regard to my celebrated Friend, hon. Grace Akello, the concern of John Ken Lukyamuzi is not how much you inject in northern Uganda. My concern is, does that money reach the grassroots?  So, you may be talking about billions of shillings but does that money reach the grassroots? I was trying to make a contribution on the dynamics of how that money can best reach the people through a federal arrangement.  Otherwise, my perception is why do you talk about northern Uganda as a specific arena?  Why do you talk about Karamoja as a specific arena, and why do you talk about Luweero as a specific arena?  Talking about those in separate terms indicates a special need for services to be addressed onto those areas.  

Madam Speaker, if the Committee on Local Government had read the Constitution, namely, The National Objectives of State Policy, 11(iii), I would have expected them to produce greater recommendations to improve the aspect of capacity building within Local Government. With your permission, Madam Speaker, permit me to read that provision verbatim, it is National State Policy, 111(iii): “The State shall be guided by the principal of decentralization and devolution of government functions and powers to the people at appropriate levels where they can best manage and direct their own affairs.”  

There is something lacking in the present malaise of local government management.  What is lacking?  You are talking about equalization grants; you are talking about infrastructure and capacity building.  How do you ensure that those infrastructure and details attached to them are brought on board when you do not have any viability in terms of economics and politics? I am going to articulate this as I wind up my presentation.

Madam Speaker, take for example the case of resident district commissioners (RDCs). I expect this House when the appropriate time comes to support a greater mechanism, which will encourage and strengthen capacity among districts, and this will be the federal arrangement.  

For example, let us take Buganda, we have 12 districts in each district, we have an RDC, how much money is being spent on the RDCs and their deputies, a lot of money.  Take the case of Buganda again, you have a tender board in each district, suppose we brought power onto the region there would be no need for the districts to run their own separate tender boards because that would be capacity building.  

So, I expect the Chairperson Local Government Committee to appreciate the issues when he summarizes his report. I am talking about the terms of capacity building.  Otherwise, Madam Speaker, my worry is that until we develop an infrastructure, which is viable economically and politically, we may not shoulder any responsibility.  

For example, the honourable member from Sembabule talked about a salary of UShs500,000 for the Chairperson LCV.  There are greater disappointments; I do not know what Kanungu gets.  But the point we are now advocating is if we are to build capacity so that we get infrastructure we would also be able to phase out the cheating mechanism going on in local governments.  

Most of the schools, latrines and the clinics they build fall down in a matter of time.  Why, because there is no capacity to ensure that those people do what they are expected to do.  How do you ensure they have the capacity, they need a small Parliament.  A place like Karamoja requires a small Parliament to supervise and administer security. They also need the guns; disarmament is not useful to them. But how do you ensure that the guns are well used through a small government in Karamoja not a government in Entebbe or Kampala.  So, that is a matter of great importance.

But before I wind up there is one aspect, Madam Speaker, which is in connection with what hon. Sabiiti alluded to, which should be mentioned here.  When we talk about capacity building, in the case of Kigezi, we have salient points to be addressed.  The argument now is every year Kigezi produces money amounting to $320 million related to Mugahinga, Bwindi National Park and other tourist ventures.  

The argument in a federal scenario is, suppose $200 million went to the centre and $20 million remained in Kigezi, given five years, Kigezi would be able to internationally borrow and improve the scales of production; so that the people in Rukiga and elsewhere in Kigezi improve.  You do not have to be Muganda to know what those people are entitled to.  This is the argument I am trying to bring on board, and I should be supported, Madam Speaker.  Thank you very much.  

1.27
MRS MINDRA EUGENIA (Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to air my views.  I very much thank the committee for the report well presented.  I have a few points to express. 

One the issue of pension - by the way I am a pensioner so I am very much concerned about the plight of pensioners.  I may be one of those who is a bit lucky because I am on the monthly payroll but my gratuity is still pending.  But my colleagues in the village are suffering because many of them are not getting access to the pension.  Many of them take a lot of pain to come to the Ministry of Public Service to present their claims, or when their claims are sent by a representative from the district they are thrown back.  

I would urge the Ministry of Public Service to once more send clear information to the pensioners and the offices concerned so that they know exactly how they can claim their pension.

I was very much disheartened to hear from the Minister of Finance that the issue of the arrears for the pensioners will be handled in the next financial year.  I believe that will be in 15 to 20 months time or even more.  I know that last financial year we were told that the issue of the pensioners will be handled this financial year, but now it has been pushed again for another 20 months.  I am very much worried about that. 

I would like this House, the Ministry of Public Service and Minister of Finance to know –I would like to emphasis this- that pensioners are a vulnerable group.  They have a right to be paid their pension because they have served this country honourably for many years.  If they had not served well, they would not have deserved a pension.  So, we should not forget their services which they rendered to this country.  Therefore, their pensions must be paid with no further delay.  

The Ministry of Finance must find all ways of trying to get this money very soon.  I know it has the capacity to lobby for funds here and there; it has the capacity to try to change resources even within the country to be able to solve this issue.  Why do we not consider these people as people who deserve their pension?  These are weak people they may not have strong organizations like trade unions to come forward to vehemently present their claims, but I think if we prolong the time to pay their pension; they may be tempted to take stronger measures by forming a strong group. We have noticed that it is only by coming out in strong groups that the Government considers payment of such monies that we deserve.  

I am also happy to learn that the Minister of Public Service is working out a pension reform scheme.  How soon will that be?  What category of officers or civil servants will it affect?  I believe everyday there are people who are reaching their limit of retirement, and every now and then you are recruiting new people.  I would like clarification from the minister concerned to tell us exactly when this reform scheme will start.  As soon as it is out the civil servants who will deserve this pension should be informed so that they are aware of what they are expecting.

Officers in acting positions in civil service are left to act for very long period and that is the time when some of the officers usurp their powers.  They will use all their power to do what is within their limit to enrich themselves by fiddling with Government funds.  This period of acting in position of responsibility should be shortened.  I have also known of cases where the cases last for as long as two years.  This is not good because it gives stress to the officers concerned.  Their issues must be solved within the shortest possible period.  

Some of Officers in local government lack the capacity to handle their duties. So, I urge the Ministry of Local Government to continuously carry out the sensitisation period on capacity building.  It was mentioned in the report that some of them have got low educational standards.  Well, what to do?  Politically they were chosen so we cannot really completely get rid of them. 

A way must be found such that when these capacity building workshops are held, all must be involved.  What I have learnt from experience is that they always call certain categories, LC III chairpersons, councillors, and most of the time the people who carry out this responsibility like the LC I councillors are not really involved, and when you sensitise the higher cadre, they do not really go down to sensitise the other people within the system.  So, a better way of carrying out this workshop should be found out so that few mistakes are made.  

Now, the inspectorate role of the ministry has been rare.  So, sometimes things blow up in the district, there are wrangles, there are misunderstandings, and Officers from the Headquarters go as a last resort or crash programme and that is not really so good because by the time they go to solve this issue things have fallen apart.  So, the system must be improved so that such cases are rare.  

Unconditional and equalization grant, I am not very clear about the formula of this equalization grant, but all I have understood is that it does not really favour the small district because they say, “What do you have” and then they just put a bit of spices on top to say, “This is what we are giving you, you can walk up on them.”  I think a better formula should be found so that you can help the other districts that do not have a lot of riches and do not have resources to raise funds to manage their affairs.  I believe those are the weaknesses of decentralization, but they should be looked at favourably by the parent ministry.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.36
MR WILLIAM WOPUWA (Bubulo County East, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want, Madam Speaker, to thank the committee for their report.  I want to make my observations. I want the minister and the Chairman to take them in a good faith.  I was glad the minister mentioned that they are working on a programme to ensure that pension is paid.  But I wanted the minister when he is looking at it to consider that the staff who were retrenched in 1993 took Government to Court and they were awarded.  They won the case and were supposed to be paid, but the Ministry of Public Service connived with the Ministry of Finance and only paid the lawyers.  The majority of those people who have not died have not been paid.  They need also to go to Court in order to be paid.  

Now, we have also this reform scheme.  The pension reform scheme, which is being proposed, turns the majority of the civil servants against Government.  If you look at the people who are doing the paper work, all the permanent secretaries now apart from one, the Secretary, Health Service Commission, are retired.  So, they get the pension and annual gratuity - they have already got their lump sum - they are enjoying the benefits of the office.  But when the policy is implemented, it is going to disadvantage those public officers who are still in service, particularly those who are about to retire.  For example, the multiplier effect of 15 years makes one who is about to get 52 million to get lump sum gratuity of 30 million.  

Now, there is also this issue of the Pension Act of 2001, following the circular standing instruction No.6 of 1989.  Pension was revised upwards, but the implementation did not start until 2000/2001.  Now when it started being implemented it was suggested that you start from those who were born in 1900 to 1930.  Now, at the phase we are going, I am not even sure whether that category has all been paid because the problem with Public Service is that they have very poor public relations.  

I happened to go there one time – I am a pensioner who is not even getting pension because since 2003 my paper work is still being processed.  I was told that I was being impatient, but at my level, if that is the answer I am getting what about the many thousands who are upcountry?  That issue needs to be addressed because very many of our people are not being paid.  We have teachers who were transferred from Ministry of Education to Ministry of Public Service.  Now, an old man travels from upcountry to come - every time, there will be a document missing.  If it is not the registration certificate, it is a teaching licence; it is NS 14 or NS 7.  Now, you need to travel over 120 times before you get your pension paid.  In my view as a friendly force, I think the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service are doing much more – (Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I have clearly heard the member holding the Floor alluding to the fact that he is a friendly force in this House.  Could he clarify to us who are the hostile forces or enemy forces as we are all contributing to the building of this country?  Madam Speaker, can he clarify on that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, hon. member, I do not know whether he said there are enemy forces?  He is saying for him he is very friendly to the Minister for Public Service.  Now, what can I do about that?  (Applause).  Please, proceed.

MR WOPUWA: Thank you for your wise ruling, Madam Speaker.  The Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service need to take time and do a bit of investigation. I am concretely aware that while the salary arrears are missing there are selective payments of pension that take place almost every month.  When you are upcountry, you see many people looking for money to come and compromise people in accounts in order to get paid.  So, you need to carry out an investigation because it may not come out documentary, but there are people who are being selectively paid pension.  Those are the ones who are co-operating.  Now, I just wanted to make a few remarks on the issue –(Interruption)

MRS MUKIIBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The member holding the Floor is making very serious allegations.  My concern is can the member substantiate about this selective payment of pension? As far as I know any pensioner who is on our payroll is paid a monthly pension without any distinction, except when we do not have enough funds and we reschedule payment.  I would like to know more about this selective payment of pension.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, that is why I was saying the minister should investigate because it is a practice.  There is a co-operation between the Ministry of Finance, the Auditor General and the Ministry of Public Service.  But if you do not have facts and you have not believed me- Madam Speaker, I withdraw that statement.  But I thought it is being given –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, but I thought you are helping the pensioners of this country who are not you, because you said for you, you can speak.  But there are some in Kotido, others are in Mbulamuti; I thought you are helping the pensioners.  

MRS MUKIIBI: I am actually very interested in your statement and I would like you to help us.  Give us a minimum clue where we can start our investigation.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WAMBI KIBAALE: Madam speaker, I think hon. Wopuwa was being very kind and was trying to assist Government by saying he is a friendly force; he would like Government to know that certain things are happening within its precincts.  For sure, there are mal-practices in the pensions section.  We blow these whistles for your own attention and use your own mechanisms to find out where the problem is.  A clerical officer cannot build a mansion bigger than Parliament if there is no corruption.  There is one clerical officer who has built in one of the towns a hostel of about six stories.  Can you go to the office and investigate; this is true information.  Can I quote another one.  Madam Speaker, the truth is, apart from other good officers who are there- look at the office messenger working in the Ministry of Public Service in the pensions section -(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI:  Madam Speaker, the honourable. member said these are facts and yet he is saying they should be investigated.  If they are facts, they should be available for ready use.  It would mean if it is factual, it means he has evidence and he can supply that evidence readily.  Otherwise, if it is a matter for investigation those would be allegations. I wanted to get a clarification whether they are allegations or they are actually facts as he insists, and if so, could he be more helpful to the House. 

MR WAMBI KIBAALE: First of all, I do not know which side hon. Wagonda-Muguli is now; either is a friendly force or an enemy force to this House. As far as we are concerned whether they are facts or allegations we are giving indicators to our Government to find out what is going on. There is no smoke without fire.  Have you not ever heard a number of investigations by IGG about pension funds getting lost. Sometimes some of them are true and others are allegations, but currently they are new waves of corruption tendencies in that ministry.  They are very, very complicated as hon. Wopuwa has said there is connivance between the Ministry of Public Service; there is connivance in Ministry of Finance; there is connivance under the Auditor General’s office and other people.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable member holding the Floor.  Once an allocation has been made for a particular activity, say pensions or any other activity, it does not go to the ministries to determine how the disbursements are affected.  To say that there is connivance between officials of the Ministry of Finance and any particular official in any ministry would be to indicate that you do not know the Government procedures. We do not go to disbursements once we release funds in block to particular ministries.

LT KINOBE JAMES:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to give information to the hon. minister.  May be the statement gave a blanket impression that the entire ministry. But I want to tell him that there is an element of conniving between some officers within that department and the officers in the receiving ends. 

There is a case which involved one cashier in Luwero, Docus Nabatanzi, a cheque was UShs82 million for pensions. It was supposed to have been paid in the bank but it was opened by the CAO. The time this cheque was opened and the time the money was received was less than 48 hours; the money disappeared in thin air and nobody followed up.  When we followed up from the ministry, looking at vouchers, no competent finance officer would have approved that payment other than an aspect of some connivance.  So the cheque was raised on non-existent pensioners’ voucher and reached Luwero within less than 48 hours. The cashier was arrested but the cash was never retrieved and the girl spent about three years in prison without disclosing any person in the racket.  

So, I want to say that there is element of connivance. We should not give a blanket accusation on the entire ministry, but there is a problem in the pension schemes.  You find that they do not have money to pay genuine pensioners but such cheques that end up being investigated are paid.  

So, I would give you the lead, look at the IGGs reports, they have so many cases.  Come to my office, I have so many cases, if you want leads that can help you to investigate, but the aspect of connivance is very, very strong.  So, the process involves many other players, it involved Auditor General’s office, it involves finance and then the receiving end these are the officers who cash it.  So, I think other than defending it, just open your eyes there is problem somewhere.

MR WAMBI KIBAALE: I think that is enough information for the minister to follow up.  Thank you.

MR WOPUWA:  Madam Speaker, I just wanted to say something small on the issue of paying district chairpersons.  I do not understand the rationale of the ministry of Cabinet deciding that chairpersons are going to be paid UShs2 millions when they are not the ones going to pay it. The practice has been that chairpersons and councillors are paid from local revenue and that is why the amount was different.  You will find the one of Kalangala getting Shs200,000; the one of Kampala city council getting UShs2 million.  Now, if the position is UShs.2 million for all of them, and it is tied to the local revenue, which has reduced drastically, what is the rationale of you deciding to pay yet you are not going to pay.  What about the disturbed areas? How are they going to raise revenue to pay them?  

I am glad, hon. Aggrey Awori was talking about this social service becoming independent.  My view is that the ones in my place have committees of the executive.  Now the two dimensions are different, when they become too independent they take good decisions, but sometimes they take bad decisions.  Now when they become appended to the executive, they begin operating under the general directives of the executive and the chairman and as a result you have a number of officers losing out because they are not friendly.  Now, I was whispering to the minister, Madam Speaker, that why do we have a lot more conflicts now than before? Since honourable member became a minister conflicts in districts have increased.  Is he helping or is increasing? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.51
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere):  First of all, Madam Speaker, the chairmen are urging for themselves and not any other person wanted to be paid from the centre. Their representative who is Mr Otekat still urges that they should be paid from the consolidated fund.  Now you know who qualifies to get money from a consolidated fund, and if Government allowed that to happen, it would mean chairpersons would be the ones to be paid from the consolidated fund like Judges and constitutional bodies.  We looked at this as a Government and saw that this was not tenable.  In fact, the chairpersons would have difficulties in running their districts.  

Secondly, the issue of a minimum did arise because when the current situation that obtains sales, 20 per cent of the money on the basis of the previous year is what is allowed for their allowances -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. minister, I do not know whether you are responding only to Mr Wopuwa, because you are going to respond to these questions in the afternoon–(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Okay, let me leave that for the time being.  But he was purporting that there are more conflicts now in local government than before I became a minister.  Let me assure this House and hon. Wopuwa- he was a Chief Administrative Officer before I was appointed minister- that the probable conflicts that he had there in Mbale were certainly before I was appointed.  Now, the bases of conflicts in the districts run around use and the sharing of money; there are also political conflicts.   There are many conflicts, Kabwegyere or not Kabwegyere, they have been there and even when I have left the ministry they will be there.  So, the issue in a note I wrote to him was that, even if you imagine there was peace, peace does not mean absence of problems.  The fact that I am addressing these problems now and addressing them thoroughly, he now hears of them more than before.

1.55
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to make few observations about the paper, which has just been presented.  First, I would like to join my colleagues to thank the committee for a job well done. 

One issue I want to comment on is keeping people in acting capacities for long time.  This situation does not encourage the civil servants to work.  When you are in an acting position you fear to take decisions and organizations are propelled by the decisions taken on the daily basis.  So, I think this issue should be checked so that the body concerned with recruitment in civil service carries out its work and offices are properly filled.  

The other issue is conflicts in local governments.  The minister is already aware that these conflicts are very numerous.  If the conflicts are there because of a bad law, which was passed, why do we not amendment the Act so that we block the areas, which are causing these conflicts?  I remember a case in Kabale when the Chairman LC IV lost a case.  He was supposed to vacate an office; he did not and the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government, wrote to him advising him to vacate. The chairman who had lost the office said he was prepared to leave the office because it is the Permanent Secretary who had put him in the office. We thought that was a disobedient on the part of the Chairman LC IV who had lost the office.  

Procurement, Madam Speaker, this issue has been talked over and over again -(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much Madam Speaker and my colleague for giving way.  Actually, before you left that point of conflict in law - there is a contradiction between Public Finance and Accountability Act and Local Government Act. One talks of the Chief Administrative Officer being the accounting Officer, and another talks of a substantive Chief of Administrative Officer who is not appointed as accounting Officer.  As hon. Wopuwa said, we have all these sort of conflicts in eastern region - Tororo, Mbale, Kapchorwa, Pallisa, mention it.  



What is happening, hon. minister?  Are we really comfortable where we are sending colossal sums of money with issues pending unsolved and whereby you know that either your Permanent Secretary would direct, and you are pushing the matter to local governments to take a decision so that these accounts, if they are thrown out, they sue the local governments so that they pay colossal sums of money.  We would want the Ministry of Local Government to come out clearly and solve some of these issues.  It is not a question of personalising.  Madam Speaker, I thought if it is a question of amending the law, why can’t this law come to Parliament so that we amend it; we are here.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much for that point of information.  I can actually reinforce your point of information by reading Article 188(2) in the Constitution; “The Chief Administrative Officer shall be appointed by the District Service Commission and shall be the Chief Accounting Officer for the district.”  How come now you leave this law and you appoint the deputy to be an accounting Officer as is the case in Tororo district and Mbale municipality?  I understand in Mbale municipality they are waiting for this acting Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) to mature so that when they advertise the post, this Chief of Administrative Officer can take the job.  With this certainly, you are not going to bring about harmony in the organisation.  

I am now on point three concerning procurement.  We read in papers how tender boards allocated tenders.  There was a case in Kabale where the chairman called for a meeting to award tenders, but before they entered the council room some members were saying, “Mr chairman, we better go back, we have already awarded the tender.”  The Chairman said, “I am the chairman who convened the meeting, and I have not sat in the chair to discuss the tenders.”  But that, of course, was the beginning of the conflict and you may have read in the papers. This Chairman of the Tender Board was fired; we did some politicking and this issue was a bit resolved.  The question of the tender boards working directly with the Chairpersons LC V to award tenders before the tender board meets is very common.  I was in Adjumani in March and this thing was also revealed.  They said the worst culprit in messing up these tender awarding is the Chairman LC v so that one can be investigated.

Another point I want to comment on is remuneration of chairpersons, which my colleague has already talked about.  Where are they expected to get money?  They are on a drip when they are paying UShs 500,000, now you are recommending UShs2 million.  How shall we get this money?  Another point is on –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, you know I have been listening to that particular point with some interest. Are you really suggesting that there should be 100 per cent spoon feeding and the district should not try to generate any money?  

MR TIBARIMBASA: I want to come to that later because the minister said he has shown the districts how to make money. I want him to tell us what he has put in place to enable these districts make money -(Interjections)- let me finish.  

Another point is on declining local revenue, and a case quoted in the report was on the boda boda. Madam Speaker, I read a document which is normally signed by the ministers after the budget. The former Minister of Local Government, Mr Bidandi Ssali, passed a ministerial statutory instrument creating a fee for these boda boda owners.  I was surprised to read in the report that the boda boda fee was not actually fixed by some authority. If you read in the statutory instrument of last year, Mr Bidandi Ssali had recommended that there should be a fee charged for the boda boda owners. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of RDCs has to be clarified. Do they belong to the NRM secretariat or presidency, because that tends to affect their operations? 

Last but not the least, the CAO, why can’t these CAOs get appointed from centres. If these CAO’s were to be appointed from the centre the conflicts at district level would reduce.  Madam speaker, I do not know whether you have heard that? (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I was consulting the Clerk about time.

MR TIBARIMBASA: I can repeat it for your benefit. The CAOs if they were to be appointed from the centre that would mean reviewing the Act. It would reduce on the conflicts because the local authorities, the Chairman, LCV and the councillors, submerge these CAOs. So this person works as a stooge; he was a CAO, he is here. He can –(Interjection)  

I am left with two points. Another point is on graduated tax and the way forward.  The committee sensibly put it in its report that this tax is supposed to be abolished with the beginning of 2005/2006. I have not seen anything in this report trying to advise how the gap will be filled. How will these local governments, which have been depending on this graduated tax, meet the obligations in their districts?  I think we needed some clarifications there. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the Chairman of this committee said he was repeating the recommendations of last year. This pains me very much. I have sat in this House for three years and two months but the question of follow-up defeats me. Some of us who had worked in institutions where you decide and implement issues we get lost. The recommendations were made last year, the committee reported to the House and Parliament passed these recommendations and up to now they are not acted upon. Who is supposed to be blamed? 

Madam Speaker, you also remember very well that members of the frontbench would say, “This has come, but we are not ready. We are going to consult and bring a report to the House.” These reports have never come. The other time Mabiike was beaten in Kabale, a report was supposed to read before this House, that was in November last year, nothing has come.  RDC Bugiri’s report is supposed to read before this House, nothing has come. My brother Mukula, his problem of masters, the Prime Minister told us a report was supposed to be brought before this house, nothing has come.  

Recently there was a report about abolition of four NTCs and hon. Kagonyera told us he was going to consult a somebody, he would come back, nothing has come.  Now who is supposed to follow-up these issues, is it the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, is it the Leader of Government Business, is it the Speaker? We want to be educated.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, today I will say what I have not wanted to say. Since last week I have been saying there are certain committees of this House that have failed us.  There are committees that are supposed to follow-up on these recommendations every year.  I want you to look at the standing committees of this House, look at their terms of reference and we shall identify who is not doing their work.  Committee on Government Assurances, what are they doing, where are the reports? These are the things they should be doing, harassing the Leader of Government Business. But they sit back; the leader of Government Business sits back then when the sessional committees come here with their budget that is when everybody wants everything solved on the Floor of this House. Yes, now I have put it on record that some committees have not done their work.

DR KAPKWOMU KAPKOMU (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I join my colleagues in thanking the chairman and the committee for what they have properly researched.  I believe our staying on this document for at least more than 48 hours has made us carry out some research.  

Madam Speaker, about three to four years ago if you wanted to see old age in Uganda you would just walk to Ministry of Public Service particularly on the side of the pensions section. You would actually see walking sticks of all categories, very thick eye glasses of all categories, so many torn gomesis; people being pushed up and down trying to seek assistance from the pensions section.  I thank the Ministry for computerizing the section. The workload has been reduced we do not see most of the old age there now; you just go there for consultation.  I thank you very much.  

Now this gives us a bit of homework when we are winding up the debate tabled by hon. Dora Byamukama. The Minister of Public Service assured us they were going to look for money and requested that as soon as they presented the request to Parliament let us pass it very quickly.  We have been assuring people that this financial year they will get the money.  I do not know may be the minister can give some clarification now that it is being pushed to next financial year.  Just two weeks ago, I was processing somebody’s pension and I was told by one of those officers to hold on until October or November when we have passed the budget.  Now, what will I tell these people who I have been misguiding that their pension is going to be in October or November?

On Tender Boards, there is nothing much we can do for now because everything is political. But I may request that something from the centre be done as far as supervision is concerned. What hon. Kayongo was telling us last week about a school building collapsing in Kampala is really going to be repeated elsewhere in country, I am sure.  They say these funds are going into the bush, not much is really being utilized in such a manner; contractors are paid full amount of money of the contract, they are to construct classroom blocks, office blocks and desks. One goes away having constructed only classroom blocks –(Interruption)

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way.  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to come in regarding construction of classrooms. Actually the report has not come up with the recommendation on procurement. We have a lot of problems as far as awarding contract tenders is concerned. In my area, Mukono District, we have got classrooms constructed by the district or by contractors by the district. We also have classrooms constructed by the World Vision. When you look at the costs, those constructed by the World Vision are cheaper than those constructed by the district contractors. But one of the classroom blocks, which was completed in one of the schools, cannot be used. We are now fundraising so that we cement the floor because the floor has gone bad, before it is even occupied.  

So, I think we should come up with a statement on the procurement procedures in the district. When we were passing the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Bill, we refused to bring in the idea of the third party, but I am sure we cannot get a good procurement unit in all the 56 districts that can provide proper terms of reference. I suggest that the committee should come up with a recommendation on procurement at the districts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mugambe, you are suggesting that you are actually aiding and abetting the commission of an offence in your district?  You are actually aiding and abetting by fundraising to complete a building, which a contractor failed to complete? 

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am only telling you the gravity of the matter; that those classrooms - because the Local Councils tried to intervene in the matter, but they were told, “That is beyond you”. In some cases the documents are not clear as to how the awards were given. There is a practice that the contractor must come from the local area; they say it is a Government policy so that money remains with the people in the area.  

MR KAPKWOMU: I thank you, colleague, for the information. The other time the Minister of state for Primary Education went to Kapchorwa on appointment with the District Council and randomly selected some four Primary Schools under construction.  What the district selected was their best, but to the dismay of the Minister and her technical staff from the Ministry headquarters it was really shoddy work and yet certificates had been issued.  That is something very miserable, and I pray that the centre really takes some tougher action against that.

On graduated tax, I highly support the suspension for 10 years as proposed by His Excellency, the President, and adopt the recommendation by the Local Government Finance Commission on page 30 of the report, that an alternative be put in place.  Right across the border in my constituency is the Republic of Kenya. They do not have graduated tax and they are surviving. So, why don’t we borrow a leaf from our brothers, the Kenyans and the Tanzanians who are not paying this tax, even if it means putting it in the essential commodities, Ugandans still find Kenyan salt cheaper and yet it is taxed. Why don’t we go to luxuries like Bell? We can at least raise some more tax from there and have these taxpayers relieved of this pain.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much. In fact I have got a chance, you see this tax, Madam Speaker, one time they reported in Bugiri, there was a man who was shot dead because they were following up this tax. There is also a man in Masaka whose eye was destroyed because of this tax. Recently someone drowned because they were following him up for tax.  Madam Speaker, even in my constituency, the way this tax is collected is very brutal. What is the Minister saying about the brutality? Thank you very much.

MR KAPKWOMU: Thank you, hon. Colleague; you have given the reasons I was going to give for suspending this tax for 10 years. The other reason why the tax is unfair is that people pay the taxes and they do not see the graduated tax tickets physically, and yet the money is already collected by the chief, only that the Chief knows that this man paid so he cannot be harassed. So, at times people get annoyed; they pay the taxes, they do not see the services, the money is consumed at source. A sub-county chief builds a mansion while the taxpayer is looking on; the CAO is building mansions, while the taxpayer has nothing on ground.  So, I would definitely support the suspension.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: I would like the hon. Member to tell us how they are going to suspend the law.   

MR KAPKWOMU: Madam Speaker, laws are made by man and they are changed by man. They are made here and they can be changed here. (Applause) So, that issue actually should be looked into by the – Madam Speaker, may you protect me please?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow hon. Kapkwomu to make his contribution.

MR KAPKWOMU: On the appointments and promotions, the districts have taken a lot of their privilege.  A person, on completing probation after two years, is promoted to a senior post, a few months after that promoted to Principal in that post, without much experience really. We are producing civil servants, who are not of quality, but as someone has said, they are manipulated by the politicians.  You get somebody after three years in service earning a salary at scale of U1, and there are so many of them! Where are we leading this country to?  So, I propose that something be done by - and even discipline; you get a CAO disciplining a civil servant mercilessly, interdicting mercilessly without even following the proper order. So, such a thing should actually be controlled from the centre.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. 


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will suspend the House until 3.30 p.m. to enable us to complete this report of Local Government and proceed to the report on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. 

(The House was suspended at 2.18) 

(On resumption at 3.42 _)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will ask the Minister of Local Government to respond.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Madam Speaker, I would like, whole-heartedly, to thank the committee for a job well done. I enjoyed our discussions with them and the report is very reflective of what went on.  

Very quickly, Madam Speaker, in the report under 4.2.1. The Issue of value for money: I am sure everybody present knows that we are still trying to establish value for money audit as a system of getting the money’s worthy. So there is nobody yet in this country that is operating on the basis of value for money. This is not just an ordinary accounting or auditing, it is more than I can explicate in the time I have, but that all of us really want to have it in place so that we maximize on the value of everything that we get.

National Policy on Capacity building in Local Governments: Madam Speaker, the draft is ready, we are just waiting for a few things and we have it discussed. It is important for the implementation of decentralization, the deepening of decentralization that we have a clear policy on capacity building. One little point I want to make is that capacity building is not the finite process. You build a capacity for a child in primary one to do numeracy. On that basis, you have got to build another capacity for reading and for doing other things in preparation for P.2 and you continue capacity building. Madam Speaker, the mood that is in this House, given so many of us in classrooms and so on, shows that capacity building is a continuous process.

Yes, the Rating Bill is due to be discussed and I am looking to having that source for local government financing because rates are known to be more reliable than graduated tax, because a rate is specifically rated to a value. 

Accountability: Madam Speaker, accountability is a problem we must face squarely and its quest for a very long time. The districts are handling large quantities of money delivered from the centre and the capacity to account must be built, and we are really trying to do that in the Ministry of Local Government. 

So I agree, we need to work hard to make sure that the capacity to account for money is undertaken. But I also want us to realize that accountability is related to social development. A sense of guilt has to be established in those who account, those who handle funds on behalf of the public. There is still a prevailing relief that public funds can be stolen without committing a sin. One of my messages in the 50 districts I have visited so far is, please, if you are a Christian, if you are a Moslem, if you steal public money, it is a sin, you cannot go to heaven, you will go to hell because it is public money; it is your money, it is the money of the public, you steal it, it is a sin.  

Restructuring Local Governments: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Local Government in collaboration with the Ministry of Public Service are due to discuss, it is already on the agenda. I am sure this Wednesday, if we do not have any interruption, we should have that paper cleared by Cabinet and then the policy implemented thereafter.

Participatory development planning at lower local government levels: Madam Speaker, this is so important that decentralization must now take on in bigger measure the role of transforming the economy, because the first two elements existing in decentralization are the administration, good governance so to speak, and economic transformation. And I would like to tell the House that participatory planning will deliver development. I am hoping that this will be achieved in the short time. This is in consonance with the efforts the President has been making with zoning; this is in consonant with the out cry that we must transform the economy through modernization of agriculture, through all means possible, so that the economy can yield more for us to improve our welfare.  

Madam Speaker, hon. Wopuwa said that there were more conflicts in Local Government now than before I went in. That is a very interesting commentary, because if you look at my policy statement, on page 28, under (4), “Conflicts in Local Government” and interestingly enough, I am sure the hon. Member read it; I said the following:

“The performance of some local governments was unduly marred by unprincipled conflicts, occasioned by different interpretations of the law”.  

That is one area, which has generated a lot of conflicts locally. Some local governments choose to interpret the law in their favour for selfish motives even against the advice from the ministry.  I have found on record the so many advices that Government has given to local governments, which were not taken. This was the case with Mubende, Mbale, Kitgum, Kamwenge and Mukono. In fact the President soon after I was appointed said, “Come to Mukono with me. Just go there and announce that if you are a CAO and you have taken money, whether this money is back from the Electoral Commission, or from …” - As the case was, the local leadership was saying “For us it is good, the money is supposed to have been squandered, it has to do with Electoral Commission”. He had to stand up and say, “Look, you cannot steal my brother’s cows and you expect me to employ you as my herdsman”. 

So, Electoral Commission money is public money, but the Mukono leaders were saying, “He is our man, we like him.” 

This issue of saying a sin here is does not affect this person and so on. The whole of that page talks about exactly the problems, which we have had in Mubende, Tororo, Mpigi, and different problems that we have had in Kamwenge and so on. 

So, the issue of conflicts arise out of the misinterpretation of the law, they arise out of quarrelling over contracts; they arise out of personality conflicts.  

Madam Speaker, I have been involved even in separating a chairperson from a vice-chairperson, a speaker from the chairman. Some of them even have private problems of girlfriend relationship type.  So, the conflicts in the districts have many causes, certainly not my presence in the Ministry of Local Government. 

Physical Planning: Yes, we need to do this. I am sure all of us know from the mushrooming trading centres, even the existing towns, how planning must be improved. The question of where the country and urban planning is located is something that we in Government are looking into, because it would appear, if I did not want to claim anything, better located in the Ministry of Local Government so that we can relate to it a bit more directly than we are doing.

Madam Speaker, procurement was a problem in the Central Government. I do not know whether that problem has been cured by the new law of decentralised procurement. Procurement, as we know, is buying services, goods, materials, and as the committee pointed out, more than 60 percent of the money we are sending to the districts ends up being absorbed through procurement. 

I call on the Members of Parliament as I have called on the leadership of the districts, that we have to have our eyes open. If we check in our own constituencies and we are able to check where the classroom, a dispensary has been put up, which road has been constructed, we would be part of that watchdog mechanism to ensure that we get what we deserve. 

As we talk now, the relationship between the sub-county and a district is beginning to be obviously problematic because the decisions of procurement are being made at the district level and the sub-counties are receiving decisions already made. They do not participate even in supervising and yet these projects are in their area. So, we are beginning to see whether the sub-counties could not be involved a bit more than they are being involved now so that before a certificate of completion is given, at least the local leadership in the sub-country has some comment. But this again has to do with the further capacitation of the leadership at the sub-county. 

One of the points I have been raising with the leadership in the districts is that, please, let us all watch out; let the public watch out. This business of saying there are supervisors - The problem is that in awarding contracts, the team that is supposed to go and supervise the work has been involved in the evaluating of the contract; they are the technical personnel in recommending the tender boards. In fact, in some cases when I meet many of them, the tender boards complained and you could understand because a lot of the technical input is made by the technical people. These are the ones who say, “This is the right thing for you to base your award scores on”. Probably if they have also been part of the contracts, then it becomes problematic. This area is being studied thoroughly. I am hoping that we will get the problems reduced. 

“Those who are interested in contracts should leave politics” – Perhaps and leave contract - but I also want to point out that in some districts, also some of us in this House get involved and sometimes also do shoddy work, though I do not want to be specific.  

On the question of remuneration of different leadership, hon. Wopuwa and one or two others said, “Why set a minimum when you are not paying?” A very good question, but two things need to be understood. One is that in the current law, we put a figure of 20 percent based on the year before collection of taxes to be the amount you use for salaries and allowances for political leaders.  So, 20 percent only is what you use for those allowances. If there is no procedure of how this chairperson can get a share of it, what we have been having is put on the table the 20 percent and all in the Council decides on how it is allocated.  So, the chairman, who is the president of the district, has no way he could give himself any fairer amount and yet we know that he covers the whole district; he is full time, he attends funerals, weddings; he is the symbol of the district. 

So, in deciding on the minimum, it is simply to guarantee him a figure, which we thought was reasonable. This figure can be adjusted from time to time. The district chairpersons had a legitimate problem and he wanted it solved. Their demand was; “Let the Government pay us from the centre so that we do not have to compete for the little money that is in the district.” He talked on their behalf; they were talking on behalf of the chairpersons only.  

For us as a parent Government, we sat down and saw that if you isolated the chairpersons and you paid them from the centre and they had been pushing to be paid from the Consolidated Fund, which as we know is a different problem. The judges and the specialized bodies are the ones who get their money directly from the Consolidated Fund, and in this case the chairpersons wanted to be paid from the Consolidated Fund.  

Having looked at their genuine problem, we set a minimum, which is now set for all the other categories, all the way up to LC III. The details are being worked out and will be announced very soon. Consultations are with Public Service and Finance so that we can give a figure that is within the law.  

Will it be found in the Local Government? The answer is yes.  If they have been using 20 percent one possibility is we can increase the powers, instead of using 20 per cent we use 30. If we find that that is not enough, we could go to 40 per cent of the money collected by the districts and the reasons why the money should come from the district are two.  

One, as I was saying earlier own, please milk a cow you have watered, you have fed and you have taken to mate and you have waited for the nine months for it to deliver so that you to milk it. The leadership in the district is supposed to participate in generating growth, in helping transform the economy, therefore, they must participate in generating the money out of which they will get their rewards. 

Point two, decentralization is actually saying, “Go, you have powers to look after yourselves”. If the district leadership becomes an employee of the Central Government, I think it will defeat the essence of decentralization. I have tried to communicate this to some people in the local governments but they have seen it only simply in terms of the money. Decentralization simply means you really have power to look after yourself.  I do believe myself that time will come when the districts will generate enough money to look after themselves and meet their own needs. 
This is not an impossibility. In Zimbabwe people leave the Central Government to go and work in the Local Government because the Local Government is better paying.  Why, because Local Government has all these developed economies and they generate money.  They only borrow at most 14 percent from the Central Government and they even pay back. So, this is possible and I believe that that is the target we must aim at rather than believing that we shall depend on the centre – (Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, I accept the point, which the Minister is articulating, that decentralization becoming independent and means getting responsibility. What I would like to be clarified, by the Minister is whether he has really gone round the 50 districts which he has so far visited and he has seen that have got the possibility and the opportunity to actually create wealth so that they can eventually pay themselves.  Has he actually in those 55 districts which he has visited – I am sure Kamuli is not one of them –really pointed out to those people that there are opportunity a, b, c, d up to z which you leaders can exploit so that the money comes out of the soil, or the lakes or the air? Could I be clarified Madam Speaker?  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the reason why a district is created is that it can survive financially; this is the standard. A study is done to find out whether a district or the applicant to be a district is capable of surviving. We look at the sources of possible income, the potential, and so on. For this matter the honorable Member needs to be assured that the Ministry of Local Government is studying all the applications for districts with a view to finding out whether they are viable or not, and the matter will be brought to this House for final decision – (interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank Prof. Kabwegyere for giving way. The professor’s serious perception is that the present district is economically and politically viable. Noting that not even the equalization grant so far anticipated in the infrastructure is viable, is the Minister not deceiving us by assuming that we have any infrastructure under the district?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, if we start engaging in the issue of viability, we may even go to the extent of looking at Uganda as a viable state economically. If you are borrowing so much money to maintain yourself are you viable, but I do not want to go into that.  Certainly there is a minimum that must be available for a district to survive and even the bare minimum we seem to be having now, somebody may say it is not enough even to be called a minimum.  But that is what I would like to say so far.

The role of CAOs as returning officers: The committee claimed this as their proposal, but actually I am the one who raised it. I said that the Electoral Commission should have their own officers rather than rely on CAOs because of what we learnt over the years.  Certainly this is a very open recommendation and statement and it is agreeable. 

As far as I am concerned, the Electoral Commission should appoint its own staff. If they appoint a Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), but it should not be a policy that every CAO - Some of them may qualify on their merit, they may be picked, but it should not be a policy that every CAO becomes the returning officer.

Graduated tax: Madam Speaker, it is true and in fact, there is an error in the figures given on page 23 under 4.12. Yes, the collection of graduated tax had reached Shs 80 billion, then it declined to the current Shs 37.6 billion - Shs 47 billion is earlier than the current. 

Madam Speaker, I do not think I need to remind anybody here that graduated tax is a tax applicable to economies of the type we have. If everybody was employed formally, you do not need to go and count goats and banana trees, how many coffee trees to grade for payment of tax.  So, it is because we are where we are that we go to the citizens and try to get something out of them as a contribution to the running of our country.  

But we also know that people have to take to their own political career and promise that graduated tax will be abolished without giving an alternative.  Shs 80 billion, it was going up, it would have gone up if politics did not interfere.  It is now declining, has been declining not because the taxpayers have died, not because the taxpayers have become poorer, but someone or some people said, “Do not pay, we shall look after you free of charge.”  That is where the problem comes – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, the hon. colleague is making a statement, which has no relevance to the truth of the matter. When he alleges among other things that some people, and I am sure he is referring to my hon. colleagues, the Back Benchers, have said that graduated tax should be abolished without coming up with a proposal for replacement.  

Madam Speaker, my hon. colleague knows very well that we are as Back Benchers, inhibited by Article 93 of the Constitution. You cannot come up with a resolution of Parliament or a Private Member’s Bill that will create a burden on the Consolidated Fund in a way of administering that particular tax. Is he in order to insinuate that we are irresponsible when he knows very well that we are capable of coming up with alternatives bearing Article 93 of the Constitution?  Is he in order to imply that I am stupid, I cannot come up with an alternative?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members. The Minister said there are some people. I do not know whether they are in this House, whether they are gombolola chiefs, who has promised the public that they can live free. He has not said anybody; he did not identify anybody in this House. Are you the one who has promised people to a free ride? – (Interruption) 

MR AWORI: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In what capacity?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, as a candidate for the Presidency, I told the electorate that, should I become a President, there would be no graduated tax.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, since you are a good Ugandan, I think we can share your alternative sources with the Minister for Local Government.  Minister, please, continue.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is actually a Bill in this House presented on the abolition of graduated tax. Members were treated to a conference in Hotel Africana purportedly to agree on the abolition of graduated tax and it was attended by many members of this House. I have been in exchange of views with hon. Okulo Epak. He tabled a motion, the Bill is supposed to be discussed; but thanks to the possibility, as the hon. Member, Aggrey Awori, was raising, it is still there. It is supposed to be discussed, debated - abolishing graduated tax.

MR SABIITI: As the Back Benchers are trying to move a Private Members’ Bill to abolish graduated tax, at the same time His Excellency, the President has also issued a letter promising the people of this country that for the next 10 years, Ugandans will not pay graduated tax. May I know from the Minister, given this information, whether His Excellency, the President has already identified those sources of revenue?

Secondly, we Members of Parliament have stated here in this Parliament that the amount of money that goes to the centre is too much, and therefore this source we are talking about is to shift money from the centre to the Local Government and they will be able - If 60 percent was sent to the Local Governments, they will be able actually to pay their chairmen without any problem.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well, we were all here when the Budget was read and a clear statement was put in the Budget about graduated tax. The message was that this year graduated tax will be paid, that between now and the next financial year, a study will be carried out to establish how Local Government can be funded better than it has been and then a final position will be taken beginning with the new financial year.  

So, the issue of the President dismissing or suspending graduated tax for 10 years was before the statement in the Budget was made. Therefore, people who have these illusions that there is already a suspension for 10 years, should really put it to rest.  Numerous studies -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, this is a critical time when we are finalizing our debate on the Budget. When a whole Minister in charge of Local Government makes a statement, which contradicts the views of the head of state, what should one think? Either that minister should resign or he should re-state exactly what he is talking about. So, until the Minister of Local Government has clarified the statement he has made - I assume as a Member of Parliament that the statement he has made directly contradicts the President’s perception on graduated tax. Could he clarify his position or else he steps down, in very serious terms?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, this is the Budget Speech, which we all listened to, those of us who were present. Page 23, paragraph 86 reads as follows: 

“As per the Constitution and the Local Governments Act, graduated tax amounting to about Shs 40 billion is assessed, collected and utilized by local governments to deliver social services. However, in the recent past there have been various representations on the assessment and collection of this tax. Government has deliberated on this matter and I wish to state as follows:

For financial year 2004/2005 graduated tax must be assessed and its payment fully enforced. The Minister of Local Government will be in close contact with the local governments on the assessment and collection of this tax. The Government is studying alternative sources of revenue and a decisive conclusion on this matter will be made by financial year 2005/2006.”  

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance reads the Budget on behalf of the President.   

On the special grants to districts in insurgency areas, there has been every effort to make sure that the districts under insurgency do not lose their money and if the money has been returned it has been sent back in a different form. That one I am sure is a true position and it is not money that was due to go to those areas that has been lost.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, the minister has just referred to the Budget Speech, which was read by the Minister of Finance. My understanding has always been that in fact he does so on behalf of the President. The President has made several statements on graduated tax. This is not the first time he has done this over the last two or so years. The understanding, which the country has been given, is that in fact the President has decided that if this tax is not going to be abolished it is going to be suspended for ten years. It is on record and I think this is why we are asking that the Minister must be categorical because now what he is reading is not what the public has heard from the President. 

He is saying it will be studied and additions will be made, but the President was quite categorical on this issue. Where does the country stand on this matter, Madam Speaker?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to read to you Article 155(1) of the Constitution in relation to this matter of graduated tax, and this financial year. It says:

“The President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year but in any case not later than the 15th day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the next financial year.” This is what was done at the Conference Centre in your presence, by the Minister of Finance. 

The question of those ten years, please do not confuse it with this budget. Let us deal with this budget, the next ten years you will deal with them afterwards.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I respect the recommendations given on page 26. The ministry if committed to building capacity, yes. Recommendation 4 says that the Ministry of Local Government should strengthen the inspectorate and support supervision of the ministry to reduce conflicts in local governments other than resorting to the fire brigade approach. I think this is not a fair recommendation. We have 56 districts now, apart from the demand from my friend of Kaliro. If you study the nature and the etiology of the conflicts, these conflicts are not a result of failure to supervise. In any case, how much supervision do you need to carry out to stop conflicts? It would mean the presence of the Minister of Local Government in every district and every time, which is not possible. 

The Inspectorate actually goes and checks, or we are told of something that requires our intervention, that is when we go. And policy to reduce conflict is already in place, the Local Government Act is there. That is the clearance statement of how things should run. But as I said earlier on, it is misinterpreted or it is not understood.  

Recommendation 6 said the Ministry of Local Government should liaise with that of Finance and the local governments affected by insurgency on the release and prioritisation of special grants to these local governments. This is exactly what happens.

LT KINOBE: Madam speaker, I thank the honourable minister for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is from the fact that he has said that the recommendation is not fair. I was expecting a fairer submission, which we should perhaps endorse, but he stopped short of that. It is a fact that some of the conflicts in the districts are because of the law, and one member here said that if it is the law, why do you not bring it here for amendment?

One other source of conflict is the politicization and disciplining of the CAO. You cannot pass a resolution to discipline the CAO until it is passed by two-thirds of poorly paid politicians. These are fellows who are always manipulated and the resolutions always fail in the council. I thought you would have developed that recommendation that we bring the law here and address all the areas that are the cause of conflict. So, we need specific commitment. There are problems in the Local Government Act that are to some extent a cause of the problems in the districts. 

There is also slow speed in bringing the regulations into conformity with Acts we pass. For example, we passed the Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act sometime back - I think it was two years ago. This has already come into conflict with the procurement guidelines of the District Tender Boards (DTBs). Two years down the road and the regulations are not there. 

Last year we passed the Public Finance and Accountability Act. This has fundamentally affected the financial and accounting regulations. Almost a year and a half down the road, the regulations have not come out. The restructuring –(Interjection)- (Mr Rukutana rose_) I am not talking about your regulations; I saw them. I am talking about the way the Local Governments Financial Accounting Regulations of 1998 were fundamentally affected –(Interjection)- I need your protection, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, allow the chairpersons of one of the committees to finish.

LT KINOBE: What I am trying to submit is that the Local Governments Financial Accounting Regulations of 1998 were fundamentally affected by the Public Finance and Accountability Act of 2003. We had expected the Ministry of Local Government to bring these regulations into conformity - because one of the clauses towards the end says that the law modifies all the existing laws, as far as they are inconsistent with that Act. So, we need specific action and this House should urge the minister to bring back this law so that we go through it and minimize some of the conflicts that originate from it.  

MR WOPUWA: I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister, Madam Speaker. The Constitution says that the Chief Administrative Officer is the accounting officer and the Ministry of Finance appoints his deputy. Who is misinterpreting that law?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Pardon? What did you say?

MR WOPUWA: The Constitution in Article 188 says that the Chief Administrative Officer shall be the accounting officer. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on the advice of the Ministry of Local Government, appoints a deputy, like in the case of Tororo. Who is misinterpreting the law? The minister has said normally the conflicts arise from misinterpreting the law. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe some of these are special circumstances. I do not know whether conditions are uniform in Tororo, Kapchorwa and Kamwenge. Is everything really uniform? Are the conditions uniform, which have caused conflict?

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I thought the law applied to everybody. This is a Constitution, uniform, because –(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA: We are worried that the minister has stood here and said that the Inspectorate of Local Government is doing its work. Really, some of us think that the inspectorate is not doing its work. How could Kamuli lose Shs 3 billion and the inspectorate is not aware? How could I have 24 teachers in my constituency, who have not received their salaries, some for two months, some up to two years? The Inspectorate of Local Government, is it reporting to the minister regularly so that we can actually access these reports and be aware that the inspectorate is doing its work?

LT KINOBE: Madam Speaker, I do not want to blame the inspectorate. They pick all this and that is why the minister is telling us that there are problems, which must be revisited. In the case of Kapchorwa now, they have three Chief Administrative Officers. All of them, I am told, are going to take government to court. In Tororo, I saw the permanent secretary’s letter. The problem is the law. The permanent secretary gives guidance and the local governments defy the guidance, which is being given, because it does not have any legal effect. They think they are governments, which cannot be directed. To cure this the law should come back here and we see how to address these problems. Once they hear one district disobeying then the subsequent ones will also continue doing the same with impunity.

MRS KULANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform my colleague actually that the problem is the district chairpersons are not interpreting the law, which was made. They are just doing things the way they want, and that is why we have problems especially in Kapchorwa, because the law is not being followed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, before you proceed I would like to announce that in the distinguished strangers’ gallery we have the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Japan, Mr Kazunori Tanaka. (Applause) He arrived this morning and he is accompanied by the Ambassador for Japan to Uganda, Mr Nabuaki Ito. He has a particular interest in our democracy and in particular the working of Parliament. So, we expect a lot of support from the Government of Japan. Please, welcome him. (Applause). Mr Minister, you could wind up.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief. There are weaknesses in the law but changing the law is not done by word of mouth. It is through certain procedure and each of these points that have been raised on the Floor and many more elsewhere are the content that I am going to look at to make proposals to this House for the law’s amendment. 

Madam Speaker, to have 24 teachers in a district with no salaries paid, and to blame the Ministry of Local Government, is to again misinterpret the law and not understand decentralization. There is a whole office of education in the district whose responsibility is to see that the department of education is administered. If you are saying that the Minister of Local Government should send somebody there to go and check in schools whether the teachers are there, that is a misinterpretation and total misunderstanding of decentralization. In fact –(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA: Order, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, let the minister finish, please.

MR GAGAWALA: I would like to put –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wambuzi, please sit down. Minister, please finish. I want to go on to Public Service.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of the chief administrative officer being the accounting officer and then his deputy being appointed an accounting officer of a district; in the current law even permanent secretaries, who are known to be accounting officers in the ministries, are designated every year by the Secretary to the Treasury to be accounting officers. 

In the case of the districts where the chief administrative officer has mismanaged funds, the Secretary to the Treasury does not appoint that person on the advice of the Ministry of Local Government, Inspectorate of Government and so on. He appoints the next in command to administer the money until the case of the chief administrative officer, the substantive person, is handled legally or otherwise. That is the explanation of how you can have an accounting officer and have a deputy being appointed the accounting officer.

The Local Governments Finance Commission, Madam Speaker, very quickly; there were complaints that His Excellency the President is not advised properly by the commission. I do not know where the evidence is to prove this. I do not think there is anybody who can establish that before the President makes a statement on the matters where the Local Governments Finance Commission is involved, that he has not been briefed or he has not been advised. However, I also want to tell this House that Presidents have that latitude of leading the way. A statement may be made, which is supposed to guide the bodies under him to take action. 

So, if a statement is made about graduated tax, because there have been some protestations and it is picked by the press, then those of us who are under the President in our respective responsibilities, we do our job. 

The issue of equalization, Madam Speaker, since I entered the ministry I have been asking myself both loudly and quietly “equalization to what”? Which is the model that district A is supposed to equal to? I have challenged the Local Governments Finance Commission to give criteria and to say, “This is really what you should equal to; you are doing everything to equal this”. That way we can say that from that, this is at the lower bottom, this is at the top and when you do a, b, c, you equal the top. These are the areas, which need to be clearly understood even in the allocation of equalization. Apart from that, –(Interjection)- -(_Mr Gagawala rose)- apart from that, I will take it but just one second. 

Apart from that the allocation to equalization has been so small and the reasons for this are many. For example for this year it is Shs 3.53 billion. That is a drop in the ocean if you are looking at Uganda, so in the end each one gets Shs 15 million, another one Shs 30 million; it is small. If we look at our economy and see where we can equalize, and especially when equal to who or equal to what is not fully established, then you can see where the dilemma can be. I will take the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, that member has asked twice this morning about equalization. You answer the question completely and move on to something else, please.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The major issues - this question of one vehicle was pointed out. I really have not seen my officers walking on the streets, I see them driving. When we now get donations then we do not put in claims to buy more vehicles. I am almost sure that my people in the Finance Commission are not that deprived as to have –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the policy of decentralization is a principle and the equalization part of it is a notable chapter within that principle. The words echoed by the minister right now are in total contradiction to that policy. Is it in order for the whole minister to stand here and negate the policies well articulated under decentralization? I am baffled to hear that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know what policies have been negated or what they are. Quote the article or the section; read them –(Interruption)- no, no, if you want me to give a ruling then justify the need for a ruling.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The equalization grant –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about it?

MR LUKYAMUZI: It is part of the chapter of decentralization yet the minister is fighting it now on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In what way is he fighting it?

MR LUKYAMUZI: There is even a schedule under it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Read the schedule, read the Constitution.

MR LUKYAMUZI: And there is a formula for distributing it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude –(Laughter).

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When hon. Lukyamuzi contributed earlier on he talked of a welfare society and I thought it was a bit of daydreaming to think that in Uganda we could talk of a welfare society. Of course, if it was Japan, yes, you can have a welfare society but if you are talking of Uganda, to have a welfare society here, you have a long way to go. 

Hon. Tibarimbasa, very quickly said, “what can districts do to make money”? This is a question we should ask ourselves. What can Uganda do to make money? It is the same question that we are asking. Districts must be interested in how to make money, how to attract investors, how to encourage local investors. This tendency to thinking that an investor is an outsider must stop. Local investors are there and they must be encouraged by being given facilities in the district. The districts must check on their potential for tourism, potential for agriculture and implementing decisions and policies that can benefit from that potential. So, this business of thinking that it is the central government that is going to attract investors and going to generate growth, growth actually in any case takes place in villages, which we represent. 

So, the transformation of our villages is part and parcel of our representation as far as I can see. Everything we can do - an improved breed of goats in the district is a source of money for you but also for the Government. If you have a fishpond then you should be encouraged, the district should help you to get the fish fries so that you can have fish as an enterprise and then money will come in. It is the money from projects, it is the money from what we do in the districts that brings money to the districts and brings money to the country. So, everything we can do –(Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, when we raised the issue of districts failing to obtain money, it was in reference to the fact that districts were relying on graduated tax, which is being suspended. 

Secondly, the boda boda operators, the tax on their operations was equally suspended and very soon you will find livestock keepers also petitioning the President to abolish that tax. If we continue infringing on the sources of revenue for local governments, how are we assisting them to be able to raise the necessary revenue? Bearing in mind that he is setting the salary for LC V chairpersons at Shs 2 million, and they are setting standards for the district speakers, LC V councilors and LC III, how can that become a reality? I beg the honourable minister, Madam Speaker. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I have repeatedly pointed out that the districts generate more money than is spent on allowances. I have said that many times. Even Sembabule does not spend 50 percent of what it generates, it does not spent - according to the current law - 20 percent of it. So, if the district of Sembabule were now told to spend 30 percent, there would be more to pay the chairman Shs 2 million every month. 

The Government you have here, the Ministry of Local Government could not jump up to promise air to people in our local governments. We instructed the local governments chief administrative officers to pay these salaries by the end of this month. You tell me which district will fail to pay Shs 2 million to their chairperson. Let us not be ignorant of the potential. We know what each district is capable of generating as we talk now. 

I want to conclude –(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister. The National Youth Council Statute, which we amended here, and the Statute for the women councils and councils for persons with disabilities, provide that each of these councils at the district level should operate separate accounts. This financial year Shs 2.5 billion was put aside, through the Ministry of Gender, to send these monies down to the district but most of the districts have refused to open up separate accounts for these councils. Instead they want this money to go say to community development and that kind of stuff. 

The rationale for providing that they should have separate accounts was that when this money is put together, at times youth, women and issues for disabled persons are not prioritized. So, I want the Minister for Local Government to clarify this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, that matter was handled by the Minister for Gender last week. She made an assurance to this House that she is coming to report on how the accounts are being handled. It is not his business. Minister, please conclude.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, let me conclude by saying that the ministry is doing and will do what it can to make sure that decentralization is fully implemented. The CAOs, and the point was brought out here, should the CAO be appointed from the center so that these problems we have can be obviated? The answer is yes. The proposal will be coming soon in a form that you will appreciate –(Applause)- because after all the CAO - and this you should know - is supposed to appoint the tender board in the district. If that is going to be the case, we certainly have to be more sure of how the CAO is appointed. 

Otherwise, I would like to thank the committee and thank the House for the enthusiasm they have shown for our tasks in local government. I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Before we go to the Ministry of Public Service, I just have two small announcements to make. I have learnt this afternoon that hon. Barusigira, the Member of Parliament for Rubanda in 1962, died and that he has been buried this afternoon. So this week we have actually lost two former Members of Parliament: the former Member of Parliament for Butebo and one for Rubanda. We hope that they will be able to rest in peace.  

The second matter is that tomorrow we are going to take a vote on the Budget and this is not a nominal vote. It is a serious vote for taking decisions, so we need at least 99 members from morning until evening. I am giving you notice in advance. From 10.00 O’clock we need all the members here because we are going to vote.   

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, PENSIONS (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all I would like to thank the Chairperson and the Members of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for a good report. I would also like to thank the members for the interest they are showing in the matters of pension management, and to ensure that we make arrangements to pay especially pension arrears.  

In the course of the debate the Minister of Finance answered the most pertinent issues on pensions. However, I will just, as a matter of summary, respond to the Woman Member of Parliament for Moyo, who requested me to send a clear message to the pensioners in the country. I would like say that the ministry will ensure that their monthly pensions are paid, and paid on time. As I speak now actually we are paying before the 28th of each month, we are actually better than salary payers, and we wish to maintain this.

Secondly, I would like to say that the gratuities, which are pending, most of them will be paid during this financial year. We shall endeavour to do this as far as the funds will allow us. So, those who did not get their gratuities, we shall endeavour to pay most of it during this financial year. They need not come to our offices in Wandegeya, we shall post them to their accounts, because they are already on our payroll.

Thirdly, we got a small amount of money to cover pension arrears. We only got Shs 4 billion and we intend to continue with the criteria of paying the most elderly of the claimants. This year we hope we will be able to cover the pensioners who were born in the year of our Lord 1933. (Laughter). But at the same time I would like to request –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, can I be protected?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is very seriously talking about senior citizens and Godly issues.  

MRS MUKIIBI: I would like to again call upon the claimants that they need not come to the ministry for these claims. We are going to post them to their bank accounts.

Fourthly, we also got some money to cover the former East African Community workers. As you are aware, there is an outstanding bill of Shs 45 billion. This year we got Shs 4 billion –(Interjection)- but last year we got none, so it is an achievement. 

This year I would like to say that we intend to pay those workers who were working in the East African Railways Corporation, who are referred to as Group C. The beneficiaries know what this means. We are going to pay them completely, we hope so, and this will actually take most of this money. If we get any surplus we shall consider orphans and widowers, with the pending payments. This kind of payment requires the beneficiaries to come and collect their cheques.  But we shall send information in the usual way, by posting their names to the post offices throughout the country. That is how they will know that they will be paid. But this group C will be paid during this financial year, if we get all the releases, and I hope we will.

Lastly, the message I would like to send out is that the ministry will continue to improve customer care services and we have greatly reduced on the congestion at our offices. We shall also endeavor to process the pending applications as quickly as possible so that we do not cause any more delays. We invite pensioners who are facing problems to call on our offices and clarify, and give us information.

I would like to call on you, honourable members, who are seeing some of the malpractices in this sector, to assist government by giving us information on the allegations of corruption and mismanagement of customers so that we can improve our services. In the ministry we would really like to endeavor to give the best services to our pensioners, to reduce delays and to curb corruption if any. But we need information so that we can investigate this with your co-operation.

This allegation of corruption has been on since I came to the ministry and I have tried to put my ears to the ground and to open my eyes very widely –(Laughter)- but so far I want to inform you honourable members that we have had several investigations in this sector but unfortunately we have not yet come up with concrete results. 

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Can we get clarified very clearly by the honourable minister as to what she means by not having seen this animal called corruption? First of all corruption is not tangible, it is not seen even if you open your eyes very widely, it is not seen walking like a goat around the building, and it does not go around making noise for you to hear. So we would like you to clarify to us what you mean by saying you have opened your eyes wide and that you have your ears to the ground but you have not been able to detect this animal called corruption. It is not an animal with horns or four legs, and you know, it is neither female nor male. Can you clarify to us how you could detect it?

MR KAPKWOMU: The minister has said that she will try to communicate with the pensioners, or beneficiaries, by post. I have come across some cheques, which remain in the pensions department until they become stale. Initially we had been paying this pension through the RDC’s office. I suggest that the information also reaches the RDC’s office, the information not the cheque, which is a slippery thing, so that the ones in the villages can also be reached by way of this message.

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable member. What I wanted to say is that actually we should work together and curb this corruption. That is what I wanted to communicate. 

Secondly, for your information, we are trying to use all possible avenues. Luckily enough with the East African Community they have their own association, which we use and we have not had much problems.

For the cheques that go stale, yes, sometimes we do get that and actually this is a positive sign that we are not coerced to pay. We look at the report or the list of the beneficiaries and we prepare cheques. That is why some beneficiaries do not get this information. In my view this actually shows that we are doing our work according to principles. If you deserve money, we prepare money for you.  Otherwise, these cheques, if the beneficiaries were always running after us, they would not go stale. But we try our best to communicate.

With the East African Community workers, some of them have died and some of the survivors do not know that this money belongs to them. So, whoever has a problem or whoever has a relative, in fact I am now actually requesting you members to humbly communicate to your constituencies so that the people at the grassroots can get this information that this group C will be paid. Their children or grandchildren and survivors can come and claim their parents’ or their grandparents’ money. Once you worked in the community, whether you have passed away, this money is yours and your survivors should come and claim it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can I make an appeal that you do what the Ministry of Education does? You write circulars to all the Members of Parliament so that they can pass on this information just like the Minister of Education does. It will help.

MRS MUKIIBI: Most obliged. We shall try to do that but these are very many beneficiaries. However, we shall try. 

Secondly, there was a question on pension reform. Yes, in the Budget Speech this financial year the President, through the Ministry of Finance, announced that we are going to reform the pension scheme with effect from this financial year and we are going to move on to a contributory pensions scheme. I would like to say that as the report of the committee indicated, this process is still in its infancy and we will be communicating or we will be working with you progressively. The fact is that this reform should have been implemented yesterday, but we are glad that now we are moving.

I would like to allay the fears of the public servants currently working that we will be very careful in implementing this reform. Your benefits will be protected because you were employed under a different arrangement. We shall try to see that you are not disadvantaged in the transition. The details will be coming out as we work out the legal framework, and Parliament will be kept posted on this. We shall work very closely and make wide consultations with the stakeholders, as we have already done, and we are moving together with all the concerned parties. It is a long process; we shall have another opportunity to explain. This reform was supposed to start with effect from this financial year and we shall keep you posted on the developments.

Madam Speaker, I think that summarizes the pertinent issues, which were raised. I would like to thank the members for the attention -(Applause)

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Patrick Aloysius Okumu-Ringa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to issues raised on matters relating to pensions, there were other administrative issues. So, I will be fairly brief on those matters.  

Hon. Wagonda Muguli and other two Members of Parliament raised issues regarding the position of Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) within the context of the constitutional arrangement, and the functions of the Ministry of Public Service and the Public Service Commission. It is true that the Constitution defines an RDC to be a senior civil servant and it is the prerogative of the appointing authority, that is His Excellency, the President to appoint the RDCs in consultation with the relevant sections of the law. So, the RDCs are appointed appropriately and they are discharging their duties.

The other issue raised was with regard to facilities for offices -(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA: Madam Speaker, when I made my submission I quoted specifically Article 172, and I submitted that the minister should actually show evidence that these RDCs have been appointed in accordance with Article 172.  Definitely I know the President is the appointing authority, there is no doubt about that. My interest is whether the Constitution has been followed, and that is why I raised the issue of the rank in the civil service because there are certain requirements for particular ranks. So, the matter is not satisfactorily answered. I wish the minister could be more specific in addressing the question I raised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the evidence you are looking for, honourable Member? What is the actual evidence you want him to produce?

MR WAGONDA: Madam Speaker, Article 172 says that civil servants are appointed by the President on the advice of a relevant service commission. The evidence in this case would be a minute of the Public Service Commission or any -(Interjection).

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable Member for giving way. I would like the honourable Member to clarify to me on Article 172, which actually mainly refers to the education and health commissions. I would like him to read it together with Article 203, which is very specific, referring to the appointment of the Resident District Commissioner. I do not know whether or not he is not confusing Article 172 to be referring to the RDC, when Article 203 is very specific in that aspect. I would need clarification. Thank you.

MR WAGONDA: Madam Speaker, I am aware of Article 203, which establishes the office of the RDC and specifies the functions. The matter of appointing the RDC as a senior civil servant can only be undertaken under Article 172, and that is very clear; that is the procedure for appointing civil servants. So, if these fellows are senior civil servants -(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform the hon. Wagonda Muguli that actually Article 203 talks of the Resident District Commissioner as a senior civil servant. But then Article 172 does not talk about a civil servant; it talks about appointment of a public officer, and the two are different.

MR OKUMU-RINGA: I would like to believe that hon. -(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA: Madam Speaker, the point at contention is whether an RDC is a civil servant, let alone being a senior civil servant at that, and that is why I went ahead to ask whether the post of RDC is a promotional post to which other civil servants can also aspire to. I have not seen a position in civil service, which is a closed post; it does not exist. So, if the minister is attempting to answer my question, he should address it in that light.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to learn from my colleague, hon. Wagonda Muguli, because he has ever served as a permanent secretary, which I regard as a senior civil servant. Under what minute were you appointed?

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Madam Speaker, I am sure my honourable colleague, Wagonda Muguli, has fully internalised the constitutional provision and we put this matter to rest. But if there is any contradiction in these matters, as you are aware, the Constitutional Review Commission has concluded its work and the White Paper will soon be in this House. I am sure we should be able to harmonize some of these issues where you believe there are lacunas.

Madam Speaker, the issue raised by hon. Wagonda Muguli also relates to office space for government offices. As you are aware, the issue of office space is handled by Office of the President, and these matters I think will be fully handled when we discuss the policy statement of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. But I would like to assure you that where offices have been procured, they are quite adequate for the performance and discharge of duties of the respective ministries and institutions.

Also an issue was raised by, hon. Wagonda Muguli, relating to how far the ministry has handled the reform programme generally. I would like to submit that my ministry has undertaken the reform programme. We started in 1992; the first phase took 10 years. 

We are in the second phase, which is 2002/07 and is going to consolidate the achievements we have registered so far in the reform programme. These reforms, among others, have been in the area of performance management, result oriented management, restructuring, down sizing and working towards a better pay for civil servants.  In quantitative terms and qualitative terms when you look at the reform programme, we have registered positive results.  

Honourable Sabiiti, I think the issue of RDC/DISO has been handled. Hon. Sabiiti raised it in addition to what he raised with regard to pensions, which has been fully covered by my colleague.

Hon. Sekikubo, raised an issue which we exhaustively discussed, that is selective salary award. He said this is a disincentive within the service. I agree with you and the committee has also observed this. His Excellency, the President has given us an assignment, as a ministry, to come up with a comprehensive pay policy for the entire civil service.  We have had a consultancy to handle this matter; we have received the report. One of the salient points which we have noted which we are going to look at, and conclude and present to Cabinet before the end of October, is in relation to how to define pay. What is pay? Is the pay only the salary package which the employee gets or does it also include all these other allowances and remuneration? We have noted that within our current pay structure, what appears to be pay is relatively small but what sometimes is paid in form of allowances, what we call the grey area, sometimes is much more than the pay.  

So, there is selective aspect why in some institutions remuneration seems to be good while in others it does not appear to be so. We are looking at all these areas so that we consolidate resources available. If need be you rather be paid – let me say the minimum wage for the driver if it were to be Shs 170,000 or Shs 200,000 at least the driver will say, “This is good money” instead of paying lunch allowance, which is not considered at all as a pay and a salary of Shs 75,000. So, all these are the issues we have looked at and we believe when we finally conclude our report these are the issues, which will be discussed and also brought before you for final decision.

Also, hon. Sekikubo, raised the issue of accommodation for the former Vice President Her Excellency, Dr Wandira Kazibwe, and remuneration to be paid to her. I would like to state that the law, which this House passed in the 6th Parliament to pay former leaders, did not cater for leaders who would become former under the 1995 Constitution. So, it means as the Constitutional Review Commission has completed its work and the White Paper will soon come to this House, we need to correct that anomaly because that is the current state of affairs. That is how the Constitution is and the law is. (Interruption)     

MR AWORI: Point of clarification, just before you get to the substantive concern. Madam Speaker, do I understand from my honourable colleague in charge of Public Service that this government is prepared to pay former rebel leaders but not former vice presidents? 

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Madam Speaker, we like to be kind to these people; when you call them rebels it is rather derogative. The returnees who are being paid, if at all they are being paid for good cause for us to have peace and stability it is worthwhile. 

With regard to the law, the Constitution is very clear and the law with regard to paying former leaders is also very clear. But I believe if you were to define who a former leader is, one of the criteria would be that such a person would not be in active politics and again these are issues we cannot bring now. This will be ironed out when we review the law. As you know, Her Excellency, the former Vice President is still a Member of this House, she is enjoying the privileges of being a Member of Parliament. In the meantime, I assure you she can be accommodated while awaiting the review of the law.  

Honourable Awori, started on a very naughty remark but I think he understood what he meant. But the issue – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I do not recall this whole day since we have been here whether I have been naughty at any given point. If I had been naughty definitely the Speaker, would not have let me off the hook. Is it in order for my honourable colleague to insinuate in whatever words he wants to use that, at some point in the course of our debate this afternoon and morning, I have been naughty? Is that parliamentary? Do I look like somebody who can be naughty?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are a very serious Member of this House. If he had been naughty I would have ejected him from the Chamber.  


MR OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I withdraw that word. Hon. Awori was very emphatic on matters relating to affirmative action and particularly with regard to the feminine gender - because gender refers to both male and female; but he was more emphatic on the feminine aspect. That this government has not been kind enough or has not provided positions in civil service to women. I would like to state that this government, and through Public Service Commission, has ensured that competitive filling of senior positions have been provided and those women who have qualified are in high positions.  

For example, in the Ministry of Public Service we have about four commissioners, one Director, two assistant commissioners. And if you look around, for instance here, we are well represented; we have an Under Secretary who substantively sometimes holds the fort of a permanent secretary. This is just one ministry but other ministries, when you look through, the record is very good. But in case we have not done well enough, we are going to ensure that we encourage the womenfolk to continue upgrading themselves so that when senior positions fall vacant, they can apply and they will definitely be considered. 

Hon. Awori also raised an issue – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: This is typical government bureaucratic talk, brushing important matters under the carpet and coming up with one flimsy answer. Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague in charge of public administration has talked about his only one ministry where he gave us a series of commissioners who might be ladies. I am talking about this government. If I were to challenge you, in Attorney General’s chambers, tell me of the four senior positions, how many are women? If I were to challenge you, in the Ministry of Finance, of the three senior –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, in the Ministry of Finance, the deputy Secretary to Treasury is a lady, Madam Mary Mudhuli. This budget we are considering, the Director is a lady, Madam Elizabeth Kutesa. The Commissioner Budget is a lady Commissioner Ssekandi and so many others. I cannot recollect the names. (Laughter)

MRS KAFIIRE: Thank you for that information. You have only named three ladies in Ministry of Finance. What is the total number of staff in your ministry, and who are senior, subtracting the three ladies? Can you give me the breakdown please?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually without going to that breakdown, honourable members, you know people take this matter as a joke, but it isn’t. Next year, all the governments in the world are required to give a report on how far they have gone on the question of women’s emancipation. You are expected to have reached one third of all policy decision-making bodies by now. Therefore, on the constitutional commissions in this country, have we reached one third? In the ministries have we reached one third? In the civil service have we reached one third?  These are the issues you are going to face next year. You must report to the convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women next year. It is not just a joking matter.  (Applause)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was in the middle of seeking clarification when the honourable colleague, Minister of Finance, gave us another diversionary answer. What you have said is absolutely true. Let us be specific. We are faced with a challenge and we are not responding to the challenge effectively. These generalities are no good; let us get specifics. If I look at even UPDF - somebody may not call it public service - how many career officers above the rank of captain are women? I am sure you are going to say “Colonel so and so.” I am talking about senior officers. Do you have a brigadier, and yet if you are talking about the origins of UPDF, women were there from day one.  (Applause). How many of them are now senior officers?  

You always talk about - and when you look at their functions, the few women majors we have, where are they? What do they do – bureaucratic work. They are not in position of command. That is what I am talking about. When you look at the police force, there is only one deputy Inspector General of Police, when there are three men.  

MS NAMAYANJA: I want to thank the honourable colleague for giving way. But, Madam Speaker, I am informing my colleague that in the Army, maybe the aspect of affirmative action is still lacking. Even out of the ten Members of Parliament representing UPDF, there is no woman. The one who was here in 6th Parliament was thrown out, and out of ten that is ridiculous to me, if I may say!

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, just to show the lack of seriousness on the part of the Government on the matter of affirmative action, often I have seen the First Lady being given a male Aide De Camp (ADC).  Why should you give the First Lady a male ADC?

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I know for sure since this morning, you have allowed my brother Awori because it appears it is your interest also in that area. But to fill a post you must qualify for it. If from the beginning like primary one - these days women are now coming up because everybody goes in. But you are not going to get any woman to be the Speaker. You must get that person who qualifies and, therefore, it takes time to fill in. You see, as we educate our women, as every child has access to education then they can competently compete. But if you have less doctors and in Mulago there are less women doctors, but you have those who have more qualifications who are men and they can –(Interruption) 

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Is hon. Sabiiti in order to impute that there are no qualified women doctors, lawyers, teachers, civil servants in Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sabiiti, unless you can present statistics here, you withdraw that statement.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, with due respect, you showed some bias from the very beginning. I can see you are continuing in that direction -(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Is hon. Jack Sabiiti in order to continue doubting the impartiality of the Speaker by imputing that she is showing sides because of her being a woman gender when you know her as a very, very impartial Speaker. Is he in order? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Sabiiti, I happen to be very well informed and educated in the areas I am talking about. When you see me intervening, it is because of my knowledge, not bias. (Applause)

MR SABIITI: But for the record in our Hansard, I would like, Madam Speaker, on the statement made by hon. Zziwa - I did not question your integrity in this Parliament. I am one of those really behind you in the way you handle this Parliament. But for her to insinuate that I – I did not like it! But my -(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Correction. The word I used was “Impartiality.”

MR SABIITI: Madam speaker, I have been in this public service for a long time. What I was trying to explain is, there are areas where we recognize that in the past many women were not allowed to come up. But you cannot pick someone who cannot qualify for a job and put her there. Therefore, as we continue training women of- (Interjections)- will fill those positions. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: Madam speaker, I was still on the Floor when my colleague interrupted with various types of information. I had been challenged to provide information, I was challenging honourable colleague in charge of administration that definitely the Government has not responded to the challenge of affirmative action the way it should. (Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the position he is presenting, and I am one of those who are behind women emancipation. I really stand very strongly behind them. But the information I want to give to him is this. The way I see the problem of Uganda, if women do not themselves take up the fight to emancipate themselves, we are going to have this situation. We may talk so highly about emancipating women but do so little. I want to give you an example in history. It was not possible for those who were not slaves to fight for the slaves to be emancipated. The masters even if they saw some good things about a slave being emancipated, would always want to make sure that they are in control of the slaves. This is more or less in the same situation where we might find it better to have women where they are. So, my appeal and my information is, that day when women will stand up and firmly demand for their rightful position in all ranks of government, we shall have true emancipation. But if we wait, I will pray that we should be begging for these positions.  

Madam Speaker, these things are not going to happen. My appeal to women of Uganda is, just be firm and ask for what is for you. Let nobody come and say, “You see, I have given you this I have given you that.” That is where now you will be told, “I will give you something else, I will give you that.” Unless that is done, we are in for a long hold for women but I am behind you stand assured.

MR AWORI: Madam speaker, I have been interrupted whenever I give information with diversionary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude and then the minister comes.

MR AWORI: Can I also, honourable colleague, listen to concerns. This is a serious matter; it is a constitutional issue do not take it just like another complaints on the floor. Madam Speaker, I continue to challenge my honourable colleague, maybe that is not his area of specialisation. Look at UPDF, I have mentioned that is embarrassing to give the First Lady a man to be her ADC. Out of a force of 6 to 10,000 PGB soldiers, how many are women? Do we assume that in this country the matter of protection of head of state and Vice President shall be a preserve of men only? 

Madam Speaker, when you talk about even the air force right now, we do not have a single pilot trainee woman. During Idi Amin’s time, we had two ladies who were flying helicopters. How many in this regime -(Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to inform the hon. Aggrey Awori that, Lt Col Nalweyiso, I think about three or four months ago, was commanding a presidential protection unit at least in Gulu. She is a woman senior officer commanding security for the President. Vice versa, a man can be an aide de camp to the First Lady.  This is a matter of security, it is a matter of competence, it is a matter of knowing the job. It is not political, it is not a farce, it is not a dance. It is not feminism, this is competence, this is professionalism and it must be left at that.  

Captain Nkalubo, when she was Member of Parliament for 6th Parliament, was a captain but she is now a major promoted because of competence. When she was here she served very well this Parliament, a distinguished lawyer and she was here because of competence. In another series of Members of Parliament from the Army, may be another four or five could be women depending really on the competence. Therefore, I would wish to leave this matter purely on a professional capacity point of view other than politicising it as an appointment of RDCs from Busia and all this kind of thing. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would have taken offence -(Interruption)

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam speaker, I would like to thank hon. Awori for the interest he has in gender balancing, and I totally agree with him. But as my colleagues have said we, in Public Service, we appoint people on merit but at the same time we do take consideration of gender. And since this government came into power, we have actually promoted the women in decision-making positions. We are doing very well actually and in our training policy in the ministry, we have incorporated gender so that the women will not be disadvantaged for lack of qualifications. 

We are actually very serious on this issue and I can assure you that being the leading example in all the ministries in gender balancing, in promotion of women in decision-making positions, we are concerned and we are working steadily to ensure that the public service looks gender balanced at all levels.  

But let us give credit to this Government, which has promoted women and continue to advocate for their emancipation and I am glad that this advocacy is being led by hon. Awori. And I want to encourage all of us to advocate for the emancipation of women wherever we are. Actually, it is not only in Public Service, starting with our homes. Let us be gender sensitive to the wives we have, to the girl children we have in the homes, to the female workers in the homes so that everybody is brought on board.  

I would like, Madam Speaker, to request that this debate stops here. We have noted the importance of gender balance in public service and we are seriously going to continue to advocate for gender balancing. I share your concern, Madam Speaker and honourable Member.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague, but I am still - I would have said I am disappointed. Madam Speaker, as I said, this is a serious matter. To hear from my honourable colleague who sits on the Cabinet saying - it is like telling me, “When I found you you did not have breakfast, you did not have lunch, you did not have supper be grateful for the breakfast I have given you” when I am entitled to breakfast, lunch and supper. You are telling me, “Be happy, I have given you today breakfast.” I am saying the Constitution requires to do the following: When it comes to women we start talking about merit, qualifications and what not, when there are so many men in wrong places who are not even qualified. Why do you always come up with meritocracy when it comes to women?  

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to give more information to my colleague on the Floor that, a number of UPDF officers are now on training to uplift their standards in the positions where they are serving. I think they were appointed before undergoing that qualification. So, when we are told that the women, with all those qualifications, should get there before they are given those positions, I think we are being sidelined and being misinformed because the men are put in positions sometimes they are even given some ranks before they go to train for those particular ranks. That is the information I wanted to give.

RTD LT GEN. MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, apart from women emancipation, which I support, I think we should also consider running against time and Members will be aware that even if we talk about this issue up to midnight, we are not going to solve it today. If we have another hidden reason for talking to be seen as if we are fighting for women, then I think we will have a very short time for that. So, I would appeal to give time for – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, it is with reluctance that I have to call order to my senior colleague I respect, First Deputy Prime Minister, a personal friend, somebody I like and somebody who has experience in the matters of military science and operations. Is it in order for my honourable colleague, who I have described in those fine words, to insinuate that I am advocating for women’s rights with an ulterior motive? What kind of hidden agenda to speak for the Constitution? Why would he insinuate that my interest in advocacy for women’s rights has got some other hidden agenda - political, financial, sexual or what? (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the honourable Member, who is a very good friend of yours, I think was not alluding to you. But let me just say that since we promulgated that Constitution, I think today is the first time in nearly 10 years that we have had an opportunity to touch on this matter, and it is an important matter. So please, let us conclude on it and then –(Interjection)- yes, when has Parliament ever discussed it in the last 10 years?  

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank all Members who have been caught up by the women gender deficiency syndrome in the public service. But I would like to assure you that public service is meritocratic and it is fair, and it always operates using rules and procedures. And whenever we are given a duty to discharge, which will require gender balancing, we shall always do that without fear or favour. 

Now, allow me, Madam Speaker, to run through the few issues, which were raised by Members because they were pertinent issues -(Interruption)

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Okumu-Ringa, for giving way. Certainly, the issue of gender balance is a very cardinal issue.  It is an issue of human rights, it is an issue of transforming society, it is an issue of the Movement acting on its own undertakings. So, I observe, Madam Speaker, what you have said that this is the first time we have given this matter some hearing on the Floor of the House. And on behalf of the Movement, I want to say this is the point on which we are ready to be judged one way or the other. And I want to undertake that in the next four weeks, we must organize a hearing here, which analyses where we have come from and where we are.  I thank you. (Applause)

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Madam Speaker, the issue of disciplinary action to be taken within the given time frame as per rules and regulations has been noted, and it is the duty and responsibility of my ministry in liaison with the Public Service Commission to ensure that whenever there is a disciplinary case such are handled expeditiously.  But there could be one or two cases, which may delay as a result of issues requiring investigations, and when such do happen we shall always ensure that the rights of employees are respected.  

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, just on that point, he has raised the issue why there are possibly shortcomings from the Public Service Commission.  But the point was raised that we needed to operationalise Article 166(4) that stipulates an independent Public Service Commission to be fully fledged, and empowered to carry out its duties and its obligations as any other constitutional body.  

Could the minister here give us an undertaking as to when a bill shall be brought before this House to operationalise that Article of the Constitution which is mandatory, but for nine years, we have kept quiet about it? When is he coming forward with that because as we speak now, it is only a baby of the Public Service Commission? Even its budget is delivered through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development like any other sister body. 

Can the minister give that undertaking here and now as to when we shall have the Public Service Commission Bill that will streamline all these matters, Madam Speaker?

MR OKUMU RINGA: Madam Speaker, I was coming to that very point. But the question I was answering was relating to issues raised by other members including hon. Awori in respect of officers who go on interdiction for a long time and their cases are not handled expeditiously. That was the point which I was responding to. But, now that you have raised that issue and it was on my next point the answer with regard to officers in Public Service who are on interdiction or on suspension is that they are being investigated according to the rules. 

In areas where may be the time frame within which such investigations should be concluded has elapsed then it could be an issue which we could look at. But I want to assure you that the Public Service Commission and in liaison with my ministry and of course, according to the rules and regulations which is the standing orders, we try our best to ensure that we do not leave people hanging for a very long time.  So, if there is a specific case or one or two isolated cases they could be issues which are under investigation and should be handled within the very near future.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, this matter went as far as the appointing authority, the head of State.  The two gentlemen were called- I am referring to Deo Byamugisha and Mr Chebron who are still senior Attorneys. The matter was referred back to Solicitor General, the Attorney General and the minister, the matter was investigated and they came to a conclusion.  It has been four months since they came to a conclusion on the two gentlemen, nothing has happened.  Why are you punishing them unconstitutionally?  If they take you to court they are going to extract a leg and arm from you.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the case of the two gentlemen has never been referred to the Public Service Commission.  It has been in the hands of the minister and the Solicitor General. They are just around and about and nothing is taking place.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, Chairperson, are you saying these members have no avenue to complain, they can only keep quiet and wait for the minister to do things?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, that is why I put it in my report. In fact when Public Service Commission advertised these posts they applied and went for interview. But when they sought advice from the Solicitor General he said they were handling their case that is why they did not- So, I think one of these days they are resorting to court action.

MR OKUMU RINGA: Madam Speaker, the two cases referred are within the ambit of the minister responsible for Constitutional Affairs and there are consulting with the Public Service Commission on this matter. Should it require the intervention of my ministry, we shall definitely get in touch.  But it is a matter which we cannot discuss and dispose of in this session –(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: I am seeking clarification from the minister.  State Attorneys are not even at the rank of Permanent Secretary and therefore the immediate responsible officer is the Permanent Secretary.  Before their interdiction, the Permanent Secretary should have got convinced that that grounds exist for the interdiction. When do they reach the minister because the immediate supervisor at that level is the Solicitor General and that is where it is supposed to be handled?  If he has failed to handle then he must submit to the Public Service Commission. But to consult with the Public Service Commission before that case reaches there, unless you are convincing the Public Service Commission to dismiss them before the submission is made.  I am seeking clarification, is that what is being done?

MR SABIITI:  Hon. Awori is saying these people were interdicted. We have rules and regulations governing public service. We have standing orders, when you are interdicted there is a period you cannot continue being interdicted for a year or two years. That is why the minister is being asked if these people were illegally removed from office, why do these people not be restated?  If it is political, let us know that it is political; if these people erred let them be taken to court by the Attorney General’s office. But to leave people hanging for a month, two months, three months, four months, five months, it is unbelievable! 

So, I would request the minister to be very specific on this matter and there are many others who have taken Government to court because of such things and we spent a lot of money.  So, I would request the minister to be very specific about these three officers. They are not only two, they are three officers; there is another one called Bireije Dennis. So, we want the minister to tell this Parliament the procedure. How are you going to handle this matter, or you will inform this Parliament after you have handled this matter.  But you cannot just go on meandering around. Madam Speaker, many civil servants have suffered we want this matter to be investigated properly.

MR OKUMU RINGA: Madam Speaker, in view of the concern expressed by various Members of Parliament on this matter, I would like to be given undertaking that within two weeks we report back to the House on a general policy with specific reference to the officers mentioned.  My ministry deals basically on policies and implementation. So, I will report back to the House on this matter within 14 days from to date.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Chairperson and members of Government Assurance here? That is your Business. So let nobody ask whether it is a Speaker’s Business to follow-up or it is for Government Assurance.  

MR OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Hon. Sekikubo raised the issue of the status of the Public Service Commission Bill.  I would like to report to the House that my ministry prepared general principles regarding the Public Service Commission. Then it went to Cabinet, Cabinet approved it and now Parliamentary Council is preparing the bill. Once the bill is prepared it will go back to Cabinet then from Cabinet it will come now to this House for the purpose of First Reading, then it will go to the relevant committee.  During that committee process any of you and even the public who may wish to have an input in as far as the bill relating to the Public Service is concerned will be free to participate.  

With regard to the participation of the Public Service Commission, I would like to report that the three service commissions were invited to have their input in as far as the drawing up of the principles of the bill is concerned. That is the Chairperson and members of the Public Service Commission, the Chairperson and members of Education Service Commission, the Chairperson and members of the Health Service Commission and Judicial Service Commission.  So, the in put of all these Service Commissions were included in the principle of the bill.  I would like to believe that it would be a holistic bill, which will answer most of the issues and concerns of the members.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you could try to wind up, minister.

MR OKUMU RINGA: The other issue raised was the functions and rights of District Service Commissions and their duplicity in the area appointment. My senior colleague, hon. Kabwegyere, gave an answer in regard to what is being done in District Service Commission.  In consultation with my ministry we have made a recommendation, which will come through the White Paper. This is in respect of the status of the chief administrative officer (CAO) in as far as appointment in U1 Scale is concerned.  You have raised these issues and this is being handled.

Hon. Tibarimbasa raised the issue of delay in appointment of civil servants, and that we have too many acting positions which compromises efficiency and eventually delivery of service.  I agree with that concern and my ministry has made it clear that every beginning of financial year my ministry writes to all ministries to declare vacant positions to Public Service Commission to advertise so that such positions are filled.  This is to ensure that we avoid acting positions and vacant positions staying for a long time.  As you know for every budget proposal, for ministries and institutions, financial provisions are made to fill those vacant posts. In most cases you find money is returned back to the treasury because such posts are not filled.  My ministry has made it clear that every new financial year such positions should be filled. I think with these I have covered most of the issues raised by members. But allow me to wind up by stating –(Interruption)

LT KINOBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am seeking clarification on the management of payrolls of decentralized staff.  The biggest problem that has been coming out of the audit reports is about funds that are embezzled because you send excess salaries; yet at the same time it takes centuries for people to access the payrolls either because the ceilings are full up or the procedure is a bit too long.  Can I know from the minister why local governments get excess salaries, which are a cause of abuse?  We have had problems with Rukungiri.  They utilized the money properly, they invested it in building, but they were not supposed to have used it because it is salary money.  They are trying to get authority to use it properly, which was positive, yet there are other districts.  

Right now I have an audit report on Luwero where they embezzled UShs251 million that has been accumulating as excesses.  Why do districts get excess? This is in all the districts.  All of them get excess salaries, which are supposed to be returned, but they are never returned. When I asked them, they said there file pay change reports regularly, which you are supposed to update so that the money comes on the strength they have but this is not done in time.  Accessing a payroll has become even mere impossible.  Some people take a whole year waiting to access the payroll, while the money is sent, which does not have people.  So, what is the cause of this, and what are the remedies for this?

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I would like the minister in charge of Public Service to clarify to this House whether the second war veterans are a responsibility of the Government of Uganda because the cards, which those people are holding, are inscribed in that the responsibility the current Government of Uganda took were inherited from the Queen’s Government, meaning that the Queen’s Government washed all the responsibilities of Second World War to the independence Government and hence today’s Government. 

Last week or the other week, Senegal veterans have put the Government of France into court for not listening to the problem of Second World War veterans. Second World War veterans are continuously bombarding me in my constituency. They are saying if the Government of Uganda has no interest to actually look in the problem of Second World War Veterans then they have no other option but actually to put the British Government and the Uganda Government to court. They fought in the Second World War and their package has not been looked into.  I would like the Minister of Public Service today to clarify to me whether really the Second World War veterans are supposed to be taken care of by this Government.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Supplementary to that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it is about veterans, no.  Someone has spoken for the veterans, somebody has spoken for the payroll; not everybody must speak for every subject.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: There is something unique.

MR OKUMU RINGA: Madam Speaker, the answer I am going to give will assist my colleague, hon. Lukyamuzi, to internalise the issue.  

Madam Speaker, on the issue raised by hon. Wambuzi; the KAR, who is responsible?  I would like to propose that you direct this question to the Minister of Defence so that –(Interruption) 

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, there is communication from the Ministry of State (Defence) dated 10 August 2004, and it was given to all Members of Parliament.  It concerns the category of ex-servicemen who are a responsibility of Government and those who are not.  So, may be we shall tell the Minister of State for Defence to give another phase of letters to honourable members so that I update their Members of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But they received them; I received mine.

MR OKUMU RINGA: So, Madam Speaker, as I said that is really the responsibility of the Ministry of Defence. I am happy that already there is a circular letter to that effect.  But if it is not enough, you may wish to raise a substantive question so that it is answered.  

Hon. Kinobe raised a very important issue regarding pay change report and ability for civil servants to access the payroll.  Indeed there has been a general outcry and sometimes we wonder why there should be a problem in accessing payroll.  My ministry has a policy that before the 15th of every month, all accounting officers should submit pay change reports.  Pay change report is a report which indicates whether or not during the month X so and so is on the payroll or is getting out of the payroll.  Whether or not a new employee has been recruited and who should access the payroll.  

That is the purpose of the pay change report; and this should be received before the 15th of every month.  Thereafter, the report is sent to Uganda computer services for the purpose of affirming that ministry X, those who are on the payroll are the following or those who are on the payroll in the previous month will no longer access the payroll.  Now in case there is difficulty, we have developed a manual, a simple instruction material to assist personnel officers to fill those forms.  Once those forms are filled properly the institution under which a person is supposed to access the payroll will access it.  

The other issue you raised is, why is it that some ministries or institutions or local governments access money arising out of payroll?  This is because budgets are prepared days on pays which must exist as per establishment.  For example, if local government in Rukungiri is supposed to have established 200 workers, that is the provision which should be provided in the budget for workers.  But in case the actual number of people in the Rukungiri local government is 150, which means, the other 50 will require recruitment and this money will be reflected as money which is normally ring-fenced.  Ring-fenced is money you cannot touch because it is for statutory payment, that is, wage.  Now at the end of the financial year, if no recruitment has taken place that money will remain.  If the Ministry of Finance does not claim that money during that financial year the next financial year more money will be sent.  

So my ministry has developed a process of inspectorate department to inspect all central government and local government.  We have been bogged down due to lack of resources.  But where we have resources, we have ensured that all these issues of excess funds should not really arise.  So I would like to inform the House that my ministry together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, inspection department, and the Ministry of Local Government, we are working on the policy to ensure that this is avoided so that we do not have that kind of money lying around, and even misappropriated where there is no strict supervision.  

With these remarks, Madam Speaker, I would like to believe that even the recommendations from page 9, 10 to 11 in the report have been adequately looked at and where there is need for us, as a ministry, to come up with specific answers to the House, we should be able to do so.  With this I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee and the committee members and the entire House for your active interest and participation in the affairs of my ministry.  I would like to assure you that we shall continue to have a vibrant, well-motivated and effective service delivery public service under my ministry.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Chairperson wish to say anything?  I think a lot of work has been done.

6.18
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Capt. Charles Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Actually I want to appreciate the enrichment the members have given the report, and may be at the later date the Ministry of Finance, particularly on the pension arrears, should seriously address this concern of the committee and hon. members find a last resolution to the issue of pensions before we organize groups of pensioners to take government to court.  We have been told again that the national reserves are increasing. So I think this accumulation should not be at the expense of the pensioners.

The selective salary awards, this policy should not be against the policy of Government of the single spent structure and the committee is still of the view that consultation should be before the pronouncements are made, not the other way because it confuses the beneficiaries.

There was a delay on the report on Kampala, which was raised by hon. Lukyamuzi.  I just wanted to inform him, incidentally he has gone, that this report was tabled at the end of 2nd Session and it was saved.  But we have not got time on the order paper to discuss this report.  Otherwise, the report was tabled and saved.  When the Business Committee allocates time on the order paper for us to discuss this report, we shall do it.

On the issue of RDCs, this will be handled by the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs where it falls, but should be in line with Articles 172, 175 and 203.  

The conflicts in local governments, we raised our recommendation for not using a fire brigade approach because the inspectorate and the one in charge of local government has not been properly funded.  We feel if they are funded and they do their duties, much will be done and the fire brigade approach will not be applied.  

Madam Speaker, the method of withholding funds instead of handling these conflicts, it is bringing problems in local governments.  Because there are conflicts and the ministry here withhold funds, and the common people in the districts suffer because of the conflicts of not having cows in place, now the ministry withholds the funding and the local person suffers.  So, we need to address this problem.

On endangering the public service, it should be adhered to.  What the Ministry of Local Government raised. Our recommendations, the consultations and advice of local government finance commission, we interacted with them and we saw that actually there was no enough advice.

The Ministry of Local Government raised equalisation of grant.  This is exactly the concern of the committee.  Madam Speaker, I want to read Article 193(4), which we recommended.  Article 193(1): “The President shall for each financial year, in accordance with this Constitution, cause to be presented to Parliament proposals as to the money’s to be paid out of the Consolidated Fund as- (4) equalization grant is the money to be paid to local governments for giving subsidies or making special provisions for the least developed districts; and shall be based on the degree to which the a local government unit is lagging behind the national average standards of a particular service.”

The local government finance commission is getting problems because the national service standards are supposed to be provided by ministries who delegated the services.  The ministries have not done it, that is why we made it a recommendation that the ministries should provide the national standards for the service levels which they delegate.  

The interdicted public servants, Madam Speaker, it is good you have referred to the Committee on Government Assurances, because for us we got a list of the officers who had been interdicted from the Public Service Commission.  Those at the Public Service Commission know.  But these ones of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs are not part of the group which Public Service Commission knows.  There are some other officers in Ministry of Health I know, an engineer in Ministry of Health, who has been on interdiction for three years.  He also appealed to the committee and he is not on the list of Public Service Commission; the Public Service Commission does not know.  So, Madam Speaker, with those few words, I will ask the hon. members to support the committee in passing these figures and I thank you for the lively debate.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. members. Obviously, we have again failed to meet our deadlines. I was hoping that by this evening we would have dealt with Presidential and Foreign Affairs.  There are four committees that have not reported, Presidential and Foreign Affairs, Tourism, Trade and Industry, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, defence and internal affairs.  

I had proposed to you in the morning that perhaps in the interest of time tomorrow the Committees that have not reported could lay their reports on the Table to enable us discuss the figures and meet the deadline for 5.00 p.m..  But now since the majority of you are here, I want to consult you again, what do the Chairpersons say? Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee Chairperson, can you lay it?

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I am hijacking the chance for the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Chairperson, I am not the Chairperson of that committee. I chair the Budget Committee.  I wanted, Madam Speaker, to bring to your attention and the attention of the House this provision in the Budget Act, it is section 22.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am aware about section 22, but I do not know whether we should set precedents for extending and extending. I do not know how we are going to do this because we have really failed to meet our deadlines. It is becoming a habit and –(Interjection)- no, even last year we had to make adjustments.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I am aware of the provision giving the Chair discretion to extend time, but my view is that it would create a very bad precedent.  What justification do we have for not having complied with the time stipulated in the law?  I would rather, Madam Speaker, instead of laying this bad precedent, we go according to your advice in the morning, we pass the budget so that we actually penalize ourselves to ensure that next time we act within time; because if we lay this precedent, that means that the reason for which we fix time will be thrown to the winds.  We would rather stick to the deadline, we pass the budget; but we proceed as we proceeded to give opportunity to the committees, which were not presented, to go ahead and make their presentations and we from the frontbench respond as if the budget has not been passed.  

I am saying that because we are looking at today and the future. If we are to ask ourselves, why did we fail to meet the deadline?  So, we should penalize ourselves by passing the budget to be within the law, but give ourselves chance to handle the business as it ought have been.  So, I strongly oppose the idea of invoking that provision when we do not have a very good reason. I imagine in order to invoke it somebody must make an application.  I am not ready to make that application.  In that application to invoke your discretion, what reason shall we give?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. members, because we had said that if we can finish the figures tomorrow by 5.00 p.m., we shall give you time to continue with the debate until the end of the week.  

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I think our purpose for being here is to scrutinize these statements deliberately and consciously.  I would suggest that the Chairperson of the Budget Committee read us that provision –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am aware about that provision, it gives me power to extend if necessary.  What are the reasons you are going to give me?  If I tell you that we continue with the report on presidential, you will say you are tired.  I am prepared to sit here until midnight and we do two more reports –(Interruption)- yes, I am ready.  Are you ready to continue until midnight?

MR SEKIKUBO: Yes, Madam Speaker, but also importantly, how do we go on, what precedent are we setting?  Even in the first place we may ask that one, we just pass here and later come back to debate?  It is also a wrong precedent, Madam Speaker, we are setting, we would have this Parliament save its image.  How else shall we come back to say that this one was improper when –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, you retain discretionary powers, but you have been very kind to us to ask for our opinion.  I would like to go with your option that we approve the figures then we come to the debate, because the debate does not affect the figures at all.  So, why do we not approve the figures then we can go into debate another time?

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  In supporting what hon. Rukutana said and really the direction in which the hon. Speaker is guiding us, if we really cast back our mind, you look at the work we do within the Committees. Our colleagues within the committees did thorough work on behalf of all of us.  Like the subject we have discussed you could see, hon. Capt. Byaruhanga, really the issues we raised they had raised them and they had made serious recommendations as to what should happen.  

So, in the interest of really keeping to the law we set ourselves and ensure that we prepare for equally important work forward like the road map. We should accept the guidance from the Rt. hon. Speaker, let us lay these documents on the Table, note the recommendations by our colleagues and proceed on with other work.

MR MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  It was only last week that you observed - actually it was a strong observation when you said that some committees do not do their work.  You said it, Madam Speaker; it is on record.  Going by what the National Political Commissar is saying that the committees do serious work down there, yet we have on record your own words, how can we go by the committee reports and simply pass figures without going through this work; unless, Madam Speaker, you can name these committees.  If we have handled these committees, we can go ahead and approve.  Otherwise, without that we cannot, Madam Speaker. I am totally objective of that, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The committees I named are not sessional committees, and earlier when you are not here I named two, which have never reported to this House.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am the Chairperson on the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs. I was ready this morning in this House at 10.00 a.m. to report.  It is unfortunate that I think the time allocation –(Interjection)- no, I think the time allocation - I thought by lunchtime, my Colleague on the Committee of Public Service would be through.  If anything, I should mention that by Thursday I was ready to report in this House.  So, it is rather a disappointment, in terms of time allocation.  Maybe we should have had an opportunity to say, “between such and such a time, that report should be finished” and it would have been good for us.  But in the event that we have now a deadline, which we need to respect, I will go with your ruling and we see how we go about over this hurdle now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not said that we shall not discuss them; we are changing the sequence.  We are only changing the sequence that tomorrow we finish the figures then Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, we go back to the debate; that is what we are saying.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I have a different thinking.  We are here to analyse figures by looking at the issues raised by Members of Parliament.  For example, I raised an issue of pensions and the Committee on Local Government and Public Service raised very important issues. Some of us have the view- and remember I informed you that I intend to move a small motion to make some adjustments in these figures. So that – well Parliament can adjust figures in the budget.   Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is not the fault of Parliament that we are not in time. Equally, finance and some other ministries have bogged us down. Therefore – (Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on the point of procedure and with due respect to my vice Chairperson of Public Accounts Committee. Is it procedurally correct for an hon. Member of Parliament to address the Chair when he is pocketing as if he is addressing workers on his farm?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member needed his hands to anchor himself, but I was mainly watching his mouth.  

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry if I did violate the rules of the House but it is the confidence that one has when he is presenting his points.  I was requesting really that- what is budgeting, really if we talk about budgeting?  Figures and facts must be brought together in order to arrive at a genuine budget.  So, if some of us have plans of adjusting some figures by requesting Parliament to help in this you will have denied me a chance to try and do what my constituents will have wanted – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Sabiiti when I talk about dealing with the figures you are going to deal with Vote by Vote and then you will say for me I want to remove money from this Vote, that is the figures I am talking about.  That one must be done vote by vote. There is no shortcut about it.

MR SABIITI: If we shall be given the opportunity at that material time to do some adjustments – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Sabiiti, I am disappointed that you are insinuating bad things.

MR SABIITI: No, there is no insinuation, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then leave it; you will adjust whatever you want tomorrow.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much.

MR AWORI:  Madam Speaker, I move that this House adopts the position you have recommended that we approve the figures and we debate later.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us agree to meet tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock.  But, honourable members, when I come at 9.00a.m or 10.00a.m there are less than 20 people.  Members come at midday then they start asking questions about a report they did not listen to and we waste time.  Tomorrow the minister will have to wind up at 10.00 O’clock in the morning and then we deal with the figures vote by vote and ministry by ministry.  Honourable members, I am saying that we need quorum from 10 O’clock until 10 p.m tomorrow night.  I am really appealing to you to be here tomorrow.  So, the House is adjourned to 10.00 O’clock in the morning.

(The House rose at 6.38p.m and adjourned until Tuesday, 31 August at 10.00 a.m)

