Friday, 30 August 2002

Parliament met at 10.00 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on your behalf, I want to welcome our children who are in the gallery. Some of them have come from Bumadu - (Interruption) - please switch off your mobile phone. We have children from Bumadu Primary School in Bundibugyo Town Council. You are most welcome our children - (Applause).  We also have children from Butayunja Primary School in Bukomansibi in Masaka district. You are welcome. We also have children from Panyimur Primary School, Jonam County, Nebbi district. You are also welcome.

I wonder whether the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs is here.

MR SEBALU MIKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing in for the chairperson who is not around and the deputy is also not here. But I am a member of the committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs.  

Mr Speaker, like it was rightly put yesterday, the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs considered the budget of the Uganda Aids Commission, but it was an oversight on the part of the committee that the figures were not included. I beg to move and report the figures so that they be included to form part of the report of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, Mr Speaker. 

THE CHAIRAMAN: Thank you.

MR MIKE SEBALU MIKE: Mr Speaker, the committee considered and approved a figure of Shs1,243,000,000 as recurrent expenditure, and Shs20,563,154,000 as development expenditure. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that we accept the committee’s report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

VOTE 395 – UGANDA AIDS COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs1,243,000,000 under Vote 395 - Uganda Aids Commission be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

                (Question put and agreed to.) 

HEAD 195 - UGANDA AIDS COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs20,563,154,000 under Head 195 - Uganda Aids Commission be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Vote 395 and Head 195 for the Uganda Aids Commission for the fiscal year 2002/2003 and passed it without amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Finance Bill, 2002 be read a second time.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded. Proceed.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, and honourable members, this financial year’s tax policy is premised on three main objectives, namely; stimulating the economy, strengthening tax administration and raising revenue to meet our ever rising expenditure demands so as to reduce the fiscal deficit.  

Mr Speaker, allow me to report that this financial Year, Government was faced with a resource gap of Shs20 billion.  In order to cater for this gap, we had no alternative but to make modest adjustments in the rates of taxes as provided for in the bill. Honourable members will therefore find that the tax bill is tailored to reflect this position. The tariff book also has had its nomenclature amended to reflect changes in goods classification made on the World Customs Council.  

Honourable members will also find that there are changes that have arisen following the decision taken in regard to what is agreed upon under the East African Community arrangements.  

I deem it that you have had time to study the bill.  I will therefore not take time to go through all the adjustments and changes, which we have made. Since the bill was supplied some time back, I will leave the House to debate the changes. I beg to move.  

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, the Finance Bill, 2002 was presented to Parliament and referred to the Sessional Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development in accordance with Rule 154(c) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

The bill is intended, among other things, to address and achieve the following objectives, some of which the Minister has already mentioned: 

• To increase revenue collection for funding expenditures of Government.

• To improve voluntary compliance and reduce incidence of tax evasion, avoidance, fraud and smuggling.

• To encourage value addition on exports and production of manufactured exports.

• To try to bring some informal sector activities into the tax net, thus widening the tax base.

• It is also to generally harmonise taxes as a move towards regional integration.

The committee considered the bill and now wishes to report and present its report to the House for consideration. 

Methodology:

In considering the bill, the committee held discussions with the minister and his technical officials. The committee also reviewed the petitions from some manufactures, and communicated to other key stakeholders in the economy, specifically: Uganda Manufacturers’ Association, Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Uganda Farmers’ Association, and Uganda Investment Authority.  

Observations and Recommendations:

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Finance in compliance with the committee’s recommendations during the last financial year, has tabled four bills to effect some of the proposed amendments in the Finance Bill, 2000. These are: 

• The Valued Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2002, 

• The Customs Management (Amendment) Bill, 2002 

• The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2002, and 

• The Customs (Amendment) Bill, 2002.  

The amendments on the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2002 will be reported on separately and they are not covered in the Finance Bill.  

We now look at major tax proposals on major items, which deserved the attention of Parliament. 

Raw Materials: 

The raw materials have continued to attract tax exemption for purposes of promoting the manufacturing sector.  

When you look at sugar as a raw material, the committee observed that among the raw materials, sugar has continued to be controversial. The complication of sugar as a raw material arises out of the fact that it can be used as a raw material and also as a finished product. It was observed that sugar imported as raw material finds its way to the open sugar market, which is diversionary. This gives undue disadvantage to those who import sugar for sale, undermines the local sugar industries and causes loss of tax revenue to government.   

The committee had proposed to the Minister of Finance to consider taxing all imported sugar and giving a duty drawback facility to those genuine consumers of sugar as a raw material. We thought this would be a very useful proposal and it would ease the administration. But we were told that this would be a disadvantage to the manufacturers who would tie down their working capital.  

In light of this controversy, the committee recommended that Uganda Revenue Authority should strengthen the monitoring function by carrying out an input-output analysis to ensure that the sugar imported as raw material is used in production and does not end up in the open sugar market.  

The second recommendation is that the manufacturers of sugar, who also import the same as a finished product, should be subjected to the applicable taxes.  

Another key tax proposed item is polythene bags. The committee observed with concern the continued degradation of our environment by the polythene bags (buveera). 

An increase was made on excise duty from 10 per cent to 20 per cent, and the committee considered that this was not prohibitive enough as these buveera block the drainage systems. They can even kill animals if they eat them.  

It was noted, though, that polythene materials are also used as raw materials in packaging, building, hospitals, packing coffee seedlings, and so on. The committee, however, was concerned specifically with the buveera used as carry bags. 

On this specific one, the Committee recommended that first, the coding of polythene bags should be streamlined to separate carry bags from the other polythene materials and that the tax on polythene carry bags should be increased from 20 to 50 per cent.  Government should come out with a clear position on these polythene bags. The view is that they should eventually be eradicated. We should encourage, Mr Speaker, the production of decomposable substitutes like paper bags. So, we are not proposing banning but they should be prohibitively taxed to encourage manufacturers to look at substitutes.  

On palm oil and some of its products, the committee wondered why crude oil attracted seven percent import duty and four percent COMESA duty, which is the same as palm olein and palm stearin, which are by-products of crude palm oil. The committee was informed that since there is no factory to process crude oil in Uganda, there is need to put crude oil on the same footing with some of its products to avoid under-declaration.  

Bicycle Manufacturing:

Roadmaster Cycles (U) Ltd 

Manufactures of bicycles in Uganda petitioned the committee that imported bicycles from India and China were undermining the industry. This is because there is a low tax on imported bicycles of seven percent import duty.  They argued that Uganda’s economy is a high cost economy because of high transport costs, interest rates, wages and utility costs.  The committee was also informed that the factory was given six years of tax holiday. Members therefore observed that with the above incentives, the factory should be able to compete favourably with imported bicycles.    

The most controversial one was worn clothing and worn textiles. This was very controversial in the discussion and it generated a hot debate. I will not be surprised if it generated the same debate on the Floor of the House today.  

The committee was informed that the increase of excise duty by 5 percent from the current 10 to 15 percent on worn clothes was a deliberate policy to promote the production of clothing materials by the local industries, and to promote the cotton sub-sector in the country. The committee was also concerned about government failure to promote the cotton growers by giving them incentives. 

Members were informed that the local cotton industry had crumbled due to second-hand clothes, and the government lost a lot of revenue in this venture, and hence the need to avert the situation. The committee was informed that there are currently three factories producing cotton textiles, namely, Nytil, Nyanza Textiles and Phoenix.  Members, however, expressed concern that some firms purportedly producing cotton textiles are actually importing finished products as raw materials.  Members were also informed that Government is just facilitating the Tri-Star Company to exploit AGOA provisions, and the committee urged government that the same treatment be extended to all firms engaged in AGOA. 

Out of the heated debate and reasoning, we made the following recommendations: 

The “protectionism” policy on textile industries should be clearly spelt out because it contradicts the liberalisation policy followed since 1987. Also, protection as a policy for other items should not be item by item. There should be a general policy on this one, especially - if I can add, Mr Speaker - when you have WTO and countries in Europe subsidising agriculture and urging developing countries to liberalise. Uganda needs to have a policy response to this contradiction even in international relations.  

There should be strict measures to penalise the alleged importation of finished textiles purported to be raw materials, if it is proved that this, indeed, is happening.  

The tax should be applied to cotton textile only for which there is no local production, and other fabrics like silk should not be taxed. Let me put this point. The point Members argued is that there are textile types, which are not produced in this country and therefore it should not be affected, since you would not be protecting its production domestically.

Verification of vehicles:  

Mr Speaker, the Committee was assured that the idea to verify vehicles from Japan and elsewhere was to ensure that the imported vehicles are still sound and genuinely acquired. We should not use the country as a dumping ground for mechanically dangerous vehicles. The committee was also informed that the verification exercise would not start in September 2002 as reported by the Minister because the policy itself is being revisited. Of course, we debated so many things, like whether the competent authority should be in Uganda or should be in the country of origin? Who is going to pay for it and how can you ensure that it is going to enforce what you want and if the country wants to re-export, how does Uganda prevent these vehicles coming in? That is how we came to the recommendation that the Minister should genuinely carry out a serious analysis to make sure that this policy, which is starting is properly implemented.  

We recommend that the implementation of this policy should be stayed and await further analysis to avoid the losses that might occur, and the possibility of taking the country back to SGS days, that made imports very expensive.  

License Fees:

Members were informed that the last time revision of licenses was done was in 1995. It was reported that in order to respond to the harmonised rates in the East African Community, the fees had to be revised upward as indicated in the Schedule in the bill. 

The committee felt that since the country is committed to regional integration, we should keep in line with the rest of the countries. 

Fees for Documents and Services:

The committee observed that the fee for personalised vehicle numbers is indeed a luxury and you pay for the taste. It was, therefore, agreed that reducing these rates could be diluting the taste and the class of those who want them. Therefore, we agreed with the minister that it should be maintained at Shs3,000,000 and Shs500,000 for vehicles and motorcycles respectively. 

Members were, however, concerned about the de-registration for export of agricultural tractors and engineering plants. It was observed that these equipment are given concessional rates on import duty in order to promote agriculture. Members therefore noted that for this equipment to be re-exported at a low fee, it is a loss to the country. There are some typing problems here, but the emphasis on this point is that these items are imported in the country cheaply because of the low rate and there is a temptation to want to re-export them. So, if the re-export tax is kept low, the country will have lost. 

Therefore, the recommendation is, the de-registration for export of the agricultural tractors be increased from the current Shs400,000 to at least Shs1,000,000, and for engineering plants to be increased from Shs350,000 to at least Shs1,000,000. The intention is clear: If you import them cheaply and you forego tax, it should not be cheap to re-export them out of the country because the purpose would have been defeated.

Fuel:

Mr Speaker, the committee noted with concern the discrepancy between what the minister increased and what the pump prices are. The minister increased the price of petrol by only Shs30 per litre, the pump price across the board increased by Shs60 per litre. 

The committee was informed that since the economy is liberalised, the market forces determine the price. That is the argument, but the committee holds the view that there must be some policy direction on guidance regarding the prices of petroleum products. 

We recommend that Government should manage the economy and intervene where possible to avoid the formation of cartels in such vital sectors as fuel and banking. 

The minister should institute a regulatory body in such sensitive sectors like fuel to avoid exploitation and making super normal profit by cartels. Surely, members will appreciate that fuel is input literally in every economic activity and the way its price is managed is very key to the way the economy performs.

Exemption of Income Tax to Bank of Uganda:

The committee was informed that there is a conflict in the provision of the Bank of Uganda Statute and the Income Tax Act relating to Bank of Uganda exemption. Exempting the central bank from income tax makes no difference in principle to the amount of government receipt. Most central banks do not pay income tax provided they transfer the profits to government. 

So, the committee’s view is that, as long as the Bank of Uganda is transferring its profit to the Treasury, there is no point in charging the bank income tax. We therefore agreed with the minister that the central bank should be exempted from paying income tax. 

Computers and their Accessories:

The committee appreciates government’s initiative for wanting to improve the application of information technology in the country. This will encourage e-commerce, e-mail and other electronic operations. This is part of the trend globally.  The committee was however concerned about a possible misuse of such an opportunity, which might lead to bringing in the country other related accessories not classified as computers but that are exempted under this bill. 

Because of that, we recommend that measures should be put in place to check on possible abuse of this incentive and the exempted items should be clearly spelt out. We could improve on coding, so that there is no ambiguity about what is a computer, what are its accessories and what is a similar item, which is not a computer.

Tax on Antibiotics:

The committee observed that antibiotics have been subjected to tax in this bill however, the minister agreed that this was a mistake, and therefore, it should be removed. These antibiotics are part of medicine used by the population. Our recommendation, which the minister agreed with, was that antibiotics should be exempted from tax.

In conclusion, the committee would like to call on the government to come up with a clear policy on protection of domestic industries in the context of a liberalised environment. Government should also put in place measures to protect the country against dumping. 

The committee noted that the Finance Bill, 2002 had incorporated most of the recommendations of the committee and the House of the last financial year. We want to thank the minister for heeding to the recommendations of the House and for promoting a harmonious understanding between the committee and the ministry.  When you examine the rates in this bill, there were no drastic increases or reductions in tax proposals, and this gradual approach to taxation encourages tax compliance and we support it.  

Mr Speaker, I beg the House to accept the report and the suggested amendment. I thank you and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and thank you, committee.  Now the debate is open.

MR PATRICK AMURIAT (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank the committee for a job well done. In contributing to this debate, I have three observations to make. The first observation is on the matter of polythene containers or bags.  

In its report, the committee rightly observes that polythene bags are detrimental to our environment because they are not biodegradable. Often they are an environmental menace. It also does observe that apart from being used as containers to hold whatever we buy from the market, they are also used in the construction industry, in hospitals and also as pots in production of seedlings and different species of trees.  However, all the other uses put together would not equal the amount of polythene bags that are used as carrying bags. Therefore, you find them in garbage heaps and drainage; drainage are choked by these buvera! 

Because of this, and considering the turn over, I would like to suggest that rather than simply slowly phasing them out, they should be banned with immediate effect. My argument is that for a very long time, environmentalists have brought this case up at different forums. We have debated on them and we have continued to watch our environment being degraded unabated. There is therefore no need to give these producers any more time. The time is now for production to stop forthwith; I suggest.

The second matter that I would like to talk about is the proposed increase on excise duty on used clothes. Mr Speaker, you will appreciate that the majority of the people who use these used clothes are actually the poor of the poorest. Inside this Chamber, you would probably not find anybody putting on used garments because Members of Parliament and the officials here can afford, but let us look at the ordinary man and woman and child deep down in the village who is hardly earning a living. These people need to dress a little bit decently.

I would like to take us back to many, many years ago when these old clothes were not a common thing. It was very common to see people moving with their bums outside, peeping. It was common to see people - men and women - moving dressed in patched clothes. But since the boom on second-hand clothing was realised, we find people a little more decently dressed. They are able to put on coats, they are even able to put on shirts with trademarks like Marks and Spencer, Dior, Pierre Cardin, which otherwise if picked out of the shelves of shops, the price would be prohibitive. I would like to urge this House to support me in these arguments. This increase in excise duty is going to cause more trouble and more harm to the cotton industry than it would help.

In conclusion, I would like to refer the House to Page 5 of the report on the matter of personalised number plates. The committee rightly observed that personalised number plates are a luxury and people pay for taste when they buy them. They also rightly observed that each costs Shs3,000,000 for motor vehicles and Shs500,000 for motorcycles however, the committee recommends that the level of taxation or the cost of these number plates should be maintained. I tend to differ a little bit. It makes me believe that the committee was not good tradespeople. If they were good tradespeople, they would encourage many more people to be able to access this luxury.  

When you look at Shs3,000,000 not many Members of Parliament probably would be able to afford this, but if this was reduced to something like Shs1.5 million, many more Ugandans would be able to afford these personalised number plates.  As a result of this, I believe it would improve on the revenue on personalised number plates. I beg this House to support the proposal that the cost of personalised number plates be reduced to encourage many more Ugandans to procure them. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their report. 

I agree entirely with the need to apply taxes to raise revenue for expenditures and also to use taxes as a means of stimulating development however, the problem of focusing on taxes alone without integrating tax policies into overall development policies will mean that even if we raise lots of revenues, we cannot achieve the desired results.  

Many committees of this Parliament, when reporting on policy statements, clearly came out with lots of lamentations, most of them linked to revenue shortfall or expenditure deficiencies, and yet the real problem was that whatever plan each of the ministries has is done sectorally and, therefore, even what they wanted was far out of the reality of this country.  I ask that the National Planning Authority should be quickly put in place so as to rationalise our national plans and to allow for the little revenue that we get from taxes to work effectively.

I would like to say this by making reference to the case that was brought before us by the committee, and that is the bicycle factory. This bicycle factory was given six years of tax relief and at the end of the six years, they are asking the ministry to impose additional tax so that others cannot bring bicycles here! 

I believe that the tax relief that was given to the bicycle factory was for a purpose. Imagine that the ministry provided some conditions for tax relief to investors! For example, if they could come with an investment plan and argue that, “if you give me tax relief for six years, by the end of the sixth year I would have done a, b, c, d”, certainly, if they are held to those conditions, it is more likely that the tax relief would yield more productive results.  

The questions, therefore, that I would like to ask the minister are; what were the conditions under which tax relief was given to the bicycle factory and to the other investors? Were the investment plans associated with their initial proposals implemented? If not, do we have measures to ensure that those who remit money gained from tax relief instead of investing it as planned are made to account for that? I believe that the ministry should consider this if we are to promote our industrial development.

I would like to also thank the ministry for removing VAT on computers. I think there may be other things associated with computers, for example tax in schools that do computer training, to actually promote the use of computers and to build capacity to benefit from the ITC environment. That is a new industry.

Lastly, I would also like to concur with the committee on removing income tax from the Bank of Uganda. I think insisting on that is merely beefing up our tax figures for something that we would have done nothing to collect. If that is removed, the real tax figures and the real work of Uganda Revenue Authority will come out. This is government money, and it only makes the work of Uganda Revenue Authority look very rosy. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR ZACHARY OLUM (Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for a very comprehensive report, but I have some points to raise on the import of palm oil and its products. 

Mr Speaker, palm oil is very heavily subsidised in Malaysia and Indonesia. When the products are imported into this country, they arrive at a lower price than the local oil seeds. My concern is that the price that we pay to our local farmers for their oil seeds is extremely very low. When you look at the price of groundnuts, Soya beans, cottonseeds and simsim, there is no way that these local oil seeds can compete favourably with imported palm oil.  

The Malaysians heavily subsidise these products and India had to react to this heavy subsidy by imposing a tax of almost 90 percent on imported Malaysian palm oil products. There is a time when the ministry has to consider increasing the tax rates on these imported products so that our local farmers can also benefit from producing the oil seeds locally.  

There are also some debates on the effect of palm oil on our health. I think last year we raised this matter in our committee report, regarding the effect of palm oil on the hearts of those who consume it. That debate is still continuing.  

But be that as it may, I think it is important that we take note of the heavy subsidy of the palm oil imported in this country, which is killing the local initiative for producing the oil seeds and being able to manufacture these oil seeds locally. That is what I thought the minister should be able to tell us. What plans has he got to progressively encourage the local farmers to produce these oil seeds and cooking oil locally, so that they can overcome the effect of these subsidised palm oil products in this country?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of clarification with respect to government’s policy of protection.  

In this year’s budget speech, the Minister of Finance observed that one of the pillars guiding government’s export strategy is the Medium Term Competitive Strategy Paper. In this paper, it is stated very clearly that protection of local industries makes them inefficient and therefore they cannot compete in the export market. This is repeated in last year’s budget speech.  

I was very surprised when in this year’s budget speech the Minister of Finance came up and said that he was going to increase tax on mivumba by 5 per cent, which actually is 50 percent. The main purpose of doing this was to protect local industries. 

I would like to know from the government whether the MTCS has been abandoned and whether government has conceded that protection of local industries is now necessary. All along, government has said that we are liberalising our economy, and that protecting our local industries will make them inefficient. May I be clarified, Mr Speaker?

MRS LYDIA BALEMENZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for the report. 

I would also like to get clarification from the minister. We have been told in the report that we currently have three textile factories. We have been told about Nytil, Nyanza Textiles and Phoenix. But from what I know, Nytil is derived from the word Nyanza and textiles. NY stands for Nyanza and TIL stands for textiles. So, I wonder whether there is another factory, which is using the trade name of Nyanza Textiles in the names of NYTIL. If that is clarified, then I will feel very comfortable.  It is common knowledge this factory is in Mukono district, but if there were another one, which has borrowed either the word “Nyanza”, or the word “Nytil” from Mukono’s factory to another district, I would be very happy to be informed.

About this five percent increase on the second-hand clothes, I am also equally worried. Much as we are informed that we have local textile industries, I am not aware of any industry, which manufactures printed cloth fit for ordinary wear or for clothing. But since the minister has informed us that we could do away with these second-hand clothes, I would like to be informed as to where we can buy printed material. As far as I know, NYTIL is still printing plain cloth mainly for bed sheets and substandard material as far as clothing is concerned. I feel that people still need these imported second-hand clothes, considering the poverty we have always talked about within our country and the prohibitive prices on first-hand clothes imported in this country.    

I wish also to comment on the VAT on computers. It is a good idea, but consider where we have retained VAT and even increased on VAT - on clothes, food and household items. I am of the opinion that people, companies or institutions which import computers are capable of paying VAT. But when you consider the areas where every other Ugandan suffers on the VAT charges on all these other items, I am of the opinion  – (Interruption)

MR SSEBALU MIKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give to my colleague is that ultimately, it is the end user who pays the VAT, not only the importers. So, the whole idea is to encourage as many users to access the facility as possible. Thank you.

MRS BALEMEZI: I thank the honourable member for the information, but as he said, it is the end user that suffers the tax. I think he only supports my point that there are very few end users on the computers as compared to other users on other items where we have high VAT rates.  

With that, Mr Speaker, if I get the clarification from the minister, I will be very comfortable with the report.

MS SAUDA MUGERWA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the ministry, which has opened its eyes to the reality on the ground.  

First of all, allow me to appeal to the House to realise what is happening and what is needed in Uganda in order to improve on our economy. We need a high tax in almost every item so that we can get revenue for government to raise income for its use. So, I disagree with the Member representing Workers, who was seeking clarification from the ministry and he asked that in 2001, why was the government opening up and now it is protecting its industries? The need is not (_Mr Wadri rose_) Sorry, Mr Speaker. But I think you will get a chance to give information.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow her to develop her point?

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, according to what I saw on the ground, Uganda should not only be protecting, it should be creating industries instead and protect them as much as possible –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way, and I would like to inform her as follows:

Some time back, when Mr Mulwana appealed to government for tax exemption, he was categorically told that tax exemption on domestic industries is reminiscent of backwardness. Are we now saying that tax exemption on a factory owned by a Muyindi is a sign of modernity, and the application by an African is a sign of backwardness? This is a statement, which was made, and I think it is still in force. What I would like to say is that what is good for the gander is also good for the goose. Thank you.  

MS MUGERWA: Thank you for that wonderful information, but as I was saying, I thank the ministry for realising the mistake it has been making. We need to protect our infant industries. We do not only protect but we also need to create new ones.  

My main concern is the tax on second-hand clothing and textiles. I will call for a higher tax than this. Why? Because of the potential the industry has. Uganda is an agricultural country, and cotton is one of our main products. In fact, internationally, it is one of the best products we have. Therefore, we should have a way of promoting it as much as possible and also promoting its by-products. If we do not promote the textile industry, we will not be promoting cotton. So, we need to promote this industry in order to promote agriculture and promote the production of cotton. Therefore, anything that would help us to do so, should be done, and tax on second-hand clothing is one of the best ways of doing it.

Another way is also the promotion of skilled manpower. How do we do this? Through the promotion of the textile industry, we would create employment and knowledge in the production of textiles. The only way we can do that is if we have a textile industry here. But if we work through second-hand clothing, definitely we will not be creating skilled manpower. And I want us to do that by introducing this tax. 

Another thing is unemployment. Uganda has got a very high rate of unemployment. The only way to reduce it is through promotion of industries, and the textile industry is one of the best ways of doing that.  

On dumping, most of the developing countries, especially Uganda where I am, are becoming dumping grounds for items like second-hand clothing. Why do we accept this? Most exporters of second-hand clothes in developed countries are spending more money than we are spending  here to get rid of the second-hand clothes. Why are we doing this, why are we accepting that dumping? It is dumping because you even find in town that somebody is putting on a winter coat.  Things are not sorted out that they are sending us their best. Is this a dustbin where they are sending things? So, to get rid of that we must put a high tax.

I also want to talk about pride; our people are not proud. We should give them the pride they deserve by not allowing them to use anything that comes from abroad. I had a friend from Sri Lanka who told me that in Sri Lanka when they were importing second-hand clothes the container could remain in a warehouse for about three/four months to give it some chemical treatment. But here, as soon as a dress comes, you do not mind whether it came from a dead person, somebody just picks it and puts it on. There is no regulation that could help to –(Interruption)
 
MR WADRI: I would like the Member to clarify as to whether when she says we should not use imported items, she is not in an imported dress? Is that dress manufactured in Masaka? Can she clarify to me on that?

MS MUGERWA: I am sorry, Mr Speaker that the honourable Member decided to just interrupt me all the time without justification. I am talking about second-hand clothing, and definitely for us to promote the industry here we must protect our cotton industry.  

Another thing is what one honourable member talked about regulation of the policies. The Ministry of Finance must find a way of regulating what it puts in place. A lot of our foreign investors here are complaining that the Ministry of Local Government is not abiding by the commitment it takes in attracting them. They come here and start an industry and within two/three years they have to change their policy. So, try to stick to the agreements we make with them so that they can plan their investments properly.

Lastly, let me alert the House that we should not ban the polythene paper because they are very, very useful. Also, Uganda has tried to re-cycle them. In Masaka we now have somebody who is collecting the polythene papers for re-cycling. What government could do is to ensure that it promotes the types of polythene papers, which can be re-cycled and the others, which cannot be re-cycled, are phased out. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am concerned about these investors of ours. For example, when you look at this factory man, he complains about our high cost economy, and that transport costs and interest rate are high. But, for example, we do not have a standard wage. A wage is negotiated between the employer and the employee and in most cases these people are underpaid. I don’t think this is a very good excuse, and I am sure these take advantage of this tax holiday.

With regard to Tri-Star Company, which is doing business here to exploit AGOA, how much are we going to gain from this company? To the best of my knowledge, some of these European companies have been going to the East to manufacture from there simply because the labour is cheaper. I am wondering whether it is not the same here, because I am told that the textile materials are imported. I think our input in this country is just, maybe employment of the 1000 AGOA girls. Can I be clarified as to how much, maybe within a time frame, shall we gain from this endeavour say, within one, two, or three years? 

I am saying that because as a country, we might be hoodwinked and we think we are moving forward when in actual fact we are not gaining much. I am reliably informed that the type of textiles that are made from our local textile industries do not meet the standards that are required in the American market. That means we are going to keep relying on the investors from outside taking advantage of AGOA, which will not benefit Uganda apart from knowing that it is done from here. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report, which they have submitted to this Parliament. I recommend to the Ministry of Finance that the tax revenue for this country must take into account the economic strategy, which we are trying to adopt. 

When you look through sections in the report, you will find that there is some sort of contradiction. Mr Speaker, I would like to comment on section 323 - Palm oil and some of its products. A previous speaker already commented on this matter, but I want to bring to the attention of the House that the Uganda Oil Seeds Producers and Processors Association has done a wonderful job by focussing on oil seeds in this country. 

A few years ago, Uganda used to import more than 90 per cent of its edible oil, but because of the intervention of this association, this figure has been reduced to 6 per cent. This is a great contribution to our economy and to our people. Unfortunately, we have got some of the manufacturers in this country who use that opportunity to import cheap Palm oil from outside and dump it in this country, thereby threatening this industry.

I would like to bring it to the attention of the minister, that oil seeds which are mainly grown in the North and the East have contributed a lot to the employment and incomes of those people. These areas are very poor. As you know, almost 70 per cent of the people live below poverty line. It will be important for this particular sub-sector to be properly protected. I therefore find the level of taxation of 70 per cent too low. 

I want to bring it to the attention of the minister and those concerned that in other countries, this industry is always protected. The protection is because of what is happening in the United States of America where most Soya beans in the world are produced and elsewhere. In those countries, and particularly in the United States of America, farmers who produce these crops are highly protected and subsidised. Therefore, to allow importers of this palm oil to bring cheap palm oil into the country is unfair to our farmers.

I would also like to bring it to the attention of this House that the Kalangala Palm Oil Industry, which is in my interest as Vice Chairman of UOSPA, is long overdue. There have been many stories about land acquisition problems and so on, but this has taken too long. I think the reason here might be connected to the tax within. But this must be taken into account very seriously.  

I would like to comment very briefly on the cotton industry. I totally agree with the recommendation of this committee on the policy of protectionism - which is put in quotes - in this particular industry. I find that the Government of Uganda does not have any clear policies on this matter. This is reflected on the tax structure in this particular industry. I think this should be sorted out. 

As I talk now, I do not know what arrangement the government has with Tri-Star Company. I do not know whether they are going to pay any tax or the Government of Uganda is in fact going to pay them money for investing in Uganda. We know that this factory has been given the Bugolobi Coffee Factory stores and buildings. I do not know whether they are paying rent on this, but I think the main issue here is that there should be very clear government policies regarding taxation and investors. I also think that incentives being given out for investors should be universal, non-discriminatory and should apply to both Ugandans and non-Ugandans alike. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity. I thank the chairman and his committee for a concise report, which I support and have a few comments to make on.  

My first comment is on the textile industry. I feel the tax that was imposed on second-hand clothes was only intended to collect more taxes from the poor, but not really to stimulate the local textile industry. In fact, I have come across a report by the Ministry of Finance that admits that that increases in tax will not stimulate the textile industry. So, the intention was merely to collect more money from poor people.  

Mr Speaker, this position was not well thought out. We have a high level of unemployment. The second-hand clothes business employs very many people, particularly women. In fact, when you look at the whole industry, only about five per cent who are in the import business are men. The rest of the people employed or who get their incomes or supplement their incomes from second-hand clothes are very poor women. This increase in the tax is only to collect more taxes from them. That is the whole objective!  

It is not right to look at this use of the second-hand clothes business as dumping. I do not agree with that. I might sound like a person who is a fanatic of liberalisation, but I am not. Actually, I think it is quite right that people who are more affluent, that when they want to change fashion but still have useful clothes, put them on the market so that those who want them are free to do so. 

Let us face it, if our people did not want to wear western clothes – look at West Africa, all the poor people wear kitenge; they can afford it. It is locally made. They are as poor as we are but they have differentiated the product they want. It is not a leftover of some Europeans or Americans. It is their own new fabric! (Interjection)  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Capt. Mike Mukula): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleague for giving way. I want to help the House and my honourable colleague on one or two issues. I have been a Chairman of the Uganda Importers, Exporters and Traders Association, and I am still a patron. The current position is that this five per cent surcharge has not affected the cost of one single bale to whoever is selling or buying.  What has happened is the following: 

The cost of one container of second-hand clothes, a 40-ft container, is US$24,000. This container landing in Kampala with taxes fully paid gets to the tune of between Shs80-82 million. The profit, which has been embedded for each importer, has been in the range of Shs10-11 million, depending on the valuation. The current position is that because there are many importers, the amount of profit that the importer has been gaining has reduced from Shs10 million to now Shs8 million because of the five per cent. But for the end user, the cost of each item has not changed in the market. Two, no single cost has changed of any single bale in the market. I just wanted this information to be understood.

MS BYANYIMA: I thank the honourable Minister for his information –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable Member, why don’t we find a way of solving this in one way or another, then proceed with the bill? I have detected that people who are contributing are talking about this particular tax. Why do we not find a way of solving this one and then we proceed on other business?  

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, if I can interpret you correctly, would you think this would be the appropriate moment for me to move my motion so that it is discussed generally and when we get there, we just do the needful?  

THE SPEAKER: No, I do not know because people have been condemning this tax but they just leave it there. This is mere contribution. What is the way forward? This is my question, because I have heard about five members talking about this particular tax. But what do we do?

MS BYANYIMA WINNIE: Mr Speaker, I had seen a motion circulated which I was going to support, so I hope if it is moved now, I will have time to make my contribution on other issues as well.

THE SPEAKER: No, you wind up your contribution.

DR OKULO EPAK: Of course, we will run into the question of procedure because I can only move my motion at the Committee Stage. I would probably beg the indulgence of my colleagues to wait until I move the motion then we can really support it.

THE SPEAKER: Agreed? Do we continue with this debate, because people are on this particular subject, or we wind up the debate then we proceed with the Committee Stage? (Interjection) Let the honourable member wind up.

MS BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, I hope I will be compensated a little to develop my other points. 

On this issue, I want to emphasise that we are in a global market and if we want to encourage our people, and our local textile industry, I would really encourage that we differentiate our products. If one wants to wear a product that is coming cheaply from the American market, because it is second-hand, we will not have that opportunity to stop it at the border. On the other hand, we can develop our own clothes. I see hon. Baba Diri here, wearing a Kitenge that design is as classic as a Channel suit or a Gucci made here in Africa. It is a classic design; it is a question of taste. So, we ought to differentiate and develop the products that can be sold here locally and that can work here. 

Mr Speaker, I have very strong reservations about how our government is going about its business of taking advantage of AGOA. As we talk now, there is no effective policy on trade; instead you have this company that is here that is benefiting from public assets and RDCs making political recruitment of staff for it. I would like to know how these politically appointed employees fit within the profit motive of a business enterprise? Who is subsidising the cost of training the girls coming from deep, deep, there in Isingiro or deep, deep, in Karamoja to adapt to an urban life? Who is paying for those costs? 

If the government wants to build capacity in manufacturing, why not set up technical schools so that this capacity is built and is available for any entrepreneur to tap? I think this is a misguided way of promoting trade. It is ad-hoc, and it promotes favouritism and cronyism. It is not a serious effort at promoting trade.

I support the reduction of taxes on computers, but I believe that if we really want to promote or to grab all the opportunities that are there in equal mass, we need to go beyond reducing taxes on computers. We need to get tax incentives to businesses in this area such as people setting up audit companies, accounting companies, data entry, data analysis, legal research companies that are doing work online. This is a way to create more employment and attract business here, and that is where we need to make more tax incentives. 

I am concerned about the opportunities for tax evasion. Sugar has continued to be an area where taxes are evaded, the same as this bicycle business. I cannot understand why a company that assembles parts should benefit from a tax reduction as a manufacturer while those who import parts have to pay taxes. I think this is favouritism.

Equally, I support the recommendation on fuel. The Energy sector is prone to the establishment of cartels, and indeed, I see cartels here in our energy sector. We need a clear regulatory policy to discourage this kind of making huge profits because of a small range of players in the field. In fact, the price of fuel is so high that it is above the prices in the region. But I am told that at the eastern border, the URA people drive their cars across, fuel them in Kenya and then come to chase the people who are trying to sell a jeri-can of fuel from across the border. This is ridiculous! We have to look at this and harmonise our prices.  I do not believe in setting prices for traders, but a tax policy can be a way of limiting tax evasion - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is time.

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA (Buryaha County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising to make some comments on raw materials and the monitoring of those raw materials. I happen to have worked in URA in the famous Anti-Smuggling Unit that was headed by Col. Lutaya Andrew. 

Raw materials many times have been brought in form of finished products. The committee report talked about sugar, cooking oil and textile. During our time we found that most of these products were totally finished goods, and we caught many people who were smuggling them. As a result of that, the Anti-Smuggling Unit was disbanded because it had stepped on some people’s shoes. This is a result of conniving between URA officials and some government officials. I am standing on this issue very seriously. The report is talking about a monitoring unit. How will this unit function? This unit should employ people who are independent of URA staff and government so much so that these raw materials are properly checked! 

In intelligence, there is intelligence and counter intelligence. This monitoring unit should be formed of various departments so that if one department has already cross-checked, the other checks again otherwise, raw materials will continue to be brought in disguise. Then, those who are found to have brought raw materials, whether they are Indians, Africans or whatever race, they should be brought to book and fined. 

On computers, it is the same thing. The VAT that has been waived may be misused, and it is that monitoring unit that can still work on it. 

When it comes to verification of vehicles, many vehicles are brought here when they are very old. While declaring them, they bring the years forward and bring in those that are not supposed to be imported. They can also declare vehicles of 1997 as those of 1992, for example, so that they evade tax. It is the monitoring unit that should work on this. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a good report. A lot has been said about the textiles, but my query is about the capacity of local textiles to produce the quantities and quality that can meet the local demand. Has government looked at that capability? 

Protection can be a good idea but over-protection can be very dangerous. When it comes to protectionism, I do not think we should concentrate only on textiles. Let us look at a wide range of agro-based industries over which we may have comparative advantage. The ministry should look at that seriously.

On the verification of vehicles, it should be carefully studied to avoid putting in place bureaucracy that may lead to increase in costs and therefore encourage corrupt tendencies. 

About fees for documentation services and the personalised number plates, I disagree with my colleague who was talking of reducing the fees. I look at this as a status symbol, which should be for only a few. You see vehicles with personalised plates with the numberplate even more expensive than the vehicle itself! So if anything, we should increase the fees so that it is a real status symbol. Those who can afford it can have it with value added.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, my hon. colleague for giving way. I believe the object of having personalised number plates is to try to raise money. This is what we should look at when we are arguing this case. The more people can access these number plates, the more revenue we shall be able to raise. It should not only be limited to the Mukwanos and the Sudhirs. It should be able to go round to other people who are averagely paid. That is the information I wanted to give.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleague for giving way. I think the honourable Member’s information is not based on a serious study of consumers. Most people will not wear their names on their dress, they will not wear their names on their ties, and there are very few people who have that kind of ego. 

I do not think there are many people who want to carry their names on their cars. It is good that this small group of people, with a huge ego, are taxed highly for this service. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much for that information. Anyway if the names start going round with every other person driving a personalised one, even those few with the huge ego will lose interest. They will remove them if anything. And another element is that if or when we increase the tax for the ordinary ones, it is only logical that we increase the tax for the personalised ones too. 

I am a member of the Budget Committee and we had an opportunity to meet the Revenue Authority officials. From that interaction, we realised the need for consultation between the Minister of Finance and some of the stakeholders on this subject of tax. 

You will realise that there was an increment in the price of fuel, but the officers told us that was done without consulting them. In any case, when you look at the revenue likely to accrue from the increment vis-à-vis the cost of administration in terms of fighting smuggling, it is a bit contradictory. When you increase tax and the fuel prices go up, then the business of smuggling becomes even more lucrative. So, the increment may lead to an increment in smuggling and the revenue likely to accrue may be eaten up by the investment in fighting smuggling. So, the URA officials held that if the price was left low and smuggling went down, it would be a better deal than just increasing prices and bringing about the above problem.

Mr Speaker, I would like to applaud the move of removing tax from computers. Definitely, that is adding value to the available skills we have, and it answers the global demand for the need for ICT and IT. That is very useful. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to business, the Committee Stage. I now put the question to the motion that the bill be read a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FINANCE BILL, 2002

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the First Schedule – oh, you want to make an amendment?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, I have an amendment to the First Schedule on item 26. It was reported as 26(a), yet it should have been 26(d). The amendment is that the registration for export of the agricultural tractors should increase from Shs400,000 to Shs1 million. And item 26(f), which relates to registration for export of engineering plants, should increase from the Shs350,000 to Shs1 million. The justification is that these items were imported at a concessional rate and should not be re-exported at concessional rates. I beg to move.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Chairman, I want to be clarified on whether the amendment that the chairperson of the committee is moving is consistent with rule 99 of our Rules of Procedure. The rule provides that we should not proceed and impose taxes, other than by reduction. Yet it appears to me that here the chairperson is proposing to increase taxes.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, Parliament can increase tax as long as it is in agreement with government. I wish to state that we have consulted and agreed on the taxes.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the First Schedule, as amended, stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Second Schedule

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, I wish to move an amendment to the Second Schedule, heading 29.41, relating to antibiotics. I wish to delete, “all duties on antibiotics.” 

The justification is that these drugs are used as medicine for the population and they should not be affected by duties. This matter has also been discussed with the minister. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of procedure. In the Second Schedule there is yet another chapter 39 to be amended. I do not know what the chairman has to say about it.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In Chapter 39 there is an amendment relating to packaging materials, which include buveera used for packaging. 

If you look at page 168 of the Bill, there are boxes, cases, crates and similar articles. The committee was not targeting these. The committee was targeting buveera. Those are in Code 39 - 23.21 and 39 - 23.29. These are the ones for which we are proposing an increase, from 20 to 50 percent, of duties.  

The justification is that the environmental concern is a major problem. Polythene bags and not the other packing materials however, mainly cause it. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Clear? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Chairman, under Schedule II, Chapter 62, Code 63.09, page 273, I wish to move a motion for the reduction of excise duty on worn clothing and textiles. The proposal is to remove the proposed increase by 5 percent of excise duty on imported worn clothing and textiles. 

In principle, and as the Member for Masaka said, it is very important for the nation and the people to have pride. It is very important, and we must develop towards that end rather than be complacent and become a nation with an import mentality; a nation of second hand things mentality. 

In our neighbourhood, Tanzania, you go to Asia, India, Pakistan, wherever they grow cotton; go to the Philippines, to Indonesia and Malaysia, these people have long abandoned a number of the colonial tastes. The so-called good tastes for Pierre Cardin and so on and so forth have now been abandoned. They have national pride, a national image, something, with which they can be identified. That is what makes the West Africans look grand. Some of us here try to ape them by copying their attire. That is good. Aping West Africa is better than aping the West. So I think that as a matter of principle, we should begin to develop our national image. We should use our local materials and project the national image.

On the present motion, the level of tax at ten per cent is already bad enough. In my view, there should have been no tax. If we are to have this second-hand mentality of importing things in order to support the so-called poor of the poorest, then there should have been no tax at all. But if we want to be proud of our nation and seriously think about promoting local industries in textiles, footwear, leather industries, even synthetics for that matter, then the best option would have been to put a ban on importation of second-hand clothing altogether. 

Having heard the general debate here in favour of a situation to which we have succumbed, I am now beginning to get completely desperate. I have yielded to move a very reasonable motion on maintaining the present level of taxation. That means that we remove the five percent and stay where we were. 

The arguments for imposing this tax are awkward. The promotion of local textile is cited but is a lame excuse. And here, I am using a better term, “promotion”, but many are talking about “protection”. We must not stick to terminology for the sake of it. “Protect” has a different connotation. “Promotion” may be more acceptable. Although many may say there is no difference between “promoting” and “protecting”, I think “promotion” is a much more progressive proposition than “protection”, which can easily be static. 

With “protecting”, you might have only Nyanza Textiles and you keep protecting it and stick with it alone. But if you are to promote, it means you are going have more textile industries of different quality of products coming up. We can produce both an expensive textile and a cheaper one. Go to India, you find cotton textiles that cost only one Rupee a metre, and then you find others that cost 1,000 Rupees a metre. Those are for people who want to pay for the most expensive stuff.

Our textile industries, on the other hand, produce only the most expensive ones. They ignore the very poor who actually produce the inputs for the textiles. They do not cater for them. So what we could look forward to is having textile industries, footwear industries and leather industries, which can produce a variety of items based on our local materials, to suit the pockets of our people.

For me, the argument cannot hold if we are to base it on the mere 50 percent increase of tax on second-hand clothes. It cannot! Nobody should even raise it. The promotion of local textile industries requires more intensive studies and interventions than exploitation of rotten clothes. 

This proposal is the best compromise I could reach between banning the importation altogether for the same reasons that the government is giving for the imposition of this tax.

On mentality, before the NRM government came into power, this country had got used to importing powdered milk, which was re-constituted at the Dairy Corporation. We had become so used to it that nobody thought that if we stopped the importation of powdered milk we could generate enough local milk to feed that factory. But for once we can thank this government for that occasional wisdom - (Laughter). 

It clamped a ban on the importation of powdered milk and the result now is that there is so much milk that we cannot afford to buy it. So, those who are scared about banning the importation of second-hand textiles because all of a sudden our people would walk around naked are behaving like those who depended on powdered milk. 

We should never acquire a bad habit. If you acquire it, it is very difficult to break. The best thing is to get rid of it as soon as possible, then you can move forward with better ways of doing things.

Let me give you another scenario. When we came here in 1979, we found our mothers, sisters and fathers basically naked. In the Lango sub-region where I returned to from Kenya, my parents could not get out of their huts. They were suffering from “measles”. And when you are suffering from measles, in Lango, you are confined to the house. 

On arrival they told me, “Everybody here is suffering from measles.” They were not dressed! But the UPC government at the time massively imported a variety of textiles from India and within a matter of months, all the “measles” was cured. We were able to move to the rallies. 

The imposition of tax on the old clothes and textiles, which benefits the poorest of our poor, is in total contradiction of the government policy and strategy of poverty elimination.  

Hon. Mukula tried to raise a clumsy argument here. The obvious thing is that, first of all, the people who are benefiting from the imported second-hand clothes are actually the importers. You cannot tell me that this 50 percent increase will have no impact at all. You say they have reduced theirs from Shs9,000 to Shs8,000 but they say the retail prices have not decreased? 

I would have expected him to support his argument by saying that they have also consequently decreased prices. Cheaper new clothing and textiles could be imported. If they are affordable then they will provide a better solution for the people to the problem of clothing. It would also allow us to develop a Ugandan personality. I thank you.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I really sympathise with the sentiments expressed by the mover of the motion. In some areas, though, I find him rather contradictory. If we are to keep our pride and not live as mivumba people, what do we do? 

What we have tried to do is, and everybody should get this clearly, we have not banned the importation of second-hand clothing. We have only put a very modest increment on tax to sort of restrict the importation of second-hand clothes. The debate on the Floor implies that we have banned them yet we have not. 

We are saying that we should put a tax that should in a way restrict the volumes that are coming into the country. Why do we have to do that? We have to do that because, as honourable Members know, and each one of us is old enough to remember, before the political turmoil, our local textile industry was very vibrant. We were producing clothes and we were tailoring our own clothes. With the advent and the boom of the importation of second-hand clothes, that industry has collapsed. So we thought that in order to give incentives to investors who may want to invest in the textile industry, we could increase tax on the imported ones. Actually, it is our intention to keep on increasing the tax and gradually, when we have built capacity, ban the importation altogether. 

How can we maintain our pride when we still allow second-hand clothes to be dumped in this country? I want to give a comparative situation with other countries.  In Tanzania, used clothes are taxed 25 per cent import duty, plus 40 per cent suspended duty.  In Kenya, it is subject to Shs25 (Kenyan) per kilo, or 35 per cent import duty, which is even higher.  In Zambia, the value of US$ 1.3 per kilo is imposed. So, it is not only Uganda that is imposing that tax. If we are to encourage our local industry, and I am saying that our real aim is to gradually encourage people to invest in this field; how do we do that?  We do that by restricting the importation of second-hand clothes so that we create market for new clothes.  

Hon. Winnie Byanyima in her presentation referred to employment. Yes, it could be true that the second-hand industry is employing people, but the number of people being employed by the second-hand industry is not high compared to the percentage that was being employed in tailoring those days when we still had a vibrant local industry. These taxes are intended to encourage those who want to invest to come and invest. I beg the honourable members to bear with us. We are not at this stage abolishing the importation of second-hand clothes, but we should send the appropriate feelers so that people know that there will be market for new clothes. That is point number one – (Interruption)

MR BAGALANA: Mr Speaker, what I want to clarify as far as dumping is concerned is that it can be used as a policy to sabotage but in essence, it is just disposing of something that has no market in the country of origin. So, in Uganda, if the cloth being dumped has no market in its country of origin and we have need for it cheaply, it can substitute our needs. I do not see why government should insist that it is a way to uplift industries. I think it can be a policy of what we call in economics “Beg my neighbour” policy. I think we should not insist on promoting something that lacks market in its domestic country of origin.  

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I do not get the point that the member wants to be clarified on, but the question is, do we want to keep in that situation for ever, or do we want at one time in life also to produce our own garments? If so, isn’t it proper that we take a step forward towards creating assurance to investors that we are moving towards producing our own garments?  So, Mr Speaker, I was saying that – (Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, may I ask the minister to clarify to this House what capacity our textiles industries have at the moment, and what percentage of the market we are supplying with locally manufactured textiles?  

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, it is very true our capacity is still very low.  We are able to satisfy only 20 per cent of our requirements, but what can we do to alleviate that sad situation? We must take the right step in the right direction.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I think he was trying to show you that taxation here is lower than any other neighbouring country. This is the context in which you should see this, because the principle of taxation is accepted whether this increase is unreasonable or reasonable.  

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I had one last point to make. Though our aim was really to promote, or call it to protect, our local industry, we had targeted to rise Shs3,000,000,000 from this tax. Honourable members, we have already appropriated that sum in this budget. If we remove it, where do we get it? (Laughter)  That is another big problem.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think honourable members you have heard the case on both sides. I am going to put the question.  

MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okollo, Arua): Mr Chairman, I seconded this motion, and I wish to be given only a minute to expound my position.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but –(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: I thank you, Mr Chairman. The points contained in the motion by my honourable colleague from Oyam South are self-evident. I do not think we should expound much on this, but let me give a bit of technical background.  

In economic theory, there is an operation analysis called the marginal rate of substitution.  In mathematical terms, this is the gradient of the indifference curve. In economic terms, it is the unit of X, which a consumer wants to give away to obtain a unit of Y, so long as he derives the same utility.  Now, this is short of demand and supply here.  

The other time, Mr Chairman, you asked very pertinent questions that, would a Ugandan give up a woollen coat in Owino Market in order to wear or to buy a cotton jacket from Nytil? Absolutely not, Mr Speaker! Now, we lead by example: will the hon. Minister of Finance come here just in a cotton suit?  I do not think so.  

In the administration of Public Finance, taxation can also be used as a welfare tool. The rationale here should not be used for promoting local industry.  The rationale here is we want to widen the tax base, but let me tell you that the timing is not correct. This tax is directly going to affect the poor. We have a big industry called the tobacco industry, which we are not touching in this financial year.  Why?  

THE SPEAKER: No, but honourable members, now I think there is a point, which you have to put into account, which was put by the minister.  

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, I want to end.  This tax is going to affect very many people in the villages. In my constituency the week is divided into market days. On Monday, there is a market here, Tuesday in another place and only two items are on sale: foodstuffs and second-hand clothing. If we are speaking for the voiceless and we are imposing a tax, which is going to increase the cost of the - (Interruption)

MR MADADA: Mr Chairman, he stated rightly that we are speaking for the voiceless, but it depends on which spectacles you are wearing. In my village, there is a parent who used to believe that taking away a razor blade from a child would make her cry. But, he was warned that if you leave the child with that razor blade, it can cut her and she cries and then you take her to the hospital.  

What I want to say here is that we are talking for the voiceless, but the voiceless should not be seen cheaply by saying we should reduce the tax today to help them.  We are talking about a strategic intervention in eliminating poverty.  

I have read the background to the budget and the ministerial statement about this issue.  We are saying that within the next ten years, the only way we can survive with the declining coffee prices is to invest in our cotton.  Therefore, I want to believe that the information given here is that we are talking for the voiceless in a more strategic manner than a short-lived manner.  Thank you.

MR ARUMADRI: In principle, I agree with my colleague.  I am only saying the timing is not correct. We should move very, very consciously. We have not built enough capacity in the country. We are just theorising because this thing has a bad impact. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now honourable members, you have heard the case for the amendment as brought out by the mover and the person who seconded. You have heard the case of the Minister. He has given you a comparison, and he has told you that he has already appropriated the figure. I think you are now in position to decide on the motion. I am putting the question on the amendment by hon. Okulo Epak.

Question put and negatived.)

(The Second Schedule, as amended, agreed to.)

(The Third Schedule, agreed to.)

(The Title, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the bill entitled, “The Finance Bill 2002” and passed it with minor amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a bill entitled “Finance Bill, 2002” be read a third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, that is as far as the Finance Bill is concerned. I remember we did not complete yesterday’s business. I do not know the position. Honourable mover, can you advise me.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. After consultation, we did not agree on the amendment, and I do not know the view of the mover of the amendment. But if she is ready to withdraw it, then we can move on with the original motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Otherwise, you are not ready to proceed, if this is not resolved. Do you want more time?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, we would like to proceed because the background of the motion was purely humanitarian, and we know our brothers need some blankets; they need some of these essential items - (Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: No, I am asking you, because you are the one who has said, if the mover agrees to withdraw and then we can proceed. It appears to be that, maybe you want more time to do the dialoguing among yourselves and resolve this dispute.  Because, there is no indication from the person who moved the amendment that she wants to –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, maybe, I should explain. My experience in Parliament has shown me that when somebody moves an amendment, and the House does not adopt that amendment, it does not become part of that motion.  This has been the practice. So, for this motion to be pronounced on, it should not be tied to whether the amendment is part of it or not.  

Mr Speaker, you asked us to go and harmonise our position.  We had a meeting, which was attended by more than 20 Members of Parliament. It is not true that the position was that this amendment should not be part of the motion.  But, it looks like this amendment, as it came up on the floor yesterday, brought in a new twist, and a new understanding or misunderstanding of the original motion. That was not my intention. That, however, will not push me, Mr Speaker, to withdraw this amendment, because I strongly still believe in this amendment.  However, I do not want the House to be biased on the original motion, which motion we welcomed because of its humanitarian nature, and the intention, which the movers of the motion had in moving that motion. This amendment has been heavily politicised. People did not sleep because they had to consult and mobilise for the motion. 

Mr Speaker, the motion is here, I did move it, it was seconded and I talked for it.  Really, I am not going to stand here and say now I am withdrawing the motion. For what reason? I am not withdrawing the motion. This House in its wisdom, should pronounce itself on the motion, so that it goes on record that the Seventh Parliament did this.  

So, Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence to ask the House whether there is need for any more debate to pronounce themselves on this amendment, so that we proceed to pronounce ourselves on the motion as moved by hon. Bright Rwamirama.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Let us resolve this because yesterday we adjourned because some people thought the honourable member’s amendment was causing a problem to the original amendment.  You have heard what the mover has said about her amendment and the position she has stated. Why don’t we resolve this, maybe by voting on each part because there are three parts to the motion; we pronounce ourselves on the first, second and the third and then we see how we proceed?  

MR MWANDHA: I need your guidance, Mr Speaker. There was a lot of debate on the original motion, and then suddenly hon. Kiraso brought an amendment. At that stage the amendment was supported, so the motion on the floor is the one amended by her and supported by the people. In all fairness, there is need for members to debate the amendment rather than simply vote on it because yesterday there was no opportunity for members to express themselves on the amendment.  I therefore would like to appeal to you, Sir, that you provide an opportunity for members to debate the amendment and then vote on it.

THE SPEAKER: You see, the mover of the amendment said there is no need for further debate.  That is what she has –(Interruption) 

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I am the one who moved this amendment. I have not said, neither in English nor in any language, that it should not be debated.  I said I have a substantive amendment, which I moved, and it was seconded and it is now property of this House.  If the Speaker, so wishes –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is there any person who wants to contribute on her amendment?  

MR OKUMU RINGA: Mr Speaker, yesterday a motion was moved by hon. Bright Rwamirama and amendments were also moved.  It was agreed that for further debate to continue, members would be accorded opportunity to have copies of the motion so that they are able to understand and contribute meaningfully. Could members be accorded the opportunity to have copies of the motion so that they can competently contribute? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think let that be done and then we see how we proceed. I have nothing to do other than to adjourn the House until Monday, when copies will be availed to members. The House is adjourned until Monday, 2.00p.m.

(The House rose at 12.59p.m. and adjourned until  Monday, 2 September 2002 at 2.00p.m.)


