Tuesday, 30 August 2005

Parliament met at 11.00 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning session. I would like to give notice to the members of the Cabinet that tomorrow there will be no Cabinet meeting so we can come and handle the reports, which we will have completed. Thank you.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

11.05
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I raise to make clarification on the Daily Monitor article that said, “Members of Parliament get free pay.” The Daily Monitor newspaper of Thursday, August 11 2005 carried on its front page an article entitled, “Members of Parliament get free pay.” This article is misleading. I take this opportunity to set the record straight.  

According to the current constitutional arrangement, elections for Members of Parliament are normally held in the month of June, 30 days before the expiry of the term of Parliament. The term of the current Parliament expires on 2 July 2006.  

Similarly, the election of the President takes place in the first 30 days in the last 90 days before the expiration of the term of the President.  

Since the last election of the current term of the President took place on 12 March 2001, the current term of the President expires in May 2006.  

The current Parliament was elected in June 2001 and started its term on 2 July 2001. Its term, therefore, expires on the 2 July 2006.  

However, as a result of the Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Constitutional Review, dated 10th December 2003 and the subsequent deliberations thereon, a desire has arisen for the elections for President and the elections for the Members of Parliament to take place on the same day.  

To achieve the above desired position, constitutional amendments had to be effected so that the coming elections for the President and those for Members of Parliament take place on the same day in the month of March 2006, but the current President’s term shall still run on until the month of May when it expires.  

For a smooth transiting from one government term to another, it has been found desirable for the term of the current Parliament to be shortened. Instead of the term of the current Parliament ending on the 2 July 2006, it will now end on 12 May 2006. This ending will coincide with the end of the current term of the President.  

Although the new Parliamentary elections will take place in March 2006, the current Members of Parliament shall continue in office performing their duties in and as Parliament, including participation in the budgeting process, a process, which commences in April as provided for in the Budget Act, until the 12 May 2006. 

It is therefore not true that the Members of Parliament will get free pay for four months. They will only be compensated for the period by which their earned term of five years shall have been shortened from 2nd July to 12th May 2006. Members earned the term of five years when they got elected in June 2001. The Eighth Parliament will commence its five-year term from May 2006.  

It ought, however, to be realised that the move to hold presidential and parliamentary elections on the same day will result in enormous savings to the country as compared to having separate elections.  Further on, voters’ time shall be saved on top of reducing voter fatigue.  

Therefore, the overall accruing savings and benefits adequately offset the approximately one and a half month’s compensation to Members of Parliament for their lost earnings due to the shortened term of this Parliament. After all this is a once and for all adjustment, which will see the country continue to enjoy the accruing savings and benefits.  

The alleged free pay will be for only one and a-half months. This is a small matter given the enormous advantages, which the country will realise, by holding presidential and parliamentary elections on the same day. The national interest requires that the matter should not be blown out of proportion. This statement is given this 30th day of August 2005.  

I thank you for your indulgence but before I sit down let me refer to a matter, which occurred in Parliament yesterday when the Rt hon. Prime Minister was informing Parliament about setting up of a commission of inquiry into the Global Fund affair.  

Hon. Abdu Katuntu required the Rt hon. Prime Minister to lay on the Table the commission, which the President had signed and had issued to establish this commission. I stood up here and said that the law had been adjusted to indicate that the power, which had originally been given to the President to issue a commission of inquiry, has now been given to the minister. Hon. Abdu Katuntu did not believe this, so I promised that I would bring documentation to that effect today. I am glad to lay on the Table Statutory Instrument No. 91 of 1965, the Transfer of Powers and Duties, No. 2, Order 1965, signed by Mutesa, President.

I also lay on the Table Statutory Instrument No. 200 of 1965 entitled the Transfer of Powers and Duties No. 3, Order 1965, signed by Mutesa, President.

The consequence of this Statutory Instrument is to transfer the power of the President under the Commission of Inquiry’s Act from the President, to the minister. I beg to lay it on the Table. Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the two statements are really not for debate. The first one was to clear the air about what is happening here and the second one was simply to satisfy an inquisitive member. So, let us proceed with other business. 

11.10
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Members wondered who should be the secretary of the commission, he will be Mr Kasirye who is a lawyer in the town and he is a former chairperson of the Law Society. We are pleased to handle these matters expeditiously. I thank you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

i.	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2004/2005.

ii.	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2005/2006.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF SESSIONAL 
COMMITTEE REPORTS

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, I thought I should give this information, which I had given earlier for purposes of expediting this process because I realized when I went through the guidelines of how we are going to handle the Budget and the policy statements some colleagues did not get copies and some were not here. 

I should emphasize part (d) of these guidelines, which I believe you have, 5(d) where we are saying that after each report short, specific questions or points of clarification will be put to the relevant ministers. I am saying this to avoid going into lengthy debates because we had the general debate on the Budget. So, after the report has been read there would be specific points of clarification or specific questions put to the minister. I thought I should inform the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you Chairperson of the Budget Committee.

11.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Nathan Byanyima): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable members. I am here to present the Budget Report for the Committee of Works, Housing and Communications. 

We had to use Article 90 and 155 of the Constitution, rules 124 and 154 of our Rules of Procedure, and section 6(2) of the Budget Act to carry out the work as required. The committee hereby makes its findings, observations and recommendations to this august House for consideration and guidance. 

We wish at this particular juncture to thank the minister and his technical team who co-operated and came to the committee to answer a number of issues, which the committee raised, and we are grateful to them. This is our first time to present the Budget in the format as described by the Budget Act. So, in case we fall short of being on schedule and on the correct line, we apologise but we have tried our level best in the scheduled time.  

Last financial year the sector of Ministry of Works and Housing had key planned activities. In these we have three major sub-sectors, and we start with communications. 

i) They had to draw up a co-ordination strategy for the National ICT Co-ordination Committee. 

ii) To draw an ICT Implementation Strategy in various sectors and ministries and have a Master Plan and Legal Regulatory Framework in consultation with the key stakeholders.

iii) They had to hold awareness campaigns for the use of ICTs as a tool for development in all sectors.

iv) They had also to initiate and co-ordinate an ICT pilot project in the areas of E-Government, health, business, et cetera.

In the roads sub-sector there were a lot of work-planned activities.

i)	Completing 4 percent of civil works on the Kampala northern bypass; 100 percent of works on Pakwach–Nebbi road; 100 percent on Busunju-Kiboga and 85 percent on Kiboga-Hoima road.
ii)	Completion of 51 percent of works on Karuma-Olwiyo road, 36 percent of works on Olwiyo – Pakwach road, 40 percent on rehabilitation of the Fort-Portal/Hima road; 40 percent on rehabilitation of Hima–Kasese-Kikorongo and Kasese-Kilembe roads, and 50 percent of works on rehabilitation of Kikorongo-katunguru and Equator roads. 
iii)	Completing 65 percent of civil works on Jinja-Bugiri road - this is what was expected. I know the work has not been going on because of the contractor but this is what was planned for last financial year. There is also completion of 100 percent civil works on upgrading Kyegegwa–Kyenjojo road by December; and completion of design review and commencement of construction works for rehabilitation of Busega–Mityana road by March 2005. 
iv)	Routine maintenance: manual maintenance to cover 10,536km, mechanized maintenance on 7,643, periodic maintenance, which would be re-gravelling of 999 km, resealing of 118km, and strengthening of 20 km.
v)	Rehabilitation of 15km of urban roads, rehabilitation of 1,276 km of district roads, and 452 km of community access roads. 
vi)	They had also to establish the Uganda National Road Authority for which the Bill has been already laid on the Table.
vii)	 They have set up an Axle Load Management Control and Monitoring Unit at 11 weighbridges. The following were to be fixed: Malaba, Busia, Mbarara and Katuna. Mobile sites were to include: Tororo-Mbale, Mbale-Kapchorwa, Kampala-Luwero, Kampala-Iganga, Kasese-Fort-Portal-Kyenjonjo, and Kyotera-Mutukula.

On water transport sub-sector, mainly inland water transport, planned activities included:

Assembling of Kalangala ship, carrying out capacity building to manage the ship, reviewing supervision reports by consultants on Kalangala ship, monitoring progress on Kalangala ship building, improvement of landing facilities on Lake Victoria, procurement of consultancy services for Marine Infrastructure Development and to carry out socio-economic studies on lakes and navigable waterways.

To formulate a policy for establishment of a Multi-Sectoral Transport Regulatory Agency (TRA): this was expected to commence February this year and to be completed by November 2005.

Housing sub-sector

The activities under the National Shelter Programme (Mbale, Arua, nationwide) included: 

i)	To carry out a technical evaluation study to access the overall impact, documentation of experiences and building a case for slum upgrading countrywide.  
ii)	To exchange tours for people from other urban centers to enable transfer of experiences from the current projects. These two projects include: Malukhu Integrated Poverty Reduction Project and Oli Low Cost Housing Project.

We come to the budgetary performance for the last financial year. The funds appropriated by this Parliament are in the table on page 3. What we appropriated and the outturn, that was the money, which was released, plus percentages in terms of what was released but on the whole, last financial year the recurrent budget was Shs 49 billion and development Shs 353.3 billion. The total releases for the sectors, recurrent and development budget, amounted to Shs 47 billion and Shs 352 billion respectively, representing the performance of approximately 96 and 100 percent respectively as you can see from the table.

The sector had supplementary appropriations: recurrent expenditure, they got Shs 506,400,000; and for development expenditure they received Shs 11,853,459,000.

The main achievements in the last financial year included:

Communications sub-sector:

(i)	Draft Telecommunications Policy submitted to Cabinet waiting to be tabled to Parliament;
(ii)	Prepared a draft report on the ICT policy implementation framework in all ministries and agencies;
(iii)	They carried out an E-Government study and design of inter-ministerial network; 
(iv)	Implemented the International Telecommunications Union Supported Wireless Internet Protocol project for Nakaseke – equipment was procured and delivered to Nakaseke.

Roads sub-sector:

(i)	In general approximately 10,534 km of national roads were maintained. A strategy for sustainable maintenance of district, urban and community access roads was developed; the ten-year district roads investment programme was drafted; 11 El-Nino major road development projects were completed; and interventions on districts and community access roads were carried out.
(ii)	Twenty kilometres of Busega-Mityana road, which were really badly off, were repaired; emergency repairs on the bridge on River Nile were carried out; 24 of the existing bridge structures on the national roads maintained; studies and designs for five bridges commenced; and general specifications for road and bridge works were developed and launched.
(iii)	Ten percent of works on Kafu-Masindi road, which is 44km, was upgraded to class II Bitumen standard, and work is in progress. Ninety percent of works on Nateete–Bakuli, which is 3.8km was completed; 100 percent pavement construction on Nsambya– Gaba road, which is 7.9km, was completed.  
(iv)	100 percent of design on work construction and improvement of ferry landings at Kalolo and Nganda ferry landings was done.
(v)	In addition, 100 percent of design work on Phase III of Clock Tower, Mengo hill road, Entebbe/Kampala road, Jinja road and Africana and Port Bell road junctions was completed. That was the petition of the ferry. 
(vi)	100 percent works on outstanding works on Sironko-Kapchorwa road, which is 45 km was completed and also, 2.4km lane of emergency repairs on Malaba/Busia–Bugiri road of 84 km was rehabilitated.
(vii)	Nebbi-Arua road and Nebbi-Pakwach was completed.  51 percent of works on Kiboga-Hoima road and Busunju road was completed.
(viii)	15 percent of the procurement of Kampala-Zirobwe-Wobulenzi road was done. 53 percent of construction work on Karuma-Olwiyo road and three percent of construction works on Olwiyo-Pakwach road were completed.
(ix)	Fifteen percent of the construction works on reconstruction of Jinja-Bugiri road was done; and 70 percent of construction works on Kagamba-Rukungiri road was completed. The defects liability period for Ntungamo-Kagamba, a 15-kilometer stretch, ended.
(x)	Ninety-five percent civil works on Gayaza-Kalagi and the feasibility study was done.  The feasibility study on Matuga-Semuto was done and 50 percent design work was completed. The Transport Master Plan was completed and 100 percent of the design work on accident black spots improvement was worked on.
(xi)	100 percent of design and 50 percent on the design on the selection of both supervision consultants on the contractor for Soroti-Lira road, which is a stretch of over 120km, was completed.
(xii)	Twenty percent of the works on Fort-Portal-Hima road was done and 16 percent of works on Hima-Kasese-Kikorongo and Kasese-Kilembe road were done.
(xiii)	The design review on Busega-Mityana road was completed but the procurement has not yet commenced while 88 percent of civil works on Kyegegwa-Kyenjojo road was completed. In addition, 100 percent of resealing works on central Uganda road maintenance and upgrading project was done.
(xiv)	Overall, we achieved routine maintenance in terms of manual maintenance whereby 10,538km were done, mechanized maintenance on 7,463, periodic maintenance (re-gravelling) of 919km was done while 109km of road were resealed and 20km strengthened. 
(xv)	Thirteen kilometres of urban roads were rehabilitated; 1,476km of district roads were rehabilitated while 320km of community access roads were done.

Bridge Repairs and Construction:

i) Eighty-five percent of the works on Maziba Bridge located at 28 Km on old Mbarara-Kabale road was done; 70 percent of works on Lugazi Bridge located at 1.4km on Lugazi-Katete road, 60 percent of works on Wolfram Mine Bridge located at 45km on Kabale-Rubanda road and 100 of Kagari Bridge located at 3.7 km on Sembabule road were completed.

ii) Forty percent of the works on Namulo Bridge located on Namulo/Maizimasa sub-county border was constructed. In addition, procurement works for Rushango Bridge on the border of Nkoma/Nyamaleba sub-counties in Kamwenge district was also accomplished.

iii) Design works for Kafu Bridge on Bulyamusenyu-Kijunjubwa road and Mpanga Bridge in Fort Portal town are still ongoing while procurement for Kyabahaya Bridge in Bushenyi district was completed.

On the water transport sub-sector (inland water transport), the building of the Kalangala ship has been completed and the ship is due for commissioning in October this year.

In the housing sub-sector, 218 condominium plans were prepared and offered to tenants.

Also, 214 Pool houses were sold cumulatively; 4 Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications up country stations were rehabilitated; one demonstration house under the Earthquake Resistant Building Project was constructed in Kabarole District.

Page 7 has the pending or ongoing activities and programmes for 2004/5. The list is quite long and you can go through it.  

We come to the key planned activities for this financial year: 
Communications sub-sector:
1.	Co-ordinate the implementation of the national ICT policy framework; 
2.	Develop E-Government strategies;
3.	Co-ordinate the Wireless Internet Protocol Pilot Project at Nakaseke;
4.	Finalise the review of telecom policy in preparation for the end of the duopoly period. The duopoly period ended last July and we are waiting for the opening up.
5.	Uganda Communications Commission to monitor the roll out obligation of the three service providers, that is, MTN, UTL and Celtel.
6.	Implement the new Telecommunications Policy with emphasis on provision of a backbone infrastructure;
7.	Complete installation of three fixed monitoring stations for Spectrum Management; 
8.	Issue new licenses under the post duopoly regime. 

Roads sub-sector:

We shall have manual maintenance of 10,080km, and mechanized maintenance of 8,527km. In periodic maintenance we shall have re-gravelling of 1.186km, and resealing of 95km.

Rehabilitation and maintenance of 23 bridges and design and construction of 25 bridges and drainage structures.

Continue upgrading Kafu-Masindi to Bitumen standard.

Carry out Phase III of Kampala Urban interface of trunk roads, that is the construction of the Clock Tower, Shoprite, Entebbe road, Jinja road and Old Port Bell roundabouts.

Road development and improvement projects, which will include many other roads, which you should have found in the last financial year but they are continuing and some of them will be completed, hopefully in this financial year. The list is quite a long; you can look at it on page 8.

They are also to reseal 112km of urban roads, rehabilitate 1,095km of district roads and spot improvement of 652km of community access roads.

There is carrying out a study for the establishment and location of technical support units.

Assess the social–economic impact of rehabilitated district roads.

Formulate a policy for establishing a multi-sectoral transport regulatory agency.

Implement international and regional civil aviation programmes.

Monitor district and urban roads rehabilitation and maintenance programs; and construct Kalolo and Nganda ferry landings.

On the water transport sub-sector (inland water transport), the minister will re-commission the ship for Kalangala and then draft the Inland Water Transport Bill. 

In the housing sub-sector:

i)	Re-develop Entebbe State House complex phase I.  It has three phases. 
ii) 	Complete the design and documentation works for the proposed Uganda National Road Authority/Ministry of Works Headquarters.
iii) 	Articulate and pursue the rest of the rehabilitation work of Parliament Building.
iv) 	Rehabilitate selected Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications upcountry stations; and 
v) 	Provide technical assistance to government departments and statutory bodies.

Observations and recommendations:

1.	The committee is concerned that presidential pledges for roads and bridges continue to be a major source of budgetary distortions in the sector of works. Presidential pledges in this sector and other sectors should be rationalized within the appropriate sectors and should be programmed accordingly for effective delivery.
2.	The committee noted that many of the bad spots on our roads are as a result of unprecedented excavation by utility providers such as telephones, electricity and water. The committee therefore recommends that such works be considered during the design of the roads, to avoid damages. 
3.	The committee observed that most of the sector programmes are of capital nature and donor funded. Hence, the committee feels that the Ministry of Finance should seriously address the issue of counterpart funding on projects financed by donors. The Ministry of Works gets 63 percent of its assistance to work on the roads and government injects in 37 percent.
4.	The committee observed that while there is a general demand for upgrading of roads to national roads, the committee recommends that Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications gives priority to roads connecting constituencies and district headquarters. 
5.	The committee observed that monitoring and supervision of works had declined to inadequate logistical support especially vehicles and motor cycles, hence the need for the Ministry to prioritise its expenditure towards acquiring vehicles and motorcycles for station engineers and field officers. 
6.	The committee observed that the development of State House Complex, Entebbe project, which was supposed to be transferred from State House with a resource of Shs 32 billion for this financial year, has instead been transferred without its resource creating a spending pressure on the sector budget. So far we are told they had spent Shs 7 billion as part of their budget. Hence, the committee recommends that funds for this project should be availed to Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications.
7.	The committee noted that while the CHOGM requires additional infrastructure between Kampala and Entebbe and within Kampala to undertake this, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications be provided with the necessary funding at an early stage to prepare for the big event.
8.	The committee noted that the housing sector has been relegated as a private sector responsibility, with government playing only a regulatory role. The committee recommends that government should play a pivotal role in the housing sub-sector by evolving a comprehensive housing policy. Areas of intervention should be explored, developed and implemented. The committee further recommends that the Condominium law should be expeditiously implemented to relieve civil servants from paying rent.
9.	The committee recommends that government should consider giving an agency role to Housing Finance Company of Uganda to manage the proceeds from the sale of pool houses to facilitate the implementation of the Public Service Housing Loan Scheme.
10.	The committee observed that the communications sub-sector’s performance has greatly improved due to private sector participation. However, the committee notes that there is need to make this sector more efficient and effective by spreading to rural areas.  

The committee recommends that the three national service providers, that is, Celtel, MTN and UTL fulfil their obligations under the service agreement of providing a public pay phone in all sub-counties in the country and in any case before the end of the year.  

Amounts of funds requested by the sector are in the table on page 11, the total budget earmarked for the sector amounts to that figure.  

In conclusion, the committee recommends that Parliament do approve a total sum of 378,776,000,000 for the expenditures under the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications for the financial year 2005/2006 and it is split in the following manner: 

Recurrent expenditure, Shs 30,880,000,000; and development expenditure, Shs 347,896,000,000. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. Now I think you have the guidelines. We have agreed that it is not a general debate; you just ask specific questions but before that, we have students visiting Parliament from Central Nursery and Primary School, Luuka, represented by Dr Jonny Bulamu and hon. Beatrice Magoola in this Parliament. They are touring the building.

11.45
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the presenter of this report. My concerns are on page 3 where the presenter is talking about improving landing facilities on Lake Victoria and procurement of consultative services for marine infrastructure. I do not know whether what the presenter has in mind is what I have in mind about the water accidents, but the other year we had a lot of water accidents. We know that 60 people perished last night, women and children with their merchandise, on Lake Victoria, and another boat capsized again around Entebbe. I do not know whether the committee and the Ministry of Works have a plan and whether they have budgeted for safety of our people on these waters?  

Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, you are aware that our fishing industry depends on these waters. Fishermen have perished and the security on these waters is wanting. I want the chairperson and the members concerned to clarify me on this. Is this one involving the security on our waters?

When it comes to housing, we have had accidents in these buildings. The presenter has talked about the Housing Policy, does it involve a security of the buildings we are putting up in our country? On top of that, is this part of the budget and are you going to work hand in hand with the local governments -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: I just want to follow the issue he is raising. Do you mean the security of buildings or the safety of buildings?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Safety, security, everything.   Thank you for bringing it up. The honourable minister is aware of the status of our buildings in Kampala. Plans are being approved where there are supposed to be parking grounds - because the buildings in Kampala today are supposed to have parking grounds as part of their plans - but what you find there, first of all, there are shops in the plans that have been approved.  

Secondly, even the materials that are used are not even providing for the safety of Ugandans and many of the buildings have collapsed. Therefore, I am talking about even that one. Is that policy part of that and the budget?

Lastly, one time I raised a pertinent question here regarding the northern bypass. They are talking about four percent of that one somewhere in the report. In my area, my constituency borders with that of Lubaga where this road passes, but the detour was not well planned and there are so many vehicles that go into the northern direction during peak hours and we find problems. Wasn’t that detour part of the budget because when you go on the eastern side the detour on the same road where they divert the traffic was tarmacked and there is a smooth flow of vehicles. On this part the whole road was blocked and we have got problems where humps are supposed to be of tarmac they have put there soil on top of tarmac and that is creating a lot of dust and mud and everything is becoming a quagmire. Is this part of the budget you are approving such that we can get a detour to offset the traffic? I want the presenter of this paper and even the minister to answer me.

11.50
MR PAUL LOKERIS (Pain County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is on roads of Karamoja. I have just gone through this report and there is nothing that is mentioned about that part of the country, Karamoja. I wonder whether the work there was done, or it is not part of this country that is really forgotten.  

As I talk the road from Sironko to Namalu is really in a terrible state. Trailers carrying marble from Amudat to Tororo or even limestone from Amudat to Tororo have really spoiled the road. You find about 20 trailers moving in a convoy and when it has rained these trailers get stuck and you cannot even pass through. So, I do not know really whether the minister was having that road in mind for repair. I know really that Tororo Cement is giving this country a lot of money out of the limestone coming from Karamoja. So maybe the minister can give me a clarification on that.

Two is this part of the road from Namalu called Moru-engatuny, to Nabilatuk or Lokapel. I could say it is a distance of 45 kilometres. From Lokapel to Nabilatuk it was done two years ago but this one from Moru-engatuny to Nabilatuk has never been done. The rivers have changed the course now and vehicles get stuck. You cannot pass via the small river called Lolelia, which can hold water for eight hours and vehicles cannot pass. If you have to pass you have to push the car when it is not in engine.  

So, I do not know really whether the minister has a different programme for these roads. About these security roads we have talked day and night about security roads in Karamoja and nothing has been done. Disarmament is going on, the soldiers cannot access - when a raid takes place they cannot meet these people and recover even the animals, or even be able to chase these people who have guns. I do not know! Does the minister have that in mind that we need access roads in Karamoja?  Thank you.

11.55
MS JACQUELINE KYATUHEIRE (Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report and the ministry for the good work they are doing generally. I have one request and two questions. 

One is that we have a problem of maintaining our roads in Kanungu though we were given road equipment. We are trying our level best to make sure that at least people who travel all the way to Kanungu are not discouraged to come back there, but we would like the ministry to at least take one road to the center, and the proposal is Kabale-Kanungu-Rukungiri road and/or Rukungiri-Mitoma Kanungu road.  

The question is about page 5, where you are talking about the work that has been completed on the road. If you look at Roman (vii) you are talking about the Kagamba-Rukungiri-Ishasha road. When you go to page 7 you are talking about pending or ongoing activities. When you look at Roman (iv), that is Kagamba-Rukungiri road. As I had indicated in the last budget the fears of Kanungu people was that this road was supposed to start from Kagamba – I mean Ntungamo-Kagamba-Ishasha - but we do not see this highlighted anywhere as going up to Ishasha. We would like to know the plan the ministry has to complete this road up to Ishasha.

This one is about the rules that govern the urban planning. There is an act I think, which is of 1964/69 and we are having most of the problems in urban planning because this Act is very old and most of the rules are no longer compatible to the modernization and fast development that is going on. When is the ministry bringing this Act for amendment? I thank you.

11.57
MR ARAALI BASALIZA (Fort-Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  First of all, I would like to thank the Minister of Works and the committee for having done a good job for our people of Kabarole. They physically visited when we had problems with our road when the road was in bad shape. They physically visited that road and inspected it and now we are happy it takes three and half-hours to reach Fort-Portal from Kampala. (Applause)

However, every good thing has got its own problems. Now there is a problem of speed. So, I would like to ask the minister to look into that so that he can put there humps, especially near Mubende NTC where many students have died because of accidents - and other places anyway.

Furthermore, I would like to know whether Fort-Portal Municipality is included in the road rehabilitation because it has been stated that 12 kilometers in towns are going to be rehabilitated. Our roads are in bad shape in Fort-Portal Municipality. We have a good road from Kampala to Fort-Portal but as you enter Fort-Portal the roads are in bad shape. So, we are requesting the minister to look into that.

Also there is the issue of housing. It seems houses were sold and civil servants now are suffering.  For instance, in Kabarole you cannot send a civil servant to work there because there are no proper houses for them. Many people are dying in Buhinga Hospital because doctors cannot go there; there are no houses for them and in other sectors also. I do not know what plan the Ministry of Works has to revisit the policy of constructing houses for civil servants. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.59
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to thank the chairman for having complied with the guidelines of the committee on the budget and made a good presentation. I also want to thank the minister and his technical staff for the job they are doing despite hiccups of the budget cuts.

A few questions, I wanted to be clarified on, what does it means by a company, which has been licensed to have a nationwide coverage? Does it mean that they should connect the towns and a few kilometres out of town are off network or it means a big area of coverage? Because when you are in other countries, you really travel for miles while on the network. Here in Uganda you move a few kilometres out of town and you are off network and yet this is a company, which is supposed to be a nationwide coverage company.

Madam Speaker, there are many complaints out there about these mobile network companies, which are selling airtime cards, which cannot load and people lose their money without compensation. Could the minister make some clarification on that?

This is my tenth year in Parliament. When will I hear or read in the report that at least a feasibility study on Kyenjojo–Hoima–Masindi-Kigumba road has commenced? When? At least a study to start and the design! I have waited ten years. I do not know whether it will happen in my Eighth Parliament.

Government is coming up with the Rural Development Strategy and the road sector is one of the cardinal aspects of this strategy. How come Ministry of Finance perpetually cuts the budget of the Ministry of Works, and especially to the road sector? Why? Maybe that is why I am not getting the feasibility study for my other road.

Lastly, I want to thank the minister and his technical staff for the quick response on my collapsed bridge, which is about to be constructed and his promise to take over one of my feeder roads, that is, Nywereyenkoko-Kakumira road. I will be very grateful. Thank you.

12.00
MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman and the committee for the report presented, but I wish to put a question to the committee chairperson. Why have we never received a report on the status of the railway bridge between Jinja and Mukono, that is, the Old Jinja road? We have time and again requested for an alternative route connecting the East to Kampala city but as a regular user of Jinja-Kampala road, there are so many accidents on that road. 

On top of that we get such exorbitant amounts read to us for construction. No sooner have the contractors constructed one section of the road than they begin to repair that same section even before it is commissioned! So Jinja-Kampala road is ever under construction. They put very thin layers of tarmac and then when they cut, the road has a thickness of a mere three to four inches! This is why in most cases we are having these road accidents. 

In fact I would like to inform you that we are having road accidents on daily basis because of those recurrent road repairs.  So I just wonder why they cannot get a good contractor who can do at least a road for maybe one year because this road is ever being repaired after two or three months of construction then as they construct these roads, there are no signposts to indicate to the road users that a certain section of the road is going under repair. That is where we get new road users involved in fatal accidents. Even now if we went back to Jinja road, there are about three road accidents today, and these are normally fatal accidents. 

You should sympathise with me because I use this road on a daily basis and I think I should have some extra allowance because sometimes I have to hold on along the road or ferry some people involved in such accidents to the hospitals. Madam Speaker, it is a serious issue because we have no signposts and at least during the day we have some people to guide the road users on controlling the speed but at night there is no body to guide the people. 

People around Kawolo Hospital are lucky because once they get involved in an accident they are rushed straight to the hospital, but there are some who get involved in accidents right in the forest and you find that there is nobody to help them.  So, I would like –(Interruptions)

DR CHEBROT: Thank you for giving way. The other problem, which we have on Jinja road, is the sugar trucks. These trucks have no reflectors on them, they are always breaking down on the road, there are tractors, which have really caused a lot of accidents and it is surprising that the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication has not even come up with a strategy of controlling accidents on this road. 

Is it not possible for the sugar companies to be restricted at what time those trucks should be passing on those road? If they are unable to give them the reflectors, then let them not move at night. As simple as that, or let them not even move on the road at all. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not really debating. We said at the beginning of this session that we should just ask specific questions. So let us limit that.  

MRS BALEMEZI: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank my colleague for having come in to say what I was going to say. I have stood here several times to inform the chairman that Mukono has a whole constituency on water but when he comes here to present to this House about water transport, once he talks about Kalangala –(Interruptions)

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the minister to keep consulting his officials when a very distinguished member is contributing on a very important issue? Can he not be kind enough to come and sit and listen?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason why those benches are reserved for the civil servants is specifically that; to advise ministers from time to time.

MRS BALEMEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was talking about water transport. The committee has never considered Mukono as one of the districts that need water transport. I have a whole constituency of Buvuma and Kome Islands where we have been time and again asking for at least a ferry or some good speedboats because in Kome is where we have a landing site where we collect fish, which is generating a lot of income for this country but when you go there the road is in such a pathetic condition.

Another thing I would like to ask the chairperson – I took this chairperson, personally, to Bugungu prison, which is a government prison in Nyenga and he promised me, plus the Minister of Works, Housing and Communications - he is very much informed of Bugungu prison, which we have visited together, and they have both promised me that the road would be made. 

However, as we talk now the prisoners are just matched to that place because not even a bicycle can move there, not a motorcycle, let alone a vehicle; and once they dump our prisoners there, the reason for them not to be brought to court for their cases to be brought up is that the road is impassable so there is no prisons’ bus, which can get there. That is why I would like to get information from the chairperson of the committee as to why he has kept a deaf ear to this request on our road?

Then lastly, Madam Speaker it is about this motorcycle transport. I would like to know from the minister whether these motorcycle riders get riding permits because it is a confusing phenomenon in this country. People are trained to drive on the left but our motorcycles drive anywhere they find space! So I would like to know whether our minister has any law governing the motorcycle riders. I thank you.  

12.10
MR SIMON D’UJANGA (Okoro County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the chairman of this committee for a very good report. My observations are on page 7, specifically paragraph 5. I notice that Karuma-Olwiyo road is listed twice, and I hope this is merely a typing error and nothing more than that.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm that works on Karuma-Olwiyo and Olwiyo-Pakwach is going on at a very good rate, but we are being told that due to an error in survey a portion of Olwiyo-Karuma is left out. We are being told that the survey instead of starting across the Nile, started on this side of the Nile and, therefore, there is a portion of three to four kilometres left between Agung and Olwiyo. I would like the minister to allay my fears on this one.

Otherwise, the people of West Nile are grateful for the Pakwach-Arua road and we would like to thank the Government very much. This road has eased our transport problem but on the day the minister visited Nebbi on a supervision tour there was a request that Jukiya hill be included because of the difficulty in maintaining that part of the road to Gole Customs. I notice here additional works on Pakwach-Nebbi road, and I hope this is in Nebbi-Gole Customs; and if so, it should be listed like that because earlier on the chairman reported that Pakwach-Nebbi has been completed and it is indeed true.  

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Thank you very much, hon. D’Ujanga, for giving way. The clarification I wish to seek from him and which probably will come from the minister is, much as we are grateful that Pakwach-Arua road now is a smooth drive, the road itself is corrugated in a number of parts, which is a sign of poor workmanship. Some patches are already having potholes. What plans does the ministry have to rectify, especially from Nebbi to Arua, which was done by SBI? It was poorly done, there are potholes, the pavements are breaking away and it is corrugated. I do not know whether the ministry has taken note of that. Thank you.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I think the minister will be in a better position to clarify on that.  

Finally, I would like to generally observe that our roads are now having more vehicles than they were designed for. There is a difficulty now of following traffic rules, even in Kampala here; roundabout rules are no longer respected and indeed the road markings are all gone. I would like to know from the minister whether there is any plan to reactivate the road markings and enforce the traffic rules as we used to know them. It is even doubtful if the new drivers on the road these days are tested because when you drive behind them it looks as if they do not know anything about traffic rules. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

12.15
MRS IDAH MEHANGYE (Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this very good report, and thank the ministry for a lot of good work done. I have just a few concerns.

I would like to thank the ministry for at long last working on the Kyegegwa-Kyenjojo road, that is a great achievement on the part of those who drive in that direction. I have a concern about marking the Kyenjojo-Fort-Portal road. We had all along thought that when you are through with this Kyegegwa-Kyenjojo road, when they are marking this road they would proceed and maybe mark the Kyenjojo-Fort-Portal Road, but it has not been done. 

This road is in an area where we get a lot of fog because of the terrain, hills and rains. We get a lot of fog on that road and it is a very dangerous road to drive on during the night or after it has rained. We have had several accidents on that road yet it was finished a few years back and handed over as completed but without these markings, it becomes very dangerous. May I know when the ministry intends to make this road a little bit safer by marking it?

I would like to thank you for also thinking about the Rushango Bridge in Kamwenge. It is actually between Nkoma and Bwizi sub-counties, it is not Nyamalebe. Nyamalebe is not a sub-county. This bridge is going to help because people actually move over 40 kilometres to Kamwenge while the crossing would be only between 10 and 15 kilometres. So working on this bridge will be very advantageous for Kamwenge and we shall greatly appreciate it. It is still at procurement level. We would like to see it moving a little bit faster than this one. 

There is one small road that I have talked to you about honourable minister, and this is the Kamwenge-Kanara-Dura-Rwimi road, which is treated as a security road that they promised to work on. The promise is almost as sure because I have seen a few people going around saying they are looking at this road and when I do not see it in this document I get worried. Is it there, are we going to get this road, the Kamwenge–Kanara–Dura-Rwimi road? Is it going to be worked on? 

Then lastly, I want to thank the committee for – on page 9 - talking about presidential pledges and the way they should be streamlined. It should be in all ministries because people in the district really do spend so much money travelling to the President’s Office asking about a bridge, asking about a school, asking about anything that the President did talk about. We have not been given a streamlined way that when the President says he has given a bridge then the ministry you go to is the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. Instead people go to the President’s Office! We as Members of Parliament also do suffer because you know we are blamed because we did not follow up what the President said. So, if this could be streamlined like this committee has proposed, it would help and save a lot of trips and hard feelings. I thank you.

12.19
MR JOHN AACHILLA (Jie, County, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have looked at this report and on page 6 despite the fact that it has been consistent in the Ministry of Works that a lot of paper work is presented in the names of Karamoja, there is nothing practically that I can I be proud of that these roads are taken care of. Honourable minister, I have shared with you these sentiments and I know you are my good friend but this report has revealed that you can easily betray me. Politically you can betray me if I insist that something will come and yet the truth is not there. 

When you look at your policy statement on bridge maintenance, there are big and dangerous bridges, which have isolated Kotido District from the rest of the country. When you are on Abim-Kotido road coming either from Lira or you are coming from Pader, there is Dopeth Bridge, it is always in your policy statement but in this statement Dopeth is not seen. That bridge is not budgeted for at all and yet every year when we are going with our ballot papers we use either graders or bulldozers to cross that river. Politically you are endangering – it is not here, on that page you have shown all the others but Kotido-Abim-Dopeth Bridge is missing. 

Then when you look again coming from Moroto to Kotido-Roope Bridge, which is also very popular, it is not there. It is in Moroto District but it is not there. What am I going to tell the people? Leave alone that, hon. Minister when I look at this report and my good honourable minister and the chairman of the committee, really you can sympathise with me. 

The language of the report is very bad. Culturally, economically and politically you are not talking of Karamoja as, anyway, was it in your mind that you should have just ignored even for the people of Karamoja to say, “Okay, Nathan is a friend of Rex?”  You have not even mentioned in this report - are you allergic to Karamoja such that you cannot talk about it? How can you justify that really you are not helping those who say let Karamoja remain where it is? How different are you going to be from that? It becomes really very dangerous when I look at this policy statement –(Interruption)

MR ARAALI BASALIZA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification form hon. Rex Aachila on the members of the committee, I can see hon. Ael Ark Lodou and hon. Lolem, and I do not know what they were doing on the committee when they were debating!

MR AACHILLA: Take it from me, if they were there it means they were not taken. Either they were marginalised or they need our support as Parliament –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: I would like the member holding the floor to maybe clarify to us as to whether they omitted those bridges willfully by way of blocking Karimojong who would naturally use them for raiding. 

MR AACHILLA: That is out of my thinking, I am thinking nationally. I would like the minister –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Eresu, I would like you to withdraw that statement.

MR ERESU: I withdraw.

MR AACHILLA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that guidance. Really we should help this House to start thinking globally not to think locally and, you know, this issue of Karamoja is for all of us. I am here as a person but Karamoja will be there as Uganda for the rest of the centuries. 

I want the honourable friend, the minister to help me, is he aware that good roads are a pre-requisite for security and governance? In terms of disarmament, how have you accommodated the factor of implementing disarmament in Karamoja in the observance of security roads? When I look at this statement and your policy statement all rehabilitation of roads and bridges stops at the border of Karamoja and yet we are saying we are going to disarm. How shall we do that? You also know that justice, law and order have failed in Karamoja just because the roads are still a problem -(Interruption)

MR AEL ARK LODOU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, all he has said is in the policy statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are they all there?

MR AEL ARK LODOU: Yes.

MS KIRASO: I am sorry, Madam Speaker, I keep going back to the guidelines. On this specific issue I would like to advise my colleagues to give recommendations. If somebody feels that a sector or a place has been marginalised we shall capture that recommendation and add it to the recommendations, which have been already given by either the sessional committee or the Budget Committee and it will form part of those recommendations. By doing that we would minimise the time and going to some of these details –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, tell us what you want them to do so that we –(Interruption)

MR AACHILLA: Yes, I have already told them of Dopeth Bridge, which has been omitted and yet the previous year it was budgeted for but this year there is nothing. The same with Roope Bridge, it has been omitted and yet in the other policy statement it was budgeted for and there is nothing. I want something to be done to that effect. 

Then, honourable minister, when you are going to clarify these issues, what political statements can you make in this House to convince the Karimojong who have access to this report that their wishes and aspirations are taken care of by you as a minister so that at least since everything is televised you correct the impression that is being sold negatively in this report?

And then lastly, how are you going to convince me, you know very well that we are 12 Members of Parliament in this House from Karamoja and we continue supporting NRM 100 percent, or 101 percent, and yet the truth is that you have not convinced us that we can demystify the feelings of DP, UPC and FDC that you are going to hold Karamoja perfectly and yet here you are trying to show that you are not really supporting us. Can you clarify that politically? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members we are a bit late on this work, part of it should have been done yesterday. May I appeal to you that we end here and I will give the others an opportunity with the other reports?

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I have issues of my constituency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from PWDs Eastern.

12.28
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairman for this report. It gives a list of successes by the minister and I hope the committee was able to verify that these were actual successes on the ground. 

I have a concern on page 2, which talks of completing 65 percent of civil works on Jinja-Bugiri road. When you look at page 5 you find a different percentage of 15 percent and the minister promised that a substantive contractor was going to be put on this Jinja-Bugiri road. When you move on this road you do not see much difference from what it was at the time when the original contractor absconded. What is happening? 

On page 3, for some reason the committee does not talk about the ship that went under water. Is this a conspiracy between the committee and the minister? What is the problem? 

On the housing sub-sector -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Mwandha, you are part of the Budget Committee, aren’t you? You issued guidelines on what should be contained in the report and now you are moving out of your own guidelines and demanding something different from the chair of the committee.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the guidelines were that we would ask questions and I have done nothing other than asking questions so far. So on the question of the housing sub-sector, the Prime Minister on the issue of accessibility addressed the Minister of Works. This was at the beginning of this year. 

The Prime Minister is here in person, the Minister of Works, Housing and Communications has been promising that he would take action on the directives of the Prime Minister but up to now nothing has happened. The minister should remember that one day he will be old and age is disabling. He will need an accessible physical environment. What on earth is the minister doing about accessibility? Maybe he will be moving in helicopters that do not need roads. 

But again on the issue of accessibility, I see here on page 8, “carry out of Phase III on Kampala Urban Interface ….” Many of the roads in Kampala and other urban centers are not accessible. More and more disabled people are using wheel chairs; you need to cross from one road to another. There is absolutely no access for one wheeling himself to cross from one road to another and even the pavements are rough and the manholes are not replaced and this is a nightmare for people with disabilities who have to use wheelchairs. I see nothing in this report, whether again this is a conspiracy between the committee and the minister, I do not know!  

On page 9 there is a very serious issue of the rehabilitation of Parliament. In fact I got some communication that the people who are responsible for our lifts complained to the Speaker far back in November last year that the roof of Parliament is leaking and since the roof is leaking, one day people will have a problem with these lifts. I am a major beneficiary of Parliament lifts. I do not want to be electrocuted in these lifts because of the negligence or the failure of the Minister of Works, Housing and Communications to provide repairs of Parliamentary Building. When is this going to be done? 

There is the issue, which my colleague hon. Mehangye referred to. These are the distortions in the Budget arising from presidential pledges. I would humbly propose that His Excellency the President should be advised not to make these pledges because they distort the Budget. I mean why should we have the Budget distorted time and again because of these pledges? So, I would like to make a humble proposal with regard to roads: these are very expensive projects that no commitment should be made, which may make people have to juggle with the Budget and distort it.

Madam Speaker, on page 10, on the issue of State House, I do not think we have resources to construct State House. It is my humble proposal that this project should be deferred. 
 
My final question, my committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was concerned about the project being implemented by Face Technology and we have a report on this matter, which has been waiting discussion by this Parliament. And before the report was presented the minister went ahead and implemented this project in total disregard of the concerns, which my committee has over this project. Why is the minister undermining Parliament? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If everybody wants to speak, I do not know when we shall finish this work. The other alternative would be that if you speak on this report you do not speak on the others. Yes, we have to complete the Budget. We have to go on.

12.35
MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for the indulgence and giving me the opportunity. I consider this a good opportunity because I understand yesterday or the other day, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications made me the subject of his submission before the committee on an issue that I had previously raised in May, a matter of great concern to my people. 

I want to put this on record. This Parliament has been very kind to that road and to the people of Omoro County. In the financial year 2002/2003 they gave Shs 350 million, financial year 2003/2004 they gave Shs 240 million and last financial year this Parliament allocated Shs 260 million for the construction of that road. 

Madam Speaker, in July of last year I went on that road and saw the difficulties it had. I came back and wrote to the permanent secretary, having seen an advert that he had ran in the newspaper about a contract to be awarded for works on that road. The ministerial policy statement said the amount was Shs 260 million and it was supposed to cover 88km of road. When the advert was run sometime in July, it was talking of 44km of road and when the contract was finally awarded, it was awarded for 24km of road. 

I have raised this matter with the chairman many times and on the date – I have the dates here - on the 3rd of May this year I went to the chairman’s office and I said, “Mr Chairman, I do not know what is happening. I have just been there. The bridge, which I talked about in July, has collapsed; there has been no food for people of Awere and they have to go through Lira, a total mess!”  The chairman told me, “By the way you are lucky, your God is with you.  Come, we have all the engineers of Northern Uganda in committee today.” I rushed upstairs, picked my papers and came for the committee meeting. 

Madam Speaker, this is the report that these people presented to the committee and in this report they said –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you tell us please what the report is for?

MR OULANYAH: The report is for Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications Road Maintenance Programme - Northern Region Progress Report, July 2004 to March 2005 published in May 2005. In annex 5 of the report they say, Opit-Awere, length 24km, contractor Dahasy, amount paid Shs 58 million, contract sum 190, not 260, and progress, this is what shocked me, 65 percent finished. I was greatly concerned. 

I told the regional engineer, Eng. Kitonsa, the District Engineer, Eng. Ogoni and the contractor whose phone number they gave me to call, I said, “Let us go to that road. I am not going to say anything.”  That is what I said before the committee, the chairman was there. I said, “I am not going to say anything in this committee today. I want this engineer to come and I will offer them transport to go see the road.”

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I am very sorry to interrupt my honourable colleague, Oulanyah, but in the interest of so many people who were standing up honestly to give specific questions, is it procedurally correct for him to continue with this story rather than putting a specific question or point of clarification to the minister? I thought we agreed that that is how we are going to move because many people are not happy that they are going to miss out on this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you have said three or four things: one, the contract sum has been changing, two, the distance has been changing and the work has not been done. Perhaps you can now ask the minister what is really going on?

MR OULANYAH: Madam Speaker, I am a man of a clean record and I like a clean record in this House. I was subject to the permanent secretary’s submission to the committee and that is why I want to clarify this and it is not because I am pleased about it, no. So we took -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Oulanyah, I do not know what the permanent secretary submitted, I do not know. Can you tell us what he submitted and then we continue?

MR OULANYAH: But that is what I am going to say Madam Speaker, if I could only be given time. I also happen to represent people and this is the only opportunity I have to speak on this matter, please.

When we reached Awere Bridge, that is the border of Pader and Gulu districts, I asked Eng. Kitonsa what percentage had been done in his rough assessment and he said, “Between 10 to 15 percent.” The report here says 65 percent of the work had been done. Madam Speaker, this is wrong. For three weeks I have been there, I found one grader for the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications with two workers doing the side of the road. 

I am sure they have reported that it is finished; it is a shameful piece of work. It is not proper for the permanent secretary to come and try to ridicule me before a committee; it is not fair! Something has got to be done. 

This year it has been budgeted that for the full length of the road it is going to cost Shs 5,000,000; we are going to see. About three weeks ago they ran an advert again to do now the whole of that road when the other contract has not yet been completed. These are the confusions I do not understand and I think for the record, the permanent secretary better be a little more careful when dealing with some of these things because you can outrage some of these people who have people who come to complain and who die on roads because trucks are stuck and ambulances cannot go and people die and yet for you, you are just calling people names. It is not fair!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope the minister will be able to tell us the progress of this road on all the fronts.

12.43
MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like the Chairperson on the Committee on Budget to clarify to this House whether this report you circulated to us is standard because if you look on one page about the achievements - first of all the plan, does the Chairperson of this Committee of Budget accept that there is need to revisit so that we improve or is she really satisfied?

The Minister of Works, Housing and Communications should always tell us how many people are employed not only in his ministry but generally in his sector because politics is about people being employed. If this sector is not employing people then it is the responsibility of this Parliament to help this minister so that more people are employed –(Interruption)  

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. These policy statements have been with us for a long time and when you open a policy statement you find a list of all the workers of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. For a Member of Parliament to stand up and say, “Tell us the workers who are in the ministry”, when actually the policy statement is on his table, I think I consider it procedurally wrong.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wambuzi Gagawala, if really there is nothing to say because in the first question you asked the chairperson whether she is happy with the format, then you are asking for staff, which you already have.

MR GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, I went on to clarify, obviously I have got the policy statement and I have been on this committee for ten years together with the chairman. He has been my vice-chairman, so when I stand up in this House to make a comment about employment in Uganda when the youth are about to eat us alive and the vice-chairman of this committee brings a report, which does not actually tell how many people are employed in the sector then he stands up to complain and I take it sitting down, this is interesting!

Madam Speaker, I would like to say one thing that it is very important for the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications this morning really to bring our blood pressure level down about the issue of Jinja-Bugiri road. Yes, he is doing very well for the temporary repairs but it is very important in the next three, four or five months for us to know where we are heading about Jinja-Bugiri road so that everybody is – when I talk about Jinja road I mean from here to Bulamogi.  

In the housing sub-sector, if we do not get to know what Sudhir is doing here by this committee and people are saying the city is being damaged then we are not doing our due diligence as Members of Parliament because it is very important for us to get reports about the construction industry, particularly big constructions. These actually hurt us for we observe them and if nobody is commenting about them and people are dying in them then we should consciously say that the chairman should have said something about it.  

However, the construction industry is something very important, which should be highlighted in terms of volume of construction and in terms of other parameters, which are important in the construction industry. The minister is doing well but if we do not bring it on the Floor then how shall we be mentioned, we shall – Madam Speaker, I would like to end by requesting the chairperson of this committee, is there anything going on in railways, because it is not in this report? Is there anything going on in the air because it is not in this report?

I thank the chairperson of the committee for mentioning slightly the issue of the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting, which is coming up. It is very important for the minister this morning or this afternoon to say something because it is a very big event, which is coming up in 2007 and maybe this is the only time we have as this Parliament to make serious comments about the summit meeting. If we just brush it aside in this last Budget of this Parliament then I think we are belittling our responsibility. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But is that really his responsibility to give us the whole programme of the CHOGM?   

12.54
MR EDWARD WESONGA (Bubulo County West, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I also join my colleagues in thanking the chairman and the committee for the report well articulated. Although I have said the report is very well articulated, I seem to be thanking the chairman on behalf of those whose constituency problems have been addressed within the same report.

When I read something about bridges, there were repairs and constructions and I never saw Bubulo West so I got a bit distressed. Since 1997 the River called Manafwa and the more reason why they had to name the new district the same river because the thing is really a “Kony” while Manafwa is “Kony” in the eastern, it has divided the people of Bubulo West. When –(Interjection)– something is interfering, I need your protection. He says how do I vote, “I vote yes.” 

When you look at annex (g) of the ministerial policy statement, it even disturbs me more because for the last three financial years the ministry has been talking about foot bridges. I do not know whether it is the same language that I interpret them to be, being constructed in my constituency, and it has never occurred that I have had any. I would wish to learn from the honourable minister as to whether – sometimes I do not call it propaganda but when we read and nothing happens and it is repeated the following financial year, we get so concerned.  

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the ministry has a policy. There are areas in this country where bailey bridges were taken as a temporary measure and thereafter the ministry followed with permanent construction of bridges ten yards away and still personally I would have felt that if the bridges were temporary and if you have constructed a new bridge, it would have been something I would feel that you remove that temporary bridge since it is metallic and you take it to the needy people. 

At one time the Government of Uganda committed itself and said it had imported bailey bridges and if anything since Bubulo West was the most hit - as I talk there are children who do not go to school during the rainy season because of our terrain and the way the river has divided us. There are teachers who earn for nothing -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamana Edward, I wish you could be specific and say, “We need a bridge in that joint, we need a bridge in the other corner”, and name them so that they can be captured.

MR KAMANA WESONGA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your guidance, I need a bridge in Butuwa. I need a bridge in Buwagogo where even His Excellency recently went and visited and assured the public but when I read this thing here I got confused. The Ministry of Works was there, even the chairman of the committee himself was petitioned by the Bagogo but now you talk about a foot bridge, which has never come. I need a bridge in Bubulo, Bubwaya. 

Madam Speaker, please, I am now appealing. Those days I used to debate, I wish the hon. Minister of Works and the committee really understood me, and the Minister of Finance should also be part of this team to ensure that children in Bubulo West can also go to school. The absence of bridges has denied them the right to education. If the issue of bridges is not addressed, I wonder how you expect my area to ever develop in the education sector. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.54
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. However, my concern is on the achievements that have been outlined on page 6. I wonder whether the committee verified the percentage of work that is reported to have been done. In 4.2 sub-section (i), it is said that 60 percent of works Wolfram Mine Bridge located at 45 kilometres on Kabale-Rubanda road, has been achieved. 

However, I was there recently and I have told the minister about it. This bridge construction was allocated up to Shs 600 million but the work being done is not satisfactory. The contractors are using wheelbarrows and a vehicle of about two tonnes. I suggest that these tenders be given to people with technical capacity. Work has been going on for almost one year and yet we do not seem to have any breakthrough. We need to verify this so that money is not lost just like that.

The committee recommends that the supervision and monitoring by the technical staff in the Ministry of Works be facilitated. Most of the new roads that are done under UMPs should always be supervised. Culverts are just laid on the road and nobody seems to take care of the bridges. When the rainy season starts these roads are washed away. For instance, Bukanga, which is in hon. Rwamirama’s constituency, where I go quite often, has had construction done without any supervision. The supervisory role by the technical team of the Ministry of Works should be reinforced.

As the committee recommends, some of the roads should be taken over by the Ministry of Works. Most of these are under district local councils, which do not have the capacity to maintain them. In other instances, you find -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Banyenzaki, you are really debating. What questions are you asking?

MR BANYENZAKI: I am giving recommendations, Madam Speaker. I am reinforcing the recommendations made by the committee. Maybe I should put my submissions in question form. Why doesn’t the ministry take over the mine roads yet these are productive roads leading to productive sectors?

Why doesn’t the ministry take over roads that lead to national parks and other national resources? Why doesn’t the ministry look into the packing yards for trailers and big lorries? These lorries pack on the roadsides and block the flow of traffic. For instance, on the Jinja highway near Mbikko Bridge there are always lorries, which make travelling at night very difficult. The other day when I was coming from Kabale I found many trucks packed in Rubare, hence blocking the road. Why doesn’t the ministry issue guidelines for packing yards?

I am concerned about the issuance of driving permits, which is under the Ministry of Works. One of the members has already shown his concern on Face Technology. 

My other concern is on boda boda cyclists. The ministry should come up with guidelines in this sector, which seems to be growing very fast. I strongly recommend that the cost of riding permits for this sector be reduced to enable all cyclists afford them. I thank you.

1.00
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara):  Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I thank the perennial chair and the perennial vice-chair of this committee. I have a few questions - (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable member who has been in this Parliament for a long time, from NRC to date, to call the chairperson and the vice-chairperson perennial? Is he in order to insinuate like that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. I think the chairman and the vice-chairman are very efficient and that is why they are re-elected to office.

DR NKUUHE:  “Perennial” means more than one year.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nkuuhe, we brought their names here and asked this House whether they agreed that the chairperson and the vice-chairperson be re-elected. You all agreed. Do not raise issues about that. Please, speak to the report.

DR NKUUHE: Perennial minister also -(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Speaker, having heard from hon. Dr Nkuuhe, a gentleman by caliber who is now becoming a ruffian by status by insinuating that the chairmanship of hon. Byanyima is perennial, and is pocketing as he addresses you and is insisting on what you have ruled upon, I beg to move that we apply rule 59 and the member no longer be heard. I beg to move. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question -(Applause)- hon. Nkuuhe please, speak to the report. 

DR NKUUHE: First question, I have often used a road in hon. Byanyima’s constituency, which also connects to my constituency. After a trip there you really need a massage. When will that road be constructed, Sir?

Secondly, I appreciate the achievements in the communications sub-sector on page 4. You well know that communications and specifically transport are important for development. I would like to thank the Uganda Government, which has better roads than those of Kenya. However, Tanzania has better roads than Uganda. I wonder what plans the committee has to ensure that our roads are to the standards of Tanzania?  

In addition to that there is supposed to be a fiber optic cable connecting Kampala to Mombasa. This will link to the cable, which goes around Africa, to the rest of the world. This communication is cheap and yet important. What steps have been taken to work on this?

Madam Speaker, there is what we call access economies of scale. In other poor countries they noticed that since electricity wires go further than those telecommunications, especially the landlines, it is cheaper to string wires on electricity poles. I wonder if this is in the future plans of the telecommunications sector. We should encourage telecom companies to put fiber wires along electric poles to reduce construction costs in providing telecommunications that covers wider network.

On page 4 you stated that one of the achievements was a drafted communications policy submitted to Cabinet. This was done in December 2003. The question is, what has been going on since that time? Indeed the people in that sector are concerned about the delays in many areas. We may be ahead of our neighbours but these neighbors are very slow. Therefore, you should ensure that we move faster than that.

Page 7 is also related to the communications sub-sector. We have two major service providers, MTN and UTL. The period upon which we had agreed with them ended in July this year. What more is there to be done? Why don’t we follow it up? I have attended the meeting with UCC and other stakeholders, concerning the way forward. They were of the view that we invite other players in the sector to provide either service or infrastructure. When will this be approved so that we know what the future has for us?

Our people are waiting. Obviously the two companies do not like competition. I am sure there is enough money in this sector. You should ensure that duopoly stops immediately. If other prominent companies came in, we would benefit from the competition. We just cannot continue having only two companies.  

Finally, honourable minister, when I meet you and ask for your business card, I see how serious your e-mail address is. However, I am concerned that your ministry has not reached the level of Parliament where every Member of Parliament has an e-mail address at Parliament. Many of your staff members still have mails at yahoo yet as a sector responsible for telecommunications, you should lead by example. It is not enough when the ministers are the only ones with addresses. I thank you very much.

1.08
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the minister is aware that some areas in Uganda, which have been insecure due to wars have not been taken as priority in as far as road construction and road maintenance are concerned. This has been interfered with because nobody expects the constructor to go to Otuke, when even the ordinary civilians’ transport cannot be accessible to the place.  However, now that most of these areas are becoming reasonably safe, people are going back home. I would like the minister to tell this House what special plan for rehabilitation of these roads he has. 

For instance, Aloyi-Olilimi-Kotido, is a very important road because it is the lifeline of the people of Otuke and those of Kotido. I went there recently with the Vice-President and this House would be shocked to know the terrible experience we had there. Small bridges were washed away a long time ago. A short distance, which should take one hour, takes centuries. Indeed the Vice-President asked me, “Is this the constituency you present?”  He promised to write to the Minister of Works to draw his attention to this special plan. Therefore, why can’t the areas of Lira, Aloyi, Otuke and Kotido be worked on, now that they are reasonably safe? For the last two or three years no maintenance work has been done. Shouldn’t the Government have special money allocated to ensure that these roads are properly done? 

The same problem persists in Apac, Aboke, Oyam, through Ngayi and Cheme. I do not think any maintenance has been done there. Although it has been reasonably accessible, Amolatar and Kioga have horrible roads. You see, he is talking about Amuria and Otuke. Therefore, it is my plea that Lango, Teso and Acholi, be given a special road programme from the minister. I am aware that when we met the President in Baraleg last year, the minister was given a directive to work on those security roads and bridges. Some of these were done but I am disappointed that only one was done and even then, poorly done in Otuke. Therefore, my question is, does the minister have any special programme for these areas?

Secondly, I am happy that hon. Amajo and hon. Eresu are around. We are greatly concerned about Lira-Kaberamaido-Dokolo road. What I see in the report is just upgrading, which means only murram will be used. I would have been happy to hear from the minister that the construction is starting this financial year, when he is still a minister. In fact, we are even ready to name the road “Nasasira Road”.  

I really want to see this road constructed. We should not have any more upgrading. That road has been upgraded for the last 50 years or even 70 years. Every time you upgrade it, it is washed away because of very heavy traffic. Now that Southern Sudan and Nairobi are accessible, we should remember it is a very important road. I am surprised that in the report you have budgeted for mere upgrading. Honourable minister, I would be happy to know when you intend to take the equipment to have that road tarmacked.

Thirdly, there has been a plan for Northern Uganda and part of Eastern Uganda to access Western Uganda through Masindi and Hoima. You can imagine, to go to Kasese from Gulu one must go via Kampala in order to use the Mbarara-Bushenyi-Kasese road. I know that there has been a plan, although it is not the plan of this government, that there should be a tarmac road from Masindi via Hoima and Fort-Portal. However, this seems to have disappeared from Uganda’s master plan and yet it is a very important road.

 I want to know - I know that the road had two parts, the Masindi-Fort-Portal road and the Apac-Lira-Kitgum road. The Apac part has been completed by the Movement Government because it goes through Akokoro, the home area of Obote, and possibly they are not very interested at this stage to see that that road is tarmacked. But if you lack that level of nationalism –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Omara Atubo, you have made your point. You said that people in Gulu should get a faster way of getting to Kasese, but now you are diverting. Just ask the minister to take note of those roads and we move on.  

MR ATUBO: Thank you for your guidance.  Finally, I am also concerned about Karamoja. I want to add my voice –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Omara Atubo for giving way. If I understood him, he says that we cannot tarmac the road from Masindi to Apac, which goes via Akokoro, because he thinks Dr Obote comes from Akokoro. I want to know from him, Dr Obote was a President here for two terms, what was the reason for not tarmacking the road?

MR ATUBO: Everything had been planned. The money was got from the African Development Bank and diverted to your area. This money was there and you very well that you diverted it to your area. Even the money for the bridge was budgeted for and provided. When the Movement came to power it diverted the money.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, let me add my voice to the cries of the people of Karamoja. Otuke neighbours Karamoja and I know a lot about what goes on there. I find it very disappointing to some of us who would like to see Karamoja developed. There is no way Otuke will be secure with Karamoja still the way it is. I pray that the roads in Karamoja be accessed from Kitgum, Lira, Otuke, Soroti, and Kapchorwa. Some of these roads, which you are trying to tarmac, are luxuries. To me the one of Karamoja should take priority. I thank you.  

1.17
DR STEVEN CHEBROT (Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me, first of all, to ask the minister about the issue of the number of accidents on the highway roads. We know that there are a number of black spots on our highways, which cause the highest number of accidents. However, it is surprising that the Ministry of Works knows where these black spots are but have not even taken the trouble to warn the public about them. Does it take so much money for the ministry to ensure that this is done? Doesn’t the ministry know where these black spots are? I remember when I was young, whenever you reached those black spots, you would see a big signpost saying. “You are approaching a black spot, please reduce speed.”  Can the minister tell this House why those black spots are not identified? Many people are losing their lives.  

Question 2 is about the humps. All municipalities and town councils just wake up one morning and put up very poorly constructed, unplanned humps, which damage vehicles and cause accidents. The ministry has no control over who constructs what hump. I have been to Kenya and seen how humps are constructed. When you approach a hump at night, you will not break your car or get an accident in Kenya. 

However, Ugandan humps are just a game.  Why do you allow these people to just wake up and put up a road humps like that? Is there no system in place; are there no standards on how road humps are done? Madam Speaker, these are simple matters but they cost lives of thousands and thousands of people.

There used to be a master plan for roads. I know that there was a plan to tarmac Kapchorwa-Sironko-Swamu road. This brother of mine reached Kapchorwa and tarmacked the road only up to Kapchorwa. I do not hear about Kapchorwa-Swamu road anymore. It is not on the master plan and I do not hear anybody mentioning it anywhere. 

Madam Speaker, you went there the other time and you saw how we suffered between Kapchorwa and Swamu. The Chairman of the Works Committee has been there and I expected him to ensure that next year the road is tarmacked. He has been my friend for long. The minister and the officials in his ministry have seen how bad this road is. There is no alternative road between Kapchorwa and Swamu. This road, as bad as it is, is not even being maintained. 

The regional office in Mbale does not care about Kapchorwa-Aswa road. Now that Kapchorwa will soon be a region of its own, why don’t you organise to get us a regional office of our own, to avoid waiting for the Mbale office even for small issues? We had been under Mbale up to 1962 when we broke off. Please, give us an office in Kapchorwa so that we can maintain that road ourselves. Honourable minister, tell me what happened to the master plan for Kapchorwa road. I want you to answer that question here.  

Madam Speaker, I worked very hard to get the MTN office in my region and I am happy that Tingey is now covered. I requested the MD of UTL to give us communication so we can use it to trap cattle rustlers from Kenya and sometimes from my colleague’s area over there - I do not know what the UTL coverage is. Why are they not giving us UTL services in Bukwa? Kwania County cannot communicate with the outside. We have to look for specific spots where we access the network. The Managing Director of UTL is here and I beg him to give us just one line to enable us communicate. We are being killed and yet we cannot communicate. Honourable minister, I am requesting you to ensure that this is done.  

The other last thing is that you informed us the other time that there were going to be security roads constructed in Kapchorwa. This was to ensure that if one area of Kapchorwa is blocked we would have alternative access from Ngege to Bukwa side. Now that Bukwa is a district, I hope the policy of every district headquarters having a tarmac road still counts. Can you revise your master plan to include Kapchorwa-Bukwa road? Those are the only questions I want the minister to answer. Amen. 

1.22
MRS ROSE WABWIRE (Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report they have presented. However, I have not seen anything concerning the road that runs through Busia District, from Tororo to Majanji. For sometime now this road has not had any maintenance and its condition is worrying. The chairman of the committee has ever used this road and I am sure he knows its condition. 

One time I went to the committee to find out what was happening. They assured me that this road would be upgraded. However, over the years I do not know what has happened. The maintenance stopped completely. The road from Tororo to Amongora in Buteba sub-county coming down to Busia town is now impassable. In fact, traffic has now been diverted from Tororo to Busitema leading to Busia because that road is not accessible. 

When this promise came up, the maintenance completely stopped. If it was deemed that the upgrading would take a lot of time, we would have wished the road to be maintained, as we wait for that project. Madam Speaker, that is my concern.

1.25
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I rise on the issue of Katine/Ochiro road, which is budgeted for every year and has never been worked on since the budgeting for it started. The policy statement has always included Shs 350 million allocated for Katine-Ochire road, which is under the central government, but now the road is almost impassable. People have to go through Dokolo in Lira District in order to access some parts of Kaberamaido District. Please, I request that this is attended to.
 
Secondly, we passed the Condominium law for the housing sector. I would like to know when the implementation of this law will start. I have not got any information to this extent and I am sure many members of the public are interested in the details.

Madam Speaker, what has happened to the National Housing and Construction Company shares? We read in the press that the company has been sold off. Could we be given the correct information? Thank you.

1.27
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to that of hon. Eresu about the road, in addition to the tarmacking of Kaberamaido District headquarters. 

No. 2, the report is not detailed on railways. I would like to know from the minister what the ministry is doing about railways. Most of our neighbours, including Kenya, are taking advantage of the railway network. We all know that railway transport is more cost-effective than road transport. What is the ministry doing about the acquisition of a railway network?

The people of Teso have been crying for a ferry on Lake Kyoga for a long time. The journey from Kampala to Teso is a semi-circle yet if there were a ferry on the lake the trip to Teso and Kaberamaido would take only one-third of the time it now takes. This ferry will help us market our produce from Kaberamaido to Kampala and other areas. 

No. 4, –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Amajo, you should expand it to include the entire Kyoga basin, including Busoga, Nakasongola, Lango and Kaberamaido. All the areas around the Kyoga basin require that ferry.

MS AMAJO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have said it. We all know that water is a ready-made transport. All you have to do is to put something on it, like a ferry, and there is a road, which does not require repairs from time to time. Therefore, I think government and the ministry should consider getting a ferry for the whole of that eastern and part of the northern region. 
        
On page 10 of the report there is mention of Housing Finance being considered for an agency role in the housing industry. Informally I learnt just last weekend that there is an on-going consultancy to consider making Housing Finance a commercial bank. I would like to seek clarification from the minister if this is true. 

It will be a disaster, because this country does not have a mortgage facilitator. I thought Housing Finance was being developed to provide that facility so that it goes far beyond the housing infrastructure in this country, including the housing upcountry. The interest rates are still high and when you apply to develop any property upcountry, you have to spend much more than you would do here. I would like the minister to clarify on this. We need a mortgage bank. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.30
MR OTHMAN ALONGA (Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report and the minister for the work well done on the road sector. The road from Karuma to Arua has made our life easier; and we shall revenge come 2006 - should I say? I have seen the roads that have to be improved, Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo, Karuma-Arua and Oraba bordering the Sudan. I wonder why the area all the way from Moyo, Yumbe, Koboko through Terego to Arua town is not included in the master plan of the roads. 

The committee also talked about road and water transport but what about air transport? We also use air transport especially in places of Arua, Adjumani, Moyo, Kasese and other areas. During the rainy season, transport becomes very difficult. I remember one time hon. Moses Ali had to come out of the plane and push it in Arua airfield. What has happened to the airfields? What are you planning to do about their condition? 

How about the bridges? What criteria do you use in selecting some of these bridges? I have seen most of them on the hilly areas in Western Uganda. Someone has complained about the bridges in Eastern Uganda. What about bridges in other areas? I also have a very bad bridge between Sudan border and Uganda, known as Kochi Bridge, which needs immediate attention -(Interruption) 

MR PAJOBO: Thank you hon. Alonga for giving way. You should say that all the bridges from Arua to Sudan are in a sorry state yet very heavy vehicles use this route all the way from Arua to Nimule.

MR ALONGA: I would like to know what criteria you use so that we suggest which bridges should be constructed in our areas. The ministry should also consider joining the road between Kerila and Kerwa at the border with Sudan. The ministry should eventually maintain it for it is economically viable, given that it connects to another country. I concur with my colleague who said that some of these roads should be the responsibility of the ministry. The districts cannot take care of them properly. 

Finally, I thank the minister once again for giving us a grader for the construction of district roads. I hope he will also expedite the ways of giving us other equipment to help us maintain our roads. I thank you.

1.34
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern is on page 2, bullet 3. The report claims 65 percent completion of the civil works on Jinja-Bugiri road. When are we likely to have this road completed? They have made it motorable but with this semi El-Nino all that murram is being washed away and yet the tarmac is just half an inch.  

Why does the Ministry of Works just grade the Iganga-Mayuge road without putting murram? It was done two months ago but the road is already terrible. The motorists are now encroaching on the smaller and better roads. Why don’t we have murram on the Iganga-Mayuge road? It is just a small stretch of less than ten kilometres.

Madam Speaker, why don’t we have any government road in the Southeast of Mayuge District where there are about three landing sites? We have so many trucks of fish from Busia, Mbale and many other activities on that road. 

I would like to suggest that government takes up Musita-Nyondwe road that connects to Bugoto landing site, which is only 16 kilometers long. The same applies to Kaluba-Mayirinya road that connects to Musuubi landing site, which government should also consider taking up. It is a very busy road, which connects to Nabyama, another major landing site. 

Lastly, the entire eastern and southern parts of Mayuge District do not have MTN services and yet there is a lot of business taking place. So, why don’t we get another mast at Kyoga hill? This place is in a black out and we can hardly communicate; UTL is also not there, just as other networks.  Thank you.

1.35
MR KAPKWOMU NDIWA (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether the minister is still in touch with a survey, which was done on the security road between Chepsikunya and Bukwa sometime back. It was agreed that this road was viable and there was no reason for any delays. Our brothers who come in as bad visitors to loot and cannot be traced thereafter will now be more. 

The Ministries of Defence and of Works, Housing and Communications were to oversee the construction of this road. I do not know what is happening now, Mr Minister. I am aware that in your policy statement Chepsikunya-Bukwa road was surveyed and it was found out to be viable. This is a road, which will cover Karamoja, Nakapiripirit, Kapchorwa, Bukwa and West Pokot of Kenya. 

What I am now aware of is that this road is supposed to be upgraded and is still under consideration.  If you take on Chepsikunya-Karita for a national road that means you will bypass most of Kapchorwa and Bukwa areas.  I do not know whether it is an oversight on the side of the ministry. It was meant to pass via Bukwa instead of Karita, which was surveyed later.

Honourable minister, I am also concerned about the construction of the bridges along that road, which has taken a bit of time. I am grateful to the Ministry of Work’s headquarters and Engineer Munyamaza who put in a lot of effort to secure the bridge materials about two years ago. Engineer Munyamaza delivered them to Chepsikunya and handed them to district officials whose responsibility it was to utilise them. 

I also thank the UWA officials who gave us Shs 7 million to work on that bridge in November of 2003. There was also Shs 13 million from the Ministry of Works but the work is not moving. This means that even if that road were to be upgraded, it would still delay us because of lack of bridges. Therefore, I do not know whether the minister is aware of this and how fast it will be worked on. 

The people of Kapchorwa region are aware of the letter you wrote to the LC V Chairman in May 2003 to the effect that the road works would start in April 2004. This never took place. In March 2005 when we were discussing the same issue you promised that the construction would start in April. I am now aware that you say it will be in December.  I would be grateful if you assured my people that this time you will work on that road. I will tell them that you raised the Bible.

Madam Speaker, we have a district of our own. I have consulted with MTN, Celtel and UTL on many occasions concerning their services. For two years now, I am still limping. Is it possible for the minister to intervene now that we have a district status? The Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) carried out a survey and came up with an overwhelming number of handsets. They recommended to MTN, Celtel and UTL that it was viable. I beg the minister to come to our rescue. I thank you very much.

1.40
MR AMON-REEVES KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairman of the committee and his team for this good report. However, I will start with something that has perturbed me on page 9, where the committee observes that the presidential pledges have brought about budgetary distortions. I do not know where they got this information. Did they consult the minister on this? 

For example, when I approached the President about Bugamba road in 2001, he told me that it was his pledge in the manifesto. He indeed rang hon. Nasasira and told him not to forget this road. Hon. Nasasira followed up this matter in the President’s manifesto and did the job. Therefore, when the chairman says they are distortions caused by the presidential pledges, I wonder where he gets the information.

Madam Speaker, another question I want to put to the minister is in connection with the sunken ship. Will this be recovered or is he planning to buy a new one?  

There was a pledge to upgrade Bugamba road to Class II Bitumen Standard. This would cut down on costs of external transporters. The people of Bugamba and Rwampara would also benefit in the process. Upgrading was done, and the ministry had promised to do some research to find out the bit up of the two vehicles per day. 

Madam Speaker, it would not be possible to raise the vehicles right now because the road is not good enough to accommodate the trailers. However, if it is put to Bitumen standard, the trailers would use it with ease. This would enable us to have more than 500 vehicles per day.  I should add that this road is only 62 kilometers from Mbarara to Mirama Hill, a border post. Therefore, most of the vehicles would use this road instead of going to Kabale, which is over 200 kilometers from Mbarara. I will be very grateful if the honourable minister takes it up.

I thank the ministry and the chairman for following up the Kyabahaya Bridge, which connects Sheema North in Bushenyi District to Rwampara in Mbarara District. Over 50 people have died on this bridge in the ten years. Yet, it is only 12 kilometres to connect the two districts, from Kabwohe to Nyanga, just about 14km via Kyabahaya Bridge. I am glad that the procurement was made but unfortunately it seems SPENCON has a lot of work elsewhere. You need to harass them because the procurement was done over six months ago but up to now work has not started.

I thank the minister for the Kalangala ship network. I pray that several ships be introduced on our lakes so that we promote tourism.

On the humps, the whole road network in Uganda - on the highways – has humps. Recently I found a low loader that was carrying a tractor struggling to get over a hump. The middle tyres had passed the hump, the high tyres were stuck, and the vehicle bent back. I do not know who is supposed to meet those costs because those humps are rather high hence putting people’s vehicles at risk?  However, I request that we get some standard humps at Nyanga Trading Centre to alert drivers, but not to put vehicles at risk. I thank you very much.

1.45
MS JANE ALISEMERA (Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): I thank the committee and the ministry for the work they are doing in this country. However, I would like to draw your attention to what is happening in Bundibugyo District. I have gone through the whole document but I have not seen Bundibugyo anywhere. I know the President has good will because he has talked a lot about Bundibugyo. I have talked to the ministry officials on a number of occasions. They have assured me of their good will and they are doing everything possible to ensure that Bundibugyo District gets a road network.  

Madam Speaker, the routine maintenance of Bundibugyo–Fort-Portal road has been ignored. I have shared it with the minister and the committee many times. During road routine maintenance and bush clearing the constructor just uses mud from Rwenzori Mountain, which is washed away during the rainy season. 

Of recent the only bus, which goes to Bundibugyo, stopped. This is a very terrible situation. My people sometimes get stuck in Fort-Portal due to lack of means of transport. To make matters worse, this road is now cut off because of the work that is going on in the district. The person who is repairing this road is using the Rwenzori Mountain mud to pour in the road and now that it is raining we are getting landslides. You can imagine what is going on in Bundibugyo.  

We have been talking about Bundibugyo-Ramia Road, that is the road to the boarder and I know very well that it is a policy for this government that any road leading to another country should be taken over by government but this road - I have talked about it but have not seen anything showing that actually the road is going to be taken on.  

We can talk, we can meet in the corridors but what is written here is important because even if hon. Nasasira is not in government anymore and another person comes tomorrow, they should follow what you wrote, follow the policy statements, follow the budget and as long as nothing is in the budget, nobody will look at that programme as essential.  

When you look at Bundibugyo-Ramia Bridge, which was swept away in 1974, my predecessors, the MPs who were here before talked about it. We have talked about it for five years but it has never been made. Recently the water overflowed and people could not cross. One person died and was buried last week because of the bridge. The small footpath bridge, which was put there by Red Cross when they were bringing back our refugees after the ADF insurgency, has also been washed away.

You can imagine the complications in Bundibugyo District. How are we going to continue to have many policy statements without including the name Bundibugyo in those policy statements and budgets? 

Recently, we were praised so much by the President. We know we grow all those crops and Bundibugyo has the potential to develop and we have shown this country that we can develop without that road. We can develop without electricity but now where we have reached, we need those essential commodities like the road, like electricity to enhance what the people are already doing. Because we have done it, we have shown many districts that we can do without some of these but now we need your help. We want Bundibugyo District to be part of the budget.

How can we be sure that African Development Bank is going to fund the road when it is not in the policy statement, when it is not in the budget? How sure are we? We might be excited when there is nothing going on. We want this confirmation on paper to tell us that actually maybe this year or next year work will begin or there is a commitment. How can we be sure that the Uganda Government is committed to giving us a road and it has already negotiated with relevant authorities? 

Honourable minister, we also need to be informed, we need also to see ourselves in the papers of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication. We need a confirmation from the relevant authorities to show that actually you are with us and that eventually we are getting what we have been crying for. Whether it is tomorrow, or the other day, we want it in black and white. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to remind you that we are not debating, please ask specific questions.

1.53
MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye Division West, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister and hon. Nathan Byanyima for the work they have done. The minister is the only minister I know of who has not suffered the criticism of Nathan Byanyima. Giving a chance to Nathan Byanyima to examine your job, you must be very careful that things will end well.

However, I am still very worried that the three skeletons in the cupboard have not been talked about namely, the railway, the air transport and the water. These things are still ringing hard in the ears of the citizens of this country and I pray before we actually close you should give a comment on these things - why they have not appeared in the report.  

I also wish to convey this information to Members of Parliament that the question of enforcing the use of seatbelts in the taxis is really very difficult. I have been travelling and I cannot dare lift a belt and tie myself because they are ever dirty. The drivers leave very late, the belts are not washed, so the whole thing is like a game of a nursery school.  

Honourable minister, you remember there was a time when my brother Ken Lukyamuzi wanted to plant banana stems in the streets somewhere and I want to remind you that the man is preparing to come back because the situation from Nateete to Kibuye is getting worse. Thank you very much for listening to me.  

1.56
MRS KASULE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee and the minister for the work so far done. The first concern is that it is the responsibility of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications to make sure that there is equality and equal distribution of services to all Ugandans but when it comes to communication, the islands in most cases are left out and the ministry has not told us what plans they have to make sure that even the islands are covered in communication.

Last year, the minister told us that they had a plan to make sure they tarmac all the roads to the district headquarters. I have not seen anything like that in this report. What is the way forward, honourable minister, after promising us?  

MRS ISANGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that Mayuge District headquarters have not been tarmacked yet it is one of the districts, which would need such service because it is a new district. 

Another thing is about the transport to the islands. When they talk about the islands, they think of Kalangala. In most cases that is what government thinks of yet we have islands where we have people whose boats have been destroyed because of this “operation clean”. That is the transport they use and when it is destroyed the people remain with nothing. I think government should also think of those islands. 

For example, we have islands in Mukono, Mayuge, Bugiri - they do not have public transport. I thank you. 

MRS LUMUMBA: Thank you for the information. That brings me to the issue of the islands. Since I came to Parliament, four years ago, the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications has done nothing in the islands of Bugiri and Sigulu yet they are far apart. They always think of Kalangala, as my colleague said, yet Sigulu Islands are more populated than Kalangala. 

We have a problem that whenever people in the islands do not receive services, they always think of seceding to Kenya because Hama Islands are nearer to Kenya than this side while Lolwe Islands are nearer to Tanzania than this side. How do you make them feel that they are Ugandans: by offering services! The Ministry of Communications, please, think of Sigulu Islands as part of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the issue of the Bugiri-Jinja road, the day we debated that issue here I had a chat with the Minister of Transport in the corridors, and I told him, “By the way, I want to mobilize people of Bugiri and Iganga, since it is a planting season, we plant maize, because that is what we have - potatoes and groundnuts in the road”. He promised he was going to do something and that was the previous planting season. This is another planting season. The minister is moving slowly with his work and as we talk, what he calls the 35 percent that has been done is just getting the loam soil under the guise of murram, put in the road and when it rains it becomes a nightmare to go through that road. 

The road in the town of Idudi is just full of water. The towns of Bugiri and Rwaba have too big potholes. Our area grows rice and since there is a lot of water in the road we can even add it on the list and plant rice. Hon. Minister of works, Housing and Communications, I am Kasule Lumumba Justine, Woman Member of Parliament for Bugiri District, very able to mobilize people and we plant the beans and rice in that road. Whatever you promised in the previous planting season, you have not done in this planting season. Can we utilize that facility you have availed us?

Madam Speaker, on page 2, 7(vii), they talk of setting up an actual road management control and monitoring unit at 11 weighbridges. I want to urge the ministry - what have they done? What have they benefited from the few weighbridges we have? When I look at Buseyi after Iganga, there is some weighing machine but I do not see any impact. I have never seen them offloading some items from a vehicle because it is too loaded. They just park them by the roadside; I see some negotiations going on and the vehicles continue. If what we have is not utilized, why don’t you first utilize what you have instead of moving on for more? If you cannot control the few, will you have the capacity to control the many?  

I want to ask the minister - we have a presidential pledge for a regional road, the Musita-Busia road. The President has always promised us to have it tarmacked and campaigns are tomorrow. How is the President going to help us with his minister to have it tarmacked before the campaigns? This would even offer an alternative route to the traffic on Busia-Jinja Road. We have always had cases where swamps have been impassable on that highway. But if the other road was also passable and tarmacked, it would cater for that but there is nothing in the plan.

We have had accidents in so many places because of so many heavy trucks but the ministry is not telling us what plans they have to control the traffic of these heavy trucks that are causing accidents. Do you allow them to move freely in the night and during the day? What limitations - then they have a habit of double parking in most of the trading centres and the ministry has done nothing about it. People have lost lives. Should we wait for the Minister of Works to be a victim so that action can be taken? I am not calling for it but that is calling for attention.

When we talk of the islands of Sigulu, let the ministry do something about these islands and please have it in your records that Sigulu Islands are part of Uganda.

The issue of bridges - I want to also ask a question. What does one need to qualify to be on the list? Hon. Patrick Mwondha and I convinced the Minister of Transport and Communications, hon. John Nasasira, and took him to the bridge in Bugiri, which is always killing people - Kibimba Bridge. He promised to work on the bridge but to date there is nothing. 

If a minister goes out and promises the people of Uganda and makes a promise on behalf of the President and he does nothing about it, then that makes the people think that the Government is just full of liars and that is so bad. Whatever the minister promises, whatever the President pledges or promises - let it be fulfilled. If you know you cannot do it, you would rather tell the people, “Please, the funds are not available, we shall think about it”. Instead of promising and you give a deadline, which you fail to fulfill. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

2.05
DR JOHN BULAMU (Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee and the minister for the work they have done. The problem with the committee is they do very well but forget completely what they want to do. They do very well what they want to do and forget completely what they want forgotten. If I have not been understood, what they do they do very well but what they do not want to do at all, they forget it and do not mention a thing here. 

What I want to remind the minister about is that the Busoga Charter starts from Jinja to Bugiri and we have cried enough. You should remember there is reciprocity; this government should remember that there is reciprocity, which you have to answer.

Another thing is the bridge at Namadope, which goes from Iganga to Kamuli. That bridge has been repaired four times. We beg that it is repaired permanently, not repaired and it causes more deaths and dangers to many people.

Another thing is, the roads that we want to take over are Nawansega, Ikumbya and Intaijura. You remember until you come to help the district maintain them, they are not maintained and so you better take them over because you last repaired them five years ago. Others are Naigobya and Bukoba. There is a health unit, which cannot be accessed because of the roads. It is actually disastrous. The roads that you took over are very well done and we thank you, but you must remember roads - like hospitals - have inflows of small roads that produce and bring in people to hospitals, for trade and so on.  

Another thing I want to mention is communication.  I do not know why certain places should be forgotten completely. No UTL, no MTN, no Celtel, despite the many times of begging and writing.  Luuka, the constituency I represent, has begged for this many times and the chairman has always laughed it off and promised. 

It is a disappointing thing for the people especially at this time when they ask me for certain things, for these roads, for this communications, and I cannot answer. More especially towards elections they will think I am not worth anything because even on a few things - because they think they are very simple things - I cannot impact in the constituency. I would rather beg that you put them in writing and you give them a serious thought this time. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thirty-one members have spoken to this report. If you had been here at 10.00 a.m. maybe 50 members would have contributed. That was not done and we have two other reports today. So, we shall end there and ask the minister to respond.

2.10
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairman and his committee for this report, especially so when they had to work overnight to produce it, having finished meeting the committee yesterday in the afternoon. Let me also thank the members, on one side for the points they raised, which helped us to improve on our work, but more importantly also for where they recognized what government has done –(Interruptions)- I was thanking the honourable members for also appreciating what government has been able to do. 

In the interest of time I will respond to issues raised by the honourable members who are still in the House and I have kept the other issues raised. I will clarify those issues to those members when I meet them in the near future, when they come.

Hon. Basaliza was referring to the accidents because now the road is good; people are over speeding and he wants humps. This is the dilemma my ministry has. We improve roads and people over speed. Although we have laws in place, because the enforcement is still weak, the drivers still need discipline. But we consider humps when the local community applies for them despite the problems we are having in constructing them. You will also notice that most of our highways are becoming humps everywhere and they will lose really the class of humps.  

The other problem is poor planning of trading centres and markets along the roads, which again is an issue we are raising with the local authorities. Every time we do the roads, people bring the shops next to the roads. I think this physical planning and town planning must co-ordinate with the roads.  

The poor roads in Fort-Portal, part of the roads in Fort-Portal Municipality will be done under the Hima/Fort-Portal project.  

You were raising the issue of houses for civil servants, that they are under housed. You know the policy of government was that we would divest or sell the existing houses to the tenants and then raise a fund so that the civil servants can access loans or mortgages through that fund. That is being worked on and hopefully will be finalized soon.  But I am sure most of the civil servants who benefited from that scheme are living in better houses now than they were living in when they were not being maintained. They have sold those and bought the houses that they want, which are new. It is only those who never benefited who will not access that scheme.

Hon. Balemezi asked about the condition and status of the railway bridge. To the best of my knowledge that railway bridge is safe and sound – the bridge, which crosses the River Nile/Lake Victoria. 

You also mentioned Jinja-Kampala Road. First of all, you said you use it everyday and you have been at risk. I will at least congratulate you for being a good driver since you have not had any accident. However, Jinja has now reached a stage of reconstruction and we are looking for money. If you recall that road was completed in 1992 and it was in good condition maybe up to about five years ago. That means it had lasted ten years of its life. It now needs maintenance and that is why we are there every year because as potholes develop, every year we have to repair them. We are trying to find a way out because it has reached its stage of full reconstruction but we are still sourcing for money. In the meantime, that is why every year we have to keep repairing them. 

I take note of lack of warning signs where there is construction and we have been warning these contractors –(Interruption)

MRS BALEMEZI: Mr Minister, I would like to give you information about the railway line because we are told that the lower road, which was the motorable road, has a lot of cracks and even people are stopped from moving along there. We have the railway line above it using the same poles, which even the roads for the motor vehicles were using. Even people are stopped from passing along that road to connect to Jinja. That is why we have the fear that the railway line might just collapse when a train is passing by.

Secondly, we had even requested that that road should be rehabilitated so that we have an alternative road connecting the East to the centre. We only have one road and whenever we get an accident on the way, cars are held up for hours and hours before the Police come to clear the road just because we have only one route connecting Jinja and Mukono. There is just one road, but that was the other alternative road – that is what we call the old Jinja Road, where the train passes above the motorable road. You see even the minister is not aware of the road I am talking about.  

MR NASASIRA: How did you know I was not aware, honourable member? Maybe I misunderstood you or you did not clarify properly because I thought you were talking about the Jinja railway bridge across River Nile. That is why I was telling you that it is safe. Anyway, the railway line between Kampala and Malaba is under rehabilitation and the whole line, including its bridge structure, was inspected and where we needed to do the repairs we have done them. I want to assure you that that railway bridge is okay but if you are talking where the grass is growing and so on, of that I am not aware. We shall go and investigate.

Water transport has been talked about by many honourable members. It is true the facilities for our water transport in most parts of our water bodies are still inadequate, but the Government is trying its best to increase its water transport, and that is why today we reported of the completion of a ship, which will go a long way in improving water transport. We shall move to the other areas like the Sigulu Islands, which my friend hon. Lumumba was talking about, and other islands as well as the Kyoga Basin. In fact while I am on this point I could also answer the Kyoga Basin question. 

For the Kyoga Basin, we have prepared a project and we are trying to source for funds, which will deal with two important ferry landings at Mbulamuti and also at Rwampanga. Those will start. We are now trying to provide another small ferry service joining Kayunga District and Kamuli District where work is going to start.

Hon. Mehangye asked about boda boda licensing and the road to Bukungu Prison. I have taken your remarks. About the boda boda licensing, we issued a statutory instrument of how boda bodas should operate. First, every year the boda bodas will have to license their motorcycles, so the boda bodas are going to be inspected. 

Secondly, the riders themselves will have to get a rider’s license and thirdly, we are starting training and sensitization programmes for the boda boda cyclists, teaching them how to behave on the roads and so on because this boda boda business mushroomed - they have been useful in providing transport in our situation in the country. What they need now is to be put in line to operate properly and that is what we are doing.

Hon. D’Ujanga, the information from hon. Wadri Kassiano is that on Nebbi-Arua Road there are failures. From my knowledge and the knowledge of my technical people, we are not aware that there have been failures on this. We know there were some cracks in some parts of Nebbi-Pakwach Road, which the contractor is rectifying, and where his periodic maintenance requirement period has been extended. But we shall investigate more on the corrugations that have been referred to us on Nebbi-Arua Road. I do not think Jakiya Hill is covered under this project, hon. D’Ujanga.  

Hon. Mehangye, marking on the Kyenjojo-Fort Portal Road has started. We have already contracted - and the Kamwenge-Kasese Road is in our big policy statement. 

Let me combine the issues raised by my friend, hon. Rex Aachilla, about Karamoja. First of all, it is true that Karamoja has been one of the most undeveloped areas of Uganda. This is a historical fact for many reasons ranging from insecurity and distance. This dichotomy has been there and the Government accepts it. That is why the Government of NRM – because you are addressing it from that angle – has addressed Karamoja as an issue right from the beginning. It is even part of the old Ten Points Programme. If you can read the Ten Points Programme of the imbalanced areas that we are supposed to address. That is why later there was a Minister for Karamoja and an establishment of the Karamoja Agency. 

You will notice that in the last 20 years or so some achievements have been made, but definitely not all. If you consider that to start from Karamoja you have to start from Kampala and go to Moroto, at least you can proudly say that you can go on a smooth road now from Kampala up to Muyembe Corner as you turn into Kapchorwa. 

To me that is an achievement for Karamoja because you would have taken more hours even to get there. If the tarmac has not reached Moroto, it is on the way. That is how I will start my side. If there is any assurance, this is the Government that can give you an assurance that they are on the way to Moroto because they have shown that they are heading there. Nevertheless, let me add what we are planning to do in the immediate future. 

First of all, I need to refer members to the policy statement. Most of the programmes and projects are covered in this book and I cannot mention them here. The report of the committee was just a summary of some of the projects and they were following the guidelines that were given by the Budget Committee but the detailed work for each section, almost all the roads that you referred to, is there. I would like to urge members to refer to the sections of the Budget policy statement, what the ministry is going to do in each area. That is why I thank hon. Ark Lodou for that information about the bridges you are talking about and the roads. 

What is not here, which I can add for Karamoja, is that recently we had a mission actually, which was the visit by the President in Brussels. We had discussions specifically for Karamoja and the neighbouring borders of Teso and Kapchorwa. We have managed to acquire US $5 million and we are preparing projects - I had already told the Minister for Karamoja to mobilize all the Karamoja MPs, Kapchorwa MPs and Teso, the ones bordering, so that we finalize those projects and this work is going to start this year. 

Most of the bridges you have been talking about, some of these roads you have talked about in Kapchorwa going to Karamoja, in Teso area going to Karamoja, are going to be covered under that 10-dollar billion special project for Karamoja and that one you will know it within the next two weeks. 

Hon. Gagawala - first of all what are the preparations for CHOGUM? For us we deal with infrastructure and infrastructure is determined after the sites or the areas where we are going to have the conference and where we are going to have the retreat for the heads of state is determined. I think that decision, between the Commonwealth and the Government of Uganda, is about to be finalized. As soon as they have finalized it we shall put there adequate infrastructure that will serve the CHOGUM. 

That is why I would urge hon. Mwandha that instead of proposing that we should terminate the State House project - the State House project has to continue because that is the area where the Queen is going to be housed. Instead of urging us to terminate the project, he should urge that we look for enough money and finish the State House project.

The other issue is of Jinja/Bugiri, which I will combine with a number of honourable members’ issues. First of all, I want to urge my sister Lumumba not to embark on the planting exercise of beans and rice in our road. It is illegal in the Roads Act but since we have started repairs, it will not help those people who will plant their crops because they will not harvest them. By the time we do that road, the harvesting will not be ready. 

I do not want you to waste your seeds. However, I wish, on a serious note, to apologize for the delay. The honorable member should bear with us. Some of this money, as you heard the chairman saying, the 63 percent is got from outside. If an issue like this happens, a contractor abandons work without notice and we have to go back through the procurement, even the emergency contract we drew we had to take it through a national authorizing officer who is the Minister of Finance, the office of AEU, after our own work then to Brussels and back to Kampala. That is why much as I had promised you, the deadline passed - the time I had given you - because of that process. 

However, the emergency contract has been signed and I expect within a couple of weeks the situation that is rather bad now will change for the better. We hope within the next two months a full contractor will have been procured and work will start normally on that road.

With respect to your bridge, I am not a liar. I wanted to correct that. I promised the bridge and I think now the contractors are under procurement. That was again money - we were supported by the EU and it has taken a bit of time but that bridge you referred to, which we visited, is going to be done. A promise is not a lie. 

Hon. Kubeketerya asked why we do not murram Iganga-Mayuge road. It is on the programme. We will murram it. Then he asked, “Why don’t we have national roads in eastern Mayuge?” You will get them. Mayuge is a new district and most of the roads there were district roads but now since you have new district headquarters, all roads that lead to district headquarters will be national. I did not promise as a policy that they would all be tamacked; I said they would be national. The roads in constituencies will be tarmacked when they eventually qualify for that stage. 

Hon. Kapkwomu Ndiwa, Krik Corner is going to be part of this US $5 million project that I have talked of. Bukwa District phone service - that point I have taken. We will talk to the companies to extend those services. 

Hon. Alisemera, this document covers a lot of what we are going to do in Bundibugyo. On page 2 of this document you will find there are roads leading to country borders. Among them is the Bundibugyo-Ramia Road. On page 146 you will find a table, the ministry projects, and No. 7 of that project is upgrading Fort-Portal-Bundibugyo road. 

MS ALISEMERA: I was saying that because of the studies, which have been carried out - since we started talking about that road many studies have been carried out - so when we read and read we also get worried. We want to see the actual - one time there was a study, which said that Bundibugyo is not viable. That is one study. Another study said – there are many studies honourable minister and that is why I get worried. So, if there is another study what next? That is my problem. Thank you.

MR NASASIRA: No, I was following your debate very closely. You said, “I want things, which we discuss in corridors to be on record because tomorrow there will be another minister”. And I want to use that record to say that that was government’s commitment. That is the issue I was addressing. 

Then I have shown you the other road, which is in their tables for maintenance. I have taken your comment about the maintenance that is going on with the material, which is being used and which is not good. We shall address that. 

Hon. Nsambu, thank you for your appreciation of what is being done. The railways, aviation and the rest are covered in the bigger document in a more detailed manner and we have contracted out the Kibuye-Nateete road. It is going to be repaired.

There is the dilemma on safety belts. There is an outcry about road accidents. We put a law in place for safety belts, and there is another outcry that the safety belts are dirty. What can the ministry do really? I think we should start a campaign that a taxi, which has dirty safety belts, does not get passengers. Eventually people will be forced to clean them. Of course some of our roads are still dusty –(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Honourable minister, I pray you remove that thing - the belts. You even sympathise with the conductor or the driver. He leaves his job at around 10.00 p.m. in the evening; he comes early in the morning. There is no time to wash those things. You have to dismantle the whole thing. You find really we are trying to order something, which we cannot supervise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, really hon. Nsambu, are you seriously suggesting that you are taking this issue with the question of our safety when we are travelling in those cars?

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I am saying as far as those taxi belts are concerned, they are useless. Nobody can sit in those taxis and start belting himself or herself. They are ever dirty.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Nsambu, perhaps you could say that we should suggest ways of improving the cleanliness but removing the belts because of dust! 

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Well, control the speed. That is all –(Interjections)- because you find even those who use the belts do die. In fact the belt sometimes helps somebody to die very quickly because he will never move from the place.

MR NASASIRA: Okay, now I understand, hon. Nsambu is against safety belts but we shall talk about it because safety belts have saved many lives. 

I think I dealt with hon. Lumumba’s issues earlier. I agree Sigulu Islands do not have adequate transport. As we expand water transport, Sigulu Islands will also benefit.

Hon. Bulamu, we have noted your bridge and we are going to read the Busoga Charter very carefully and see that we understand it. (Applause)

MRS ISANGA: Honourable minister, if you talk of Sigulu Islands - when we raised the issue of those islands - there are many islands. It is not only Sigulu Islands. We have many islands in Mayuge, we have islands in Mukono, and we have islands in Bugiri. But when you emphasize Sigulu, then it means that you are going to leave these ones and then you work on Sigulu as you are working on Kalangala. We would like some clarification on that.

MR NASASIRA: No, I was just using Sigulu as a representative but all the islands need to be served and part of our marine transport development plan covers not only those islands in Victoria, but also other water bodies as I said.

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know I want us to wind this up. We have been here some of us since 10.00 a.m.  Minister, please conclude.

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam, it is just a small thing. I want to ask the minister whether it is possible for the ship in Kalangala, which will be commissioned in October - can it work in all the islands of Uganda?

MR NASASIRA: No, you know that ship has a limit.  We would rather look for another means of transport there. We have thought about that but it will not reach that side. Let us aim at having another vessel working in that part of the lake. 

Hon. Wesonga, that river cuts through your constituency but you are aware that last financial year we built a bridge across that River Manafwa.  You are aware another bridge was also constructed 500 meters farther down. Those are two bridges. If you look at page 4, we have included Wagobo Bridge. Really, we are trying to serve your constituency as we serve the other parts of the country, people who have got bridges should be patient with us.  

I will discuss with hon. Banyenzaki with respect to the Wolfram. I understand technically that bridge is going to be a floating bridge and they cannot use heavy equipment to – they have to use light equipment until it is fully constructed, but we shall discuss the legalities. Apart from that, I want to thank honourable members –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, there are only two areas, which I think are important. The question of accessibility to roads and buildings for the disabled and then there was a general problem of the lack of communication in many areas where the communication companies have not reached. Deal with those two. The lack of communication in many parts of Uganda despite having these communication companies and –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, the understanding from the beginning was that ministers would respond to issues raised here after the policy statement or report has been presented and issues raised during –(Interruption)- the hon. Member for Kasilo is making too much noise. I could not follow even what I was saying myself. 

I was saying there were two important issues, which were raised during the general debate and I would like the minister to just give us information. One is on the implementation of the Condominium law, the other one is on the National Housing Corporation, because the question was asked, “Was it given to Libya?” I thought that for the record it would be good for the minister to say something.

And also of course I do not agree that you should only answer people who are here because people will go to the Hansard to see if their questions were answered. But in the interest of time, we will go by your guidance, Madam Speaker. But those are two issues that we would like to be answered so that we incorporate the answers in the other responses. Thank you.

MRS WABWIRE: And, Madam Speaker, I have not heard my response.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the Majanji road?

MRS WABWIRE: Tororo-Majanji road.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you looked at that book, in case it is there? Is it not?

MR NASASIRA: I think I have been on that Majanji road more than Aggrey Awori. Hon. Aggrey Awori just stops at Bugiri here and he goes there for votes.  This Tororo-Busia-Majanji road is on the same contract with Kapchorwa-Swam road and it is on tender. 

Let me answer the two issues raised by you, Madam Speaker. One is on the issue of communication. Under the rural communication fund, areas that are not covered yet but are not licensed to be covered by the operators will be covered under the rural communication fund. Whichever areas are under served the rural communication fund through the rural communication programme will cover that. 

But also you realize the other three operators are expanding every year and that takes into account the query that you find these networks in towns and you do not find them a few kilometres after towns. Even that situation is changing. I am sure when we started you remember you would get in Kampala and maybe in Lugazi or Mukono, then Jinja but now you can put your phone on and drive up to the border, almost with the network on throughout between here, Malaba and Busia and even between here and almost Kigali-Rwanda border on the Northern corridor. So, the underserved areas will improve as the infrastructure increases and the areas, which are underserved completely, will be dealt with under the rural communication fund.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What do you plan to do with Majanji-Busia road?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, the minister has said that matter is in the other book. He says it is in the policy statement. If it is not there, you can let me know, but he says it is in there.

MR BYABAGAMBI: But, Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it is procedurally right for somebody to come in only five minutes ago and start raising the issues, which we have already gone through.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague has every right to say whatever he wants in this august House so long as he has the right permission. Is he in order to assume that some of us who have just walked in here have not been following what is going on in this august House, knowing very well that we are so advanced, we have got electronic media, we can hear, see - even when I am in Busia or Kitgum, I can follow what is going on here? Are you in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think his concern is that some matters were dealt with before you arrived and they were answered adequately. Minister, please conclude. 

MR NASASIRA: The other issues –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Accessibility for the people with disabilities.

MR NASASIRA: The accessibility for people with disabilities - paths into buildings and secondly while crossing roads. That is a serious matter. We are aware the country has been weak but under the new Building Control Bill, which is coming, we have said that the policy - but it is going to be a law. There will be no building constructed without facilities for people with disabilities. 

With regard to roads, I want to assure this House that the junctions and roundabouts we are going to have will have provisions for people with disabilities. However, the problem we have is that when you go to modern societies you find that most people with disabilities have motorized wheel chairs like the one hon. Mwandha has. As a result their traffic lights are designed in such a way that these people can move with ease. Therefore, although we are providing those provisions, we are limited by the facilities that people with disabilities in the country have. However, we will try to do our best. 

I appreciate that this is something that has been neglected in our designs for road crossings and buildings but we will sort this out. For the crossings with traffic lights we will also add lanes for people with disabilities. Also eventually parking areas will have reserved places for these people.

The railway line is also covered here. You will realize that we have undertaken repairs between Kampala and Malaba. Furthermore we have started opening up the line from Tororo to Mbale and in the policy statement we will continue until we reach Pakwach even as we prepare to link up with Sudan. We have already had serious discussions about linking Yei to Pakwach via the railway and as soon as Southern Sudan stabilises and we solve the Northern Uganda question, I believe the railway on that side will be operational. 

I did not want to talk much about Arua Airport although it is one of the busiest. In our document we have planned to expand it by first lengthening it, then surfacing it eventually.

I would also like to talk about some of the issues raised by the Chairperson of the Budget committee. First of all somebody said that the Housing Finance Company is going to be turned into a commercial bank and will no longer be a mortgage institution. Furthermore that the shares of National Housing are going to be given away, sold or leased out to somebody. 

If you look at the PERD Statute, the Privatisation Unit (PU) has got the power to convert a parastatal into a limited company. Should this happen, that limited company is diverted to PU upon which Ministry of Finance and PU each appoint one member to the bard. This is exactly what has happened to the National Housing and Construction Corporation. 

There is a belief that this company is currently under the ministry and this is true. The Ministry of Finance appoints board members and the company is now totally under that ministry as well as being handled by PU. Therefore, I am not competent enough to answer these two questions. The relevant minister will come and give an explanation on that. 

Finally, I want to thank the Budget Committee and the chairperson for the support they gave in their report especially when they urged government to increase money for roads as public utilities. However, I think they got the wrong impression that since we borrow money for 40 years the roads should also last that long. How I wish we could do that! The problem is that if we design roads to last 40 years or more, the cost of those roads would be higher. 

In economic terms, therefore, the internal rate of return would be lower and we would not qualify for the kind of loans we get since we are still getting soft loans from the World Bank. As a result we have designed our roads on an average budget to last 15 years while paying the loans within the 40-year period. The 15-year life span of a road means that seven years after construction it will start developing weaknesses and should be resealed. After that constant maintenance is required.  

Resealing of a road can give it another 15 years after which it should be reconstructed. That is the cycle we go through and it does not mean therefore that when these roads last for only ten years the work has been shoddy. Other than that I want to thank honourable members for the support they have always given the ministry and to assure you that we are doing our best within budgetary means to keep this sector running. We appreciate all your comments and advice. Thank you very much.

3.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Nathan Byanyima): Thank you Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to thank all the members for participating in the debate of our report. I apologize that we were unable to cover a number of issues especially railway and air transport and the Karamoja region. You realize that the time was too short and we are all constrained by it. 

Since we are trying to get into the system of reporting briefly so that we can stick to the schedule, I think we should look at the most important thing in this particular sector, which is the policy statement. On the last page there is a list of roads that the ministry has earmarked to take over. However, as a committee we disagreed and thought they should put this on hold. This is because we would like to first discuss with our colleagues and ensure that each constituency gets a road, especially one to the headquarters of the constituency that is funded by the central government. Only then will we be able to move together.

Secondly, there are a number of schedules for road maintenance in the policy statement. It is our responsibility as colleagues to look at the schedules and determine which roads fall in our districts or constituencies so that we can follow them up. Otherwise we do not have the capacity to go all over the country to find out how far the work has gone. 

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, we have the issue of Kyoga. I hope the minister will concur with me that funds are scarce. Since Kalangala is going to have a ship, I was proposing that as soon as it is launched and stabilized it should go to other places as well. It would be disastrous for us to keep -(Interruption)

MRS KAVUMA: Madam Speaker, the present ferry at Kalangala is like a road that has been cut off from Mbarara road and the ship that is going to be launched is like a bus. Nobody is replacing the road with the bus. Some people are claiming for more roads to go to their districts or within their districts and this is a district that is on water completely. So what value are you going to add when you cut our road?

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that the honourable colleague was not in the House when we started but the issue of Lake Victoria and Kalangala should not take precedence over any other place. We want to be realistic and as colleagues we shall see how the Government can handle this. We must find a way to serve the Kyoga area especially Nakasongola to Namasale, Kayunga and Kamuli – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, perhaps I should remind members that since the NRC we have been requesting for water transport on Lake Kyoga. It is not something we have dreamt about recently.  

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I agree with you that we should set priorities and stop being selfish in our constituencies.  About –(Interruption)

MRS RWAKIMARI: Point of clarification honourable chairperson –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: No –(Interruption)

MRS RWAKIMARI: Yes, I am entitled. Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, some of you were not here when the report was being presented. I would really appreciate it if you let us conclude. 

MRS RWAKIMARI: Madam Speaker, I went before the committee yesterday and I wish to get clarification on what the chairperson has said. I know I was not around in the morning due to other parliamentary issues but let me raise it. Why are you booing me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, raise it.

MRS RWAKIMARI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In relation to what the chairperson has said about prioritizing some of the roads in our constituencies, yesterday I raised an issue about tarmacking the small stretch of road from Ntungamo to Mirama hills but I did not get a concrete answer. When I look through this report it is not on the schedule. When is this road going to be on the schedule for tarmacking?  I thank you.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I agree that we have so many demands but I think it is high time that members knew that one kilometre of bitumen tarmac costs approximately Shs 1 billion. What we know is that the road from Ntungamo to the Rwanda border is in order and the committee could not go and repair all the roads in the pipeline. We had to pick a few that are on the drawing board, and work on them.

With regard to communication I think the problem is in the sector because the three national providers made a pledge that they would ensure that each sub-county gets a public phone and they were supposed to have done that before the end of the duopoly. Therefore, the onus is now on the minister to ensure that the three service providers honour their pledge. There is no question about that and our peasants should not rush to acquire mobile phones since they cannot use them anyway.

Finally, I request members that –(Interjection)– hon. Minister we have said that these members come from several constituencies but they should have public pay phones in their sub-counties before the end of the year because the providers are in position to do it but they are more interested in making profit elsewhere in the mobiles.

Finally, I wish to request members to get some time and read the policy statements so that we can get something out it. I thank you so much. May God bless you all.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proceedings are suspended until 4.00 p.m. We shall resume to consider the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

(The proceedings were suspended at 2.56 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.14 p.m. _)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will use my powers to adjust the Order Paper to permit the Minister for Trade, Tourism and Industry to make a statement on a matter of public importance. After that we shall resume with the reports of the committees.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.15
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I stand to make a statement to Parliament on the impending strike by Kampala City Traders Association, an association referred to as KACITA.  

On Monday, 22 August 2005, I received a memorandum from a section of traders from Kampala led by KACITA. The memorandum contained their grievances in regard to the following issues:
1.	Lack of timely response by government to some of the issues KACITA has been raising.
2.	Lack of cheap and convenient water transport on Lake Victoria to ferry goods from     Mwanza and Kisumu to Port Bell. 
3.	Involvement of aliens in petty trade.
4.	Interception of traders’ goods after payment of taxes.
5.	Closure by Uganda Revenue Authority of the Tax Education Centre at KACITA offices on Royal Plaza Complex.
6.	Application of 75 percent Common External Tariff (CET) rate on rice in Uganda. 
7.	Increase in taxes payable on imports.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I promised to take up the issues raised in the traders’ memorandum with the relevant organs of government and get back to them as soon as possible. Unfortunately as soon as the KACITA executive and some traders left my office, they issued a circular giving an ultimatum to the Government to act within a week. 

KACITA further called upon traders to stop forthwith lodging and submitting tax entrances to Uganda Revenue Authority with effect from 22 August 2005 and temporarily suspend importation of goods into the country.

The actions of KACITA were clearly contrary to the spirit in which their dialogue with government was supposed to be conducted. Indeed I called upon KACITA to refrain from this method of problem solving.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, nevertheless I went ahead to respond to their issues as follows:

On the issue of lack of timely response to some of the issues they had been raising, we have had several meetings at the Government level with KACITA. These meetings have involved His Excellency the President, the Rt hon. Prime Minister, the hon. Minister of Finance, Uganda Revenue Authority, and my ministry.

At each of these meetings issues have been raised, explanations given by government, action taken in some cases and promises made in others. KACITA leadership has participated in all these meetings.  

In situations where it has taken a bit of time to address the issues, reasons for the delay have been given. It is therefore not true that Government has not been responding to the grievances that KACITA has been rising with us.

b) On the issue of lack of cheap and convenient water transport on Lake Victoria to ferry goods from Mwanza and Kisumu to Port Bell, I have had consultations with my colleague the Minister of Works, Housing and Communications. The current disruption in water transport on Lake Victoria is temporary as work to make our vessels Kaawa and Pamba sea worthy is going on. As soon as repairs are completed, the vessels will be insured and put back into operation. All this should be accomplished before the end of the year.

In the meantime, Tanzania and Kenya vessels Umoja and Uhuru respectively are each operating three times a week. This may not be very convenient to the Uganda business community but as we await the Ugandan vessels to resume services, the business community is encouraged to use the Tanzanian and Kenyan vessels.

c) Madam Speaker, on the issue of involvement of aliens in petty trade, various arms of Government under the leadership of the Ministry of Internal Affairs are coming up with a comprehensive arrangement to handle the matter. Notices have been issued to the effect that aliens must limit their activities within the terms of their entry and this has been followed by a survey of various places in the country. 

Soon there will be security searches all over Kampala to apprehend, prosecute and where necessary deport both those who have overstayed and those involved in activities outside their conditions of entry.  Unfortunately, this has and will take a bit of time as it has diplomatic overtones and financial implications which need to be considered as a prerequisite.

However in handling the above, Government is looking for ways of identifying genuine investors and as a start Uganda Investment Authority has set up a desk for fast tracking the applications of genuine investors. The Ministry of Internal Affairs as directed by the Rt Honourable Prime Minister is handling this matter. It has taken a bit of time to resolve simply on account of diplomatic and financial implications. The leadership of KASITA has been updated on this matter.

d) On the issue of interception of traders’ goods after payment of taxes, a few revenue checkpoints still exist to check on transit malpractices that are rampant in some regions of the country. However with roll-out of ASYCUDA++ and the shift to increased surveillance of the movements of transit cargo, such check points will be an issue of the past.

e) Madam Speaker, on the issue of closure by Uganda Revenue Authority of the Tax Education Centre at KACITA offices on Royal Plaza Complex, Uganda Revenue Authority has been reviewing all its processes and systems. As such, it suspended then existing Tax Education Centre at Royal Complex Arcade that housed the KACITA offices to create room for more enhanced and targeted oriented tax sensitisation initiatives that have now already taken root.

Shared centres with taxpayers to be used for among others, tax information education and complaint solving are to be opened at convenient locations and communicated to the public.

f) As regards the issue of application of 75 percent common external tariff rate on rice in Uganda, the three East African Partner States agreed on a CET rate of 75 percent on rice. They further agreed to vary the application of this rate for Kenya and Tanzania for a limited period of two years.

The differential application of CET does not only apply to rice. For instance in the case of wheat the agreed CET rate is 35 percent although Uganda is allowed to apply zero percent rate for a period of two years. His Excellency the President explained the reasons behind the CET rate for rice to the business community when he met the traders in May 2005.

Therefore the application of differential tariffs on rice is not a result of weak negotiation skills on the part of Uganda Government as KASITA has asserted. In the meantime we have met with rice importers and are encouraging them to focus on locally produced rice as well. This is because at the moment Kibimba Rice Scheme that is being run by TILDA is operating at only 50 percent capacity on account of insufficient outlets and market for their rice.

It is also true that His Excellency the Vice President has started a rice production programme in the country and the farmers of this rice are yearning for market within the country and region. 

g) Madam Speaker, on the increase in taxes payable on imports, there hasn’t been any change in tax rates since the previous Budget.  However following the interception of many false invoices, Uganda Revenue Authority circulated new test values in accordance with Article 1.2 (b) of the WTO Valuation Agreement. 

§	This agreement provides that the primary basis of valuation of goods is the transaction value, which is the price actually paid or payable. 
§	It further provides that transaction values may be proved by presenting all documents relating to the transaction, failure of which the value of identical or similar goods may be used. The values circulated were therefore test values for use in methods subsequent to the transaction value method.  
§	It should also be noted that a number of importers have confessed that they use false invoices in order to maximize profits. As a result of streamlining the valuation of goods, importers who have been grossly undervaluing their goods will inevitably be affected most as the increase in tax payable will be greater.

§	Use of false invoices is a common practice and a big challenge to customs authorities all over the world. Our long-term solution to this problem is through exchange of information on values with our major trading partners in the not too distant future. In this way, the lucrative business of clearing goods using false invoices will be dealt a final blow.

§	The assertion that customs officers do not make reference to the HS Code System to ascertain the purchase price of goods is incorrect. The Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System (HS Code) is an international system for classification of goods but not ascertaining their purchase prices.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, yesterday 29th August 2005, my ministry together with Uganda Revenue Authority and a representative of the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry met with the leadership of KACITA and they raised the following issues:

1.	That URA Customs Department has no mandate to issue Reference Values within the provisions of the East African Community Customs Management Act.
2.	That Customs withdraws the list of Reference Values circulated to all its officers.  

After the meeting, I had consultations with relevant Government organs after which I sent a response to KACITA to this effect:

(a)	That all the legal issues raised are to be forwarded to the Attorney General for his guidance.
(b)	That URA is consulting other governments and organisations like the East African Community, Directorate of Customs and Trade, WTO and WCO on the interpretation of the WTO Valuation Agreement on the provisions with regard to Reference Values.
(c)	That Uganda Revenue Authority issued a clarification in connection with Reference Values. The clarification instructs Customs officers not to apply Values outside the provisions of the WTO Valuation Agreement.  

Given the above explanations, KACITA has no basis for instigating traders not to pay taxes or to call for a strike. However as Government and URA, we shall intensify on tax education and sensitisation of the business community on these matters. We shall equally protect all those who want to do business in the country. Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to honourable members and the populace to give the Government position support in order to ensure that there is no disruption of business in the country. I thank you for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this statement was basically for information but we can comment on it up to 5.00 p.m.

4.30
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to comment on the timely statement by the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry.  

I have just been wondering whether this statement will stop the strike anyway. This is because traders out there are busy mobilising to have tomorrow as a day for closing all shops. However my purpose for getting up, honourable minister, is to ask you two questions. The first question is about page 4 of your report where you talk of the involvement of aliens in petty trade. 

This issue has been raised several times on this Floor yet you are saying that Government is looking for ways of identifying genuine investors. I do not think this is an accurate statement because I would imagine that a functioning government would know who has entered the country and whether he is an investor. If we have reached a situation where a minister is saying Government is looking for ways of identifying genuine investors then we have a big problem.  

I have seen Indians in Kampala riding boda bodas, selling pancakes and even operating super markets. Now how will a Ugandan survive? Honourable minister, apart from the strong statements that some of us are making that will send a message and scare genuine investors, I think there is need for your ministry to come out with a clear guideline of who an investor is and what kind of business they should and should not to do.  

I was in Bangladesh and there you cannot even buy a kilogram of sugar if you do not first show your visa and state how long you intend to stay. We have to be mean otherwise our people will have nothing to do. People are selling matooke leaves and youths are sharpening knives for a living simply because other profitable things are being done by those who have fled their countries to come here. 

I support your ministry’s position on CET rate of 75 percent on rice. In fact where possible I would even suggest that we ban the importation of rice from other countries completely. When you go to a shop, you are asked whether you want Pakistan rice or another type. Traditionally the best rice in Uganda would come from Northern Uganda in Paboo although now people are unfortunately locked up in camps. There is also quality rice from the Kibimba area although many people would protest that.  

At this particular time, Government should come out clearly and ban the importation of rice from other countries or at least impose some limits. These are my views. If we cannot eat domestic rice and we are eating rice from Pakistan, then this is interesting. Otherwise honourable minister, please let us know who the investors are and who are not otherwise I may also organise a demonstration against investors selling pancakes and riding boda bodas in Uganda. Thank you so much.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, traders are rioting because of taxes and I know the ministry concerned with taxes is the Ministry of Finance and the committee that oversees the sector is the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Ministry of Finance is not taking this seriously. Are we addressing this issue appropriately?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I see the minister sitting here and he appears to be listening. Honourable minister, please give us the appearance that you are listening.

MR MIGEREKO: Rt honourable Speaker, as I read the issues raised by the business community in particular the traders, you may have noticed that they go beyond taxation. My ministry is responsible for coordinating the activities of the traders. I am also heavily buttressed by none other than hon. Musumba who is the lead tax expert in the country and Minister of Finance.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have not appreciated the issue raised by hon. Rwamirama, Chairman of the Committee on Finance and Planning because I have been in this House at all material times. My senior colleague, the Minister of Tourism has made a statement that goes beyond mere taxation to trade relations, WTO and to East African Community Arrangements. If the member has a specific question that he wants addressed by the Minister of Finance, I want to inform this House that I am heavily mandated to answer that question and as you may know, my competence on that issue is not questionable. I thank you.

4.35
MR NATHAN NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to also thank the Minister of Trade for his report and Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA) for their efforts in keeping Government on its toes. In fact KACITA is acting on behalf of the poor who consume goods and services and who should have been the ones to demonstrate. They have helped us and I really thank them. Furthermore should they need our help to demonstrate, I am ready to demonstrate with them.

Madam Speaker, it is common knowledge that the moment prices go up it is the consumer of the goods who suffers.  It is only in this country that prices go high and nobody demonstrates. In many other countries like Brazil, when prices have gone up governments have fallen. As for me I think the issue of KACITA should be addressed seriously.

Where do the taxes go after they have been imposed? I have said they go to the final consumer. KACITA does not lose its profits since they are already set. They are simply asking us the consumers whether we are going to suffer as a result of increase in costs of transport and taxes.

On the issue of aliens it is not only the traders who are unemployed as a result of them. Even those who are supposed to get employment cannot. If an investor comes here and brings with him a gatekeeper who is Indian, was that Indian the only one trained to be a gatekeeper? This would have been a job for a Ugandan. You cannot say that Government has taken notice and that it is going to act. This is long overdue.  

You have restructured Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) but in fact you should have started with restructuring immigration that is a big problem. The moment you give people employment there will be consumption. We would not have complained about taxes if we had the income to consume the goods. I have been telling you that this Government is very insensitive towards peasants and nobody believes me. If they had been sensitive we would have dealt with the employment policy by now but nobody has done it. 

You cannot keep on saying that you are going to take note.  Who does not know the number of Indians that are here?  They are always cleared by immigration and it is only a matter of going there and pressing a button and saying, “This one entered here on this day and this is what he has come to do.” If they do not have those facilities they can ask us the local people and we can get these people out. I think this is overdue and it is time that Government either works out something or gives up and gives us a chance to help them.

Madam Speaker, about the issue of smuggling I think that the people who are punished as a result of smuggling are the small time ones. The big shots are crossing and not being touched by anyone. If you carry out an analysis you will discover that there are so many big shops that are owned by big people here. They are the ones selling goods cheaply compared to others because they know how to beat the system. These people you are complaining about are the small time traders while the people who are dodging taxes are going through.  

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I am not sure that my colleague has listened to the minister very carefully. When you look at page six it says that one of the problems that KACITA has been having is the discovery that a number of importers have confessed that they are using false invoices and this is a very serious offence. Now the honourable member appears to be speaking on behalf of KACITA or at least seems to be sympathetic to them. I just want clarification from him as to whether he approves of what has been mentioned about this group on page six by honourable minister.  

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much. That is the problem with you. You are not trying to listen. I was trying to deliver my point and this is not panda gari –(Interruption)  

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, in this House we have rules of decorum and specifically rules that affect the way members relate to each other. The honourable minister responsible for information made a statement in this House. Is it in order for a member of this House, the hon. Nandala Mafabi to use language that is derogatory, saying that is the problem with him, he does not listen when in fact at all material times the honourable member did listen? Is it in order, Madam Speaker?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have cautioned you several times about the use of insulting and derogatory language. This plenary is not for quarrelling or insulting people. So please conduct yourselves in an orderly manner and behave civilly to your colleagues. You are out of order.

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for your wise ruling. As a Speaker you are entitled to your ruling. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I would have thought that after your wise and counselling ruling to the member he would have demonstrated respect for the ruling that you gave with such a tender voice. But to reply in the manner that he did sounds completely contrary to your advice. Is this member in order to continue speaking in this manner in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala Mafabi, I think you have been in this House long enough to know that you cannot question the Speaker’s ruling except on a substantive motion. Therefore I do not expect you to question my ruling because it was very clear. If you persist I might either proceed under Rule 59 or another one that requires you to go out of this Chamber for some days. I do not want to go that far so conduct yourself well.

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling. The reason KACITA is falsifying entrance - and I agree with them - is because they want to be able to compete with those people who are smuggling officially. All of you here know Danzy. They exist and you cannot fight them in this way and that is what KACITA is saying. Government should come up with regulations to the effect that whoever they get smuggling, whether important or not will be dealt with equally. As for me I think that it is high time that KACITA was helped.

As regards the reference values, I think it is wrong for us to continue using them. We know the right values so why should we go for reference ones? The moment you use a reference value you are punishing one person and of course when Customs or the Commissioner General claims that they are right, that is the end and nobody can question them. The only place you will go to is the Tax Appeals Tribunal and they will tell you that before we handle your case pay this amount of money. By the time you hear the case six years will have elapsed. I have been in the Tax Tribunal for one year now and my case with them has never been settled. 

By the time you settle the right value, one full year has elapsed and you may have borrowed money from banks to which interest rates are accumulating. Meantime the cost of living is also going up. I think Government should be serious and allow people to pay the value on the invoices. If you have a complaint you can lodge it and ask the person to pay.

In conclusion, I would like to state to Government that KACITA is right and that they are only trying to help us fight this issue of unemployment. Furthermore Government should stand up and address the issue of the migrants. In fact the migrants are the ones who are bringing problems. They are bringing in cheap things like the rice yet the quality is like that of animals much as human beings are also animals. They are bringing us animal feeds to eat and this is what they are putting on the market at a cheaper rate thereby causing our rice not to be brought. They are also selling things like agricultural implements at cheap prices and because ours are more expensive we are unable to sell. I think the alien issue of these so-called investors should be addressed. 

There should be a record of investors so that it is not a matter of allowing anybody with a yellow colour to be one. If anything there are investors in Uganda. This Government has simply made out Ugandans to be the least class of people. If I went for an investment license at UAI I would not get it. But immediately an Indian asks for it, he is given with tax holidays included. But a Ugandan cannot get tax holidays. 

In India the inflow of funds they get out of service every year is $ 10 billion. The Indian Government is willing to lend money to Indians to come and sell pancakes here and repatriate the money back home. They are taking money that should have stayed in the economy of Uganda to help Ugandans. You people who are sitting on the Front Bench should not leave us home to suffer thinking that the country is moving well. That is wrong –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR MAFABI: I am winding up, Madam Speaker. I told you this is the final issue. On the issue of KACITA, they should not be penalised. We need to go down and look at the real cause of the problem. In fact if KACITA does not demonstrate, we the consumers should be the ones to stand up quickly and demonstrate because these people are simply helping us. I want you to handle them very carefully because if you mishandle them, they can mobilize us the locals and it could be dangerous. I thank you.

4.48
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you Madam Speaker. The complaint between KACITA and the Government is not new. They have petitioned Parliament, they have been to the Prime Minister and to all other offices. According to me, the immediate cause of this pending strike has been the call by KACITA to Government to refrain from issuing reference values. This is a legal matter under the East African Community Customs Management Act. Honourable minister, since this matter has been put to the Attorney General for his guidance and even URA which is implementing the reference values has no mandate since they are consulting, why don’t you avert this impending strike by suspending the reference values and stick to the right ones as of now?

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you honourable member for giving me way.  I feel that there is no need to go to the Attorney General. This is because after the formation of the East African Customs Union and during the Budget reading for 2005/2006, the minister alerted this Parliament that there would be a change of tariff rates. If those internal tariffs were established and confirmed by the East African Customs Union then that is the law. 

Since the complaint is that there has been an increase of tariff rates from 15 percent to 25 percent, what the Government can do is come down midway so that they can collect revenue while the traders also continue with business. Otherwise this is the way the East African Union is operating and it not only applies here but also in Tanzania and Kenya. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I suggest that the minister take heed of this advice as consultations on the legality of reference values continue. I suggest honourable minister that you avert the strike and suspend the question of application of reference values for a week to enable the Attorney General harmonize with Uganda Revenue Authority in accordance with the East African Community Customs Management Act and clear the matter. 

Madam Speaker, the matter of investors in this country is really surprising. Not only do we lack genuine investors but also those who have been given licenses are selling chapatis on the streets of Kampala. They are involved in petty trade and hawking. I beg the minister not to hide behind diplomatic concerns and financial implications.  Honourable minister what more proof do you need after finding somebody vending chapattis and cigarettes? 

Surely this already tells you that you do not need to go through procedures to crosscheck their registration. It is automatic that they are idle and disorderly on our streets and you would not need much proof to move them. This matter was raised last year but up to now you are still organizing yourself. I do not think we should continue hiding behind diplomatic concerns and all that. 

Lastly I would like to talk about the 75 percent common external tariffs on imported rice –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Be brief, you have only seven minutes remaining.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I fully support the efforts of Government to make us self-reliant particularly concerning rice that is a stable crop. However before we impose this 75 percent tariff, I wonder whether Government has bothered to know the quantity of rice we have at the moment. Are we self-sufficient?  I suggest that you put mechanisms in place and first facilitate the production and processing of rice. 

We need those machines to process that rice before you can authoritatively strike the rate at 75 percent.  I would have suggested, let it be gradual, maybe we could begin from 50 to 75 upwards but not to just simply impose growing not knowing the food security and the current grain production in the country.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WANJUSI WASIEBA (Mbale Municipality, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank KACITA, because it is KACITA who have prompted the Minister to be able to make a statement to Parliament. Because without KACITA, I do not think such a thing could have been raised.

We have a similar problem in Mbale and I did speak to the Minister this afternoon requesting him to come and address my traders so that he can be able to talk to them in order not to strike just like Kampala is doing.  What is happening is that a group like Mukwano when they manufacture their goods and they send them to Mbale, they have a representative who is an Asian and this Asian when it gets there, he puts them in a truck and takes them on the market days, around the villages.  It is good he helps the consumers, but he denies the real traders who would have managed to be able to get something out for survival.  It is not only Mukwano, but also the paint companies like Robbilac and these other companies.

The other day, on Sunday, I was in Mbale and I was going around the town. I met somebody who was painting a shop and he calls himself an investor. I asked him what he was going to do.  He said he was going to sell paint.  I think Ugandans should do this work.  It is important that the immigration helps Uganda and the Police to be able to track down those people who do not have permits, so that they can give a chance to our people to reduce poverty; because all of us are fighting to reduce poverty in the country and it will be very difficult for us to achieve what we want unless we are assisted by the relevant authorities.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MAJ. TOM BUTIME (Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry for his, very, very useful and very important statement.  I would only like to ask him to do much as he can to assist the KACITA to really understand that the problems, which they are facing, are not problems of the Uganda Government or the Ministry of Trade.  These are problems, which are across the board as far as East Africa is concerned.  

The common external tariff was negotiated by the council of ministers of East Africa, ministers of Finance, ministers of Trade, ministers of Foreign Affairs and all other stakeholders.  We now have a Customs Union of East Africa, which came into force on the 1 January 2005. Therefore, diesel cannot be changed by the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry or the Minister of Finance of Uganda.  This is a matter for the entire of East Africa and by the Manufacturers Association and traders. 

The two chairmen, Mzee James Mulwana and chairman of the manufacturers, Mr Abudi Alarm, all of these attended the negotiation and the meetings in Arusha.  And when they came back they did brief the traders and the manufacturers in Kampala and the country about these particular rates. 

 I know that these surprises as far as prices and imports are concerned are going to continue. KACITA will continue striking for a long time until they have been explained to and sensitized by Uganda Revenue Authority to really understand the meaning of all these rates, is it not?  These are prices and everybody should sit down and understand them, including the Uganda traders.  That is the work of Uganda Revenue Authority to try as much as possible to explain to our traders that the regime of the customs union in order to settle down in the minds of businessmen is going to be hard and must be understood as such. So, for me, I appreciate efforts the Minister is really trying to do and it is not an easy task and everything possible must be done to assist.  

On the question of foreigners who are selling Mandazi, who are involved in roasting meat and those involved in bars and Ggonja in the streets, I would like to advise that even the honourable Members of Parliament have got to be a little careful, because I would hate to see a situation of “panda gari” of Asians and other people in Kampala.  The immigration department cannot carry out “panda gari” of people who are already living here.  It is going to create panic and mar the image of Uganda if we are not careful.  This must be done professionally and systematically.  And I am sure that the immigration department has the capacity to carry out investigations, case by case, to solve this problem.  But creating a stampede in Kampala at night and on the roads will create a problem.  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But, honourable Minister, I think we Ugandans are very civilized people. Our people do not get that kind of treatment when they are outside this country.  No, they do not and really for the record, members have raised this matter year after year and the country needs a solution to it.  

Now, before Mr Awori speaks, there are students from Bishops Primary School, Kanungu District, represented by hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Kyatuheirwe in this Parliament.  They are welcome.  (Applause)

MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the honourable Minister for giving this timely statement.  But at the same time, I am wondering why he had to come to Parliament?  This is an administrative matter, which could have been handled by the Cabinet.  

Two, as a minister of Commerce, I think the recognizance organization to deal with such matters at national level should have been the Chamber of Commerce.  I do not know whether it has ever been discussed at any of the meetings of the Chamber of Commerce. 

Going back again to the matter of taxation. Indeed I also support my honourable colleague. Really it is within the terrain of the power of Ministry of Finance.  Taxation in this country has become punitive.  I know every Government relies on revenue but when you make taxes punitive, you definitely run in this kind of situation where tax based on consumer goods definitely are resented by the consumers. By this time again, to agree with hon. Nandala, I am surprised. It should be we the consumers to protest; these other people, actually whatever taxes we impose on any goods or imports, they can always offload them on us the consumers. 

Now, on the question of Uganda being a consumer society or a producer society, that is what is leading us to the CET. Madam Speaker, may I use your office to discipline my colleague, the minister on the frontbench?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one, there are four of them? I do not know which one you are interested in.

MR AWORI: The one who is always talking to my colleague at the back. I think he knows himself.  Otherwise, the CET on the matter of rice is very important.  I am surprised and equally disappointed that our brothers in Kikuubo would pick on rice.  Rice as you are aware is now probably Number 3 item in terms of diet or menu. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is grown near your home.

MR AWORI: Absolutely; I am surrounded by rice.  I must confess I was partly involved behind the scenes negotiations in the East African Community before we came up with 75 percent.  I took a delegation to Arusha and Nairobi of rice growers who were expressing concern that rice in this country will find no market. When you look at Tanzania, it came to the point when the acreage of rice was reduced by almost 75 percent and in Kenya it went down to 10 percent.  As a result CET is the only protection they have. 

Madam Speaker, talking about CET, let me also disclose that as we talk now, Pakistan has blackmailed our partner state, Kenya.  Actually, the honourable minister should know that Kenya has suspended this 75 percent, they are not really putting this 75 percent because they are in a tight spot with Pakistan.  Pakistan is the largest consumer of Kenya tea and the largest supplier of rice to Kenya and Tanzania. They have told Kenya and Tanzania, “If you put 75 percent, we are not going to buy your tea; we can go to Sri Lanka and buy the tea.”  Tanzania and Kenya are in the tight spot. So, they are softly saying, “we shall not apply.”  

As a matter of fact, Mr Minister, I have brought it to your Boss, the Chairman of your Cabinet. I said, “Mr President, are you aware that Kenya and Tanzania are not applying the CET?” He said, “No”.  I said, “Check with them, there is a problem. Why are we being punished when our partner states are not applying the law?”  

CET helped Nigeria. Nigeria, one time was 100 percent importer of rice but within two years of applying 95 percent tax, they are now even exporters.  However, it comes with some obligation on the part of the State, you must also reduce taxes on certain imports that make the rice growers grow more.  

Right now, Kibimba is stuck with more than more 5,000 bags of rice; they cannot offload on the market because they know there is a problem in Mombasa.  There is a ship, which has been lying there for two months with 10,000 tons of rice, which can be sold here at knock down price. All these rice growers of ours will be redundant within six months.  So, we have to take into consideration- I would like to talk to my brothers in KACITA that let us take into consideration the fact that Uganda should not be a consumer society, it should also be a producer society. But if we just go on importing, we are going nowhere.  

I agree that indeed transport is expensive; again now this is where I agree with KACITA.  Why is transport in this country so expensive? Three problems. One, we have put a very heavy tax on fuel thereby the transporters offload this on the people who need their transport. That is a problem.

Two, for a long time we have neglected the cheapest form of transport, that is the railway from Mombasa to any destination in Uganda.  Again we are just waking up; not even waking up, now we are talking about offloading the railways to some ultra entrepreneur to Canada at almost give away price on a 25 year concession. Why in the world are we doing this kind of thing?  We have got the capacity to revive this railway on our own for the benefit of our own people like KACITA’s. Why do we have to offload what we need like we are doing right now. We want to offload National Housing Corporation to some foreign government, why do we do this when people need housing here; likewise, we need transport here? 

Water transport, Madam Speaker, it is indeed sad that our two ships collided; up to now we have not been told the circumstances.  We do not have cheap transport at all.  We will need to have transport from Mombasa through Tanga or from Tanga or Mombasa up to Mwanza or Kisumu. We have not done it at all.  

Madam Speaker, talking about fuel. Once again we have been talking about a pipeline to make fuel less expensive and less vulnerable to accidents.  All the fuel we consume in this country, 58 percent comes to this country by road, all the way from Mombasa or sometimes from Eldoret. These are the issues we should look into instead of penalizing the small rice grower in Olweny, in Butalija and other places because these people cannot offload their taxes on the consumer.

The final point, Minister of Finance, Let us have punitive taxes on luxury goods not on essential commodities.  We are punishing people who cannot afford it. You can charge me 200 percent on whisky, yes, charge me 400 percent on whisky, charge me 1000 percent on Mercedes Benz, charge me whatever you can on luxury, what nobody can afford but essential commodities, I call upon the Government to reduce the tax.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR OKUPA ELIJAH (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 4, where the Minister tells us that “in handling the above case- that is the case of fake investors- in looking for ways of identifying genuine investors, Uganda Investment Authority has set up a desk for tracking the applications of the genuine investors.”  Initially that is the work of Uganda Investment Authority. This is what they are supposed to be doing. What have they been doing?

At one time the committee on finance asked the Director of Uganda Investment Authority, “Can we have a list of the investors registered in this country and how much they have put here. They failed to produce it in the committee.  What are they doing?

They are the ones who are letting us down. This problem of the pseudo investors would not be existing here.  Can the Minister of Finance take this seriously and have this issue addressed.  All these problems that are coming today from KACITA, if we had been serious, they would not be there.

I remember one time you even put it seriously here to the Minister for Regional Affairs that this Parliament needs to be informed, sensitized and educated on the East African Custom’s Union. But up to date it is only a few who understand or who attempt to read to get this information.  

The Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs had the same problem.  So, it is the ministry, which is letting us down. How do we go to explain this to KACITA if we do not know?  If MPs do not know, if Okupa Elijah does not know, then what will I explain to KACITA?

I am only possibly advantaged because I worked in Uganda Revenue Authority so I can understand and explain some things. What about those who do not or do not have that field, like hon. Otto Odonga here, what do you expect him to say?

So the challenge goes to the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Trade to help us to help you. If you cannot then there is going to be a big problem as hon. Butime has put here that these people will continue striking.  You are very poor in communicating, in giving us information, that is where the problem is.  So, it is not until you address these issues that you will see possibly these problems come down.

We have the tax tribunal.  I know very well if there is tax dispute the taxpayer is asked to pay 30 percent of assess tax as the matter is sorted out, as their goods are being released to the taxpayer.  What has happened, is it the tax tribunal that is letting us down?  Because if this was the case this would not be happening, what has happened to the tax tribunal?  Maybe the honourable Minister of Finance will tell us what is really happening.  So, please help us to help you if you want to traders to stop striking in this country.

There is an issue of interception of trader’s goods after payment of taxes. The response you have put here has no relation to these issues, which have been raised.  Because if someone has paid his goods, he has the receipts, why should the goods be intercepted?

This issue of ASCUDA, is a computer package that is used to track goods as they move from border to the final destination. This has rolled out to all the border posts in this country, why is there still the problem of intercepting people’s goods?  Because if the goods have left Mombasa, the information is relied to Malaba, from Malaba it is relied to head office Nakawa and to Katuna, all these border posts there is no need of intercepting unless if someone has smuggled goods to this country.  

So, where is the problem here; where you are going to intercept people who have paid taxes?  Because this would be for people who have under declared taxes in their places of aboard, that is where this would come in and the tax tribunal would be in position to help us sort out these things.  So, can the tax tribunal help us to speed up the process of arbitrating in this matter?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Mine is an observation involving invariants on petty traders.  We appointed a select committee to intervene on these non-migrants. I think it is high time since in our country we do not have Employment Act and the labour laws need to protect our people who are in business.  You cannot move from here, go to Kenya and start a business whereby your permit has expired.  But you find that because of the corruption within the immigration, somebody comes, the record is there, the Ministry of Internal Affairs does not mind to check out these people how they get involved in these businesses.  That is why you find that so many people within this business, you might find that almost - when you go to Kikuubo - people who are involved in business are non citizens and you might find that they do not have even work permits and their visas are expired – (Interruption)
MR ERESU: I would like to be clarified on the issue of corruption as stated by hon. James Kakooza. He says there is corruption in immigration department and it is quite clear at one time, Madam Speaker, that this very House constituted a committee to investigate the affairs in the immigration department and this committee we have been waiting for the report up to now.  Can I be clarified, what has happened to this report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report is ready, but as you will appreciate we spent the last few months on the constitution amendment process that is why we are doing the budget late.  The report is ready and it will be debated soon after the budget.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable two colleagues.  There has been a reshuffle in the Ministry of Internal Affairs, immigration department, the head was taken off, her two deputies were also removed under very trying circumstances.  It was found that these people actually had more than three passports each - diplomatic, official and ordinary - which is illegal.

Two, there is a leading industrialist in this country less than a quarter of a mile from here who has got 128 alien workers that live on top of the factory and all their passports are kept by the boss.  Those people never leave that factory.  We have our own people who work with them and they say these people are like slaves; they are all of Asian origins.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, hon. Awori Aggrey is making a very serious statement, which needs to be followed up.  I would like to beg that hon. Awori Aggrey goes further to name the industrialist who is a quarter of a mile from here so that we can be in position to interact with that industrialist and address this problem.  Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not afraid, I am glad this is being broadcast live.  If you can leave this august House, go to Jinja Road at the roundabout, turn right for about 100 meters, turn right again, ask for that particular factory on your right built on top of our sewage - ask them who lives upstairs. The factory reproduction is downstairs, but who lives upstairs? Close all the doors – all the gates and check in the next 15 minutes, I can assure you, you will be surprised what you will find there.  

MR KAKOOZA:  Madam Speaker, I would like also on page 4 where you have interception of traders’ goods after payments of taxes I think; I am finding it a problem because this is a mistrust between revenue officers.  As much as you enter into an entry point where you have paid taxes, I thought that it is clear and proper that somebody takes his goods because they have been certified to the requirement of customs. But the moment you intercept these goods on the way, it is a barrier to trade. 

If Uganda Revenue Authority finds it a problem, let them centralise that somebody who comes from Kenya importing goods pays from Nakawa.  But once you intercept, somebody gets an expense; who pays this expense because you have to check and offload goods; it becomes a problem to traders whereby I feel that this should be stopped.  The way forward should be, if they are finding it a problem that they have mistrust between people who pass values at the entry point of customs, then they should centralise and come to Nakawa where they can pay all the entry points from the Eastern side to Nakawa.  

Then another point which I would like to comment on and to support the minister that after the VAT evaluation, general agreement of trade tariff in the World Trade Organisation, there are six methods of how a person can pay taxes.  One is the commercial transaction value.  Once you present your documents, which are really genuine, I do not think URA can disturb you.  But what happens is that people tend to give false documents so that the value can come down and they dodge taxes.  

I think here Uganda Revenue Authority and the business community should be genuine, because currently you self assess the amount you want to pay on the goods you have imported.  When you pay genuinely I do not think they stop you. When you hide away the documents, which are original from suppliers, as you know that technology is everywhere that is when Customs comes in to say that the documents you are presenting are false.  If we are to help this country to get the revenue of 60 percent which we expect from the budget, 40 percent away from donors funding, I think the best way to go about it is to help our country move by presenting genuine documents and more sensitising the people.

Another point I would like to comment on is how the approach of the East African Community external tariff came up. I am finding it a big problem that the moment you increase a tariff rate, a tariff rate increases the cost of a good. There are two things you want to achieve - collection of revenue. But one of the major canons of taxation, the moment you raise and it becomes unaffordable then people try to evade.  So if it is flexible and affordable, then I feel that the approach East African Community took to come from 15 to 25 percent should have been gradual till people would pick up. Otherwise it was a big problem in that it started from 15 to 25 percent at ago.  I thank you very much.

5.23
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I thank the minister for having brought this statement.  As a matter of fact, the committee also in a way promoted him to come up with the statement. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Members, you cannot solve a problem before you define it well. KACITA one time came to our committee, they petitioned Parliament and their petition was sent to the committee.  Last time the main complaint was unequal treatment by our neighbours.  Another complaint was taxes on rice, sugar and mivumba.  

Then another one was the problem of aliens.  We advised them to come up with a well-defined problem and what they would like us to do for them.  Before even two weeks passed, they again went on strike; they met the President and we thought their problem had been solved since they never came back to us to follow up what we advised them to do.  As hon. Awori rightly put it, we have a chamber of commerce, which is a legal body established by an Act of Parliament, which should represent all traders in this country.  We also have the private sector foundation that they should work with and come up with a real solution.

Now, the minister mentioned that there is ASCUDA; ASCUDA only traces the data, but the problem here as of now, I think is valuation.  The question we would like to put to URA because this is mainly a problem of finance.  How do they arrive at the value?  We passed here a law abolishing pre-shipment inspection; and under WTO that regulation - it has six regulations of evaluation - but transaction value is arrived at by looking at the cost price presented by the trader plus the cost of insurance and freight.  Now, the method, which is being used by URA, is the one, which is causing a lot of problem.  I think we should ask URA to apply the correct method and find a way of knowing the prices from the point of origin.  

It is not true that if I have bought a car, which was manufactured in 1992, it should be of the same value with another car manufactured in the same year - the values change.  One could be worn out and costing about 100 – maybe 1000 dollars, another could be costing about 500 dollars.  But the problem is URA is not accepting the prices presented by the traders.

One time they ask for a receipt, another time URA does not ask for a receipt.  So I think it is the evaluation, which is causing a lot of problems besides the tax.

Madam Speaker, that complaint about aliens I think one time in the newspapers they put a blame on one of the ambassadors.  Whoever comes here I think there are different types of visas; a visa given to a tourists should be for a short time.  The issue is, who gives them those visas, who gives the visa to the people who come here as tourists and end up working?  Maybe the problem is with the Ministry of Internal Affairs who change the status of the visas and maybe the problem is with the city council.  But all in all, I think the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Internal Affairs should look into this issue very critically.

Madam Speaker, the problem is, we are trying to get researched work on the impact of the common external tariff for Uganda.  We are told the studies have been carried out, but we have not had chance to get a copy of any of those studies. So maybe the problem was not well studied, we need more serious studies in this area. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, some matters were raised concerning the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Can I ask the Minister of Finance to respond before the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry?

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable Members who made comments on issues relating to taxation, issues relating to the portfolio that I am holding now.

I want to thank specifically, among the people, hon. Otto and the hon. Awori. This issue of the tariff on rice, I want us to understand it in a collective perspective that this country has the potential to grow rice in a matter of months and export it! But that in this country, we do have a policy, which deliberately encourages the dumping of the rice and that this Parliament and Members therein support such that policy, surprises me, Madam Speaker!  

We in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have issued a document, circulated to all Members on focus on wealth creating sectors. One of the sectors is actually rice. I want to invite Members to study and see that we have a deliberate plan, as a government among other things that we are going to promote deliberately in this country is rice.  Therefore, a tariff of 75 percent does encourage investment in rice by those people who want to invest in proper milling machines.  

I can inform this House, for example, Madam Speaker, that according to the figures we have, from one acre of land, using neither non-organic productive methods nor fertilizers, from one acre of land in some parts of this country, one can harvest maize and get Ug shs 400,000/= from that acre.  From the same acre of land, using similar methods of agricultural husbandry, the amount you can raise is Ug shs 1.4 million.   So at this point in time, I want the Members to work with us and help this government to ensure that we create opportunity for people to make money.

Secondly, I want to –(Interruptions)

MR ERESU: Point of information.  Could the honourable Minister along the line of giving this explanation also take recognition of the fact that Government in its deliberate way, through liberalisation as they talk about, is also causing Uganda to be a dumping ground for second hand clothing, fridges, radios, petty dresses, panties and yet the Ugandan cotton fibre is one of the best in the world and thereby deliberately discouraging the production of cotton and thereby the textile industry, which has been going on for a long time.  Even if NPA is providing these visions to us, it is becoming a little too late, as if we did not have recognition of this fact before.  

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Eresu for emphasising the point.  He has demonstrated to this House that where we can protect local production or encourage local production, that is the route to take.  I thank you for that point.  I hope Members have understood; if they have not, I can come again.  

I am saying that the fact that we would have by now had a first class machine that transforms cotton lint into the finest fabric, but we have not because we have not got sufficient people to sufficiently invest in that sector, and therefore, in fact we have made an application to this House to allow us seek Parliamentary authority so that Government can guarantee the procurement of equipment like that.  

The point I want to make is that it is a pity that even where we can quickly protect our own production and be able to export, some people are arguing that 75 percent is too high.  That is the point I want to make and that is the point where hon. Eresu’s demonstration was very important.  If it is happening - where we cannot do like radios; we cannot manufacture radios! Even rice which we can grow in a month’s time, Madam Speaker, that is the point I want to emphasise.

I just want to respond to reference values.  People have talked about reference values.  But you see, there are people in this House who have ever worked with URA, there are people who are actually importers in this House; people who have had various interaction, and it is a point of fact, Madam Speaker, that false documentation, unrealistic declaration of value, under declaration are a reality with our tax system. How do you avoid this?  

How do you, for example, two people bring cars; one of them has bought this car, same make, age and mileage maybe; one bought it on an auction in Singapore and another from Germany and they come here. The one who bought it in an auction is declaring 800 dollars and the one from Germany is declaring 8,000 dollars. As a tax collector, how do you ensure that there is equity? How do you ensure that when you are administering this tax, you are sure that the declaration that has been made is actually the true declaration; that there are really no lies in the value of reference values?  So let us not make it look like it is an offense to have a reference value –(Interruptions).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like us to end this matter.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, the gist of the reference value is for the Minister to assume that all importers buy from the same market, yet this is not the case.  In Western Europe prices are a bit different from Asia, and in Eastern Europe, you cannot penalise me when I buy from a cheaper market and you take me in the same category with somebody buying from an expensive market; and I would like the minister to insist on the actual values rather than clamping up all together because the sources of the markets are varying and in that respect the value of the goods; certainly I will be running away from an expensive market to a cheap market and not the other way round as the minister suggests.

MR ERESU: Point of clarification.  Honourable Minister, you have given an illustration of motor vehicles bought from different points in the world and the reference price having significance to determine.  Supposing I also went to a market and I was cheated, and I paid so exorbitantly for the same commodity and another person pays less, would I through the reference value have my tax reviewed because I have been cheated?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, reference price is not the same as reference value.  I am talking about reference value; value here means in terms of a car. For example, we have talked about its value – year of manufacture, mileage and so on and so forth.  It is not just the price differential, it goes beyond price differential. However, I would hesitate, maybe we need to do more in informing both the taxpayers, the tax collectors and the lawmakers; we need to do a lit bit more to explain to them how this is done, why it is done and I will admit that the onus lies squarely on us.  

Hon. Okupa raised the issue of tax tribunal efficiency.  I will go and investigate if there are delays because also, Madam Speaker, we have to know that sometimes delays or apparent delays before a tribunal arise from parties.  It may not be the arbitration body itself; it may be the parties appearing before them and each of them or one of them is not ready with all the evidence, etcetera.  But the tax tribunal efficiency is something that we will look into to ensure that it does exist.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I want to urge the hon. Members of this House that as lawmakers, also as representatives of our people, but also as part of this Government, we should not work towards inciting any organisation to settle issues in a manner that is not negotiation or discussion.  So when people stand and say, “KACITA is right, I will demonstrate with them.” I think our responsibility lies beyond that, we should work towards ensuring that we should address these people’s problems because encouraging them to demonstrate per excellence does not solve the problem.  We can only solve the problem by dialoguing, bringing the problem here, talking about it and finding a way forward.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.45
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE, INDUSTRY, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank Members for their contributions, observations, comments; and those who have suggested a way forward out of this problem. I want to say that we have taken note of all the issues that you have raised and the points you have raised.

Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with the Minister of Finance that it is extremely important that when matters of this nature come up, we point to the conflict-resolution mechanisms that we have, the organs that can be approached for attending to these problems. As the Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Industry has pointed out, I think KACITA needs to be made to appreciate that a negotiating process is a negotiating process.  

It is not a question or presenting a document and you walk out with a solution because this is what is really happening.  They come up with a document, they have already made up their minds on what they want to do tomorrow, and they say their problems are not being attended to. My view is that those who appear to have better knowledge of some of these things and are closely associating with KACITA should take off time to assist our brothers and sisters and educate them, sensitise them on some of these processes.

Having said that, Madam Speaker, practically all the Members who contributed, who reacted to my submission, raised the issue of aliens.  I would like to state that I will be impressing on the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the Minister of Internal Affairs that Parliament is getting impatient over our not moving fast enough on this matter, much as I have been able to report the constraints that we are faced with, of which the two major ones are; financial implications – anybody you deport out of this country, if he does not have a ticket, you must buy him a ticket, you must buy the policemen who are accompanying him tickets and the budget for that had not been worked out, this had not been foreseen.  However, that this matter is turning out to be this serious, I am sure Government will make a submission on this one so that funding can be secured to attend to this very urgent problem.

Of course the others are the diplomatic implications; hon. Butime made a good submission on this one.  We also have many Ugandans who are on Kyeyo in many parts of the world.  As we deal with this problem, we are mindful of the kind of reaction that could easily come up from those other countries.  Some bit of time has been spent doing homework; interacting with embassies to explain the magnitude of the problems we are faced with and to bring to the attention the likely action we are going to take such that when Government finally moves, we do not run into serious diplomatic problems –(Interruption)  

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague.  I would like to inform my honorable colleague and the Government that this information we are seeking regarding aliens resident in this country is easily obtainable at every exit and entry point in Uganda.

There is a small gadget, which has been provided by the US Government, where you insert your passport. It is a kind of Identity Card verifier, which electronically transfers information to Land Park in Virginia at the CIA headquarters. It is a small gadget compulsory to all East African countries. Before we allowed these people to install that equipment, We should have insisted that every time the information is obtained, we get a photocopy, so we know who is here and who is away. Honourable minister, if you check carefully, every time you leave Entebbe or pass via Busia, they take out your passport and insert it. 

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, very often we read in the press that Ugandans have been thrown out of neighbouring countries. I will not name these countries.  They look for them at night and arrest them and subsequently throw them out of their countries –(Interruption) 

MR RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that I come from a border area with Tanzania and I am aware that Ugandans were recently expelled from Tanzania with their herds of cattle. 

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I cannot understand the argument by hon. Butime. I cannot understand the argument of Government that there are all these other considerations when in fact; Ugandans are not getting the reciprocity, which we give to outsiders.  Uganda is the only country, where aliens can move in anyhow, anytime, sometimes without documentation, do whatever they like, and get away with it.  So –(Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME:  Madam Speaker, Uganda has a more civilised way of handling matters than the countries hon. Mwandha is talking about. We cannot reciprocate with behaviour and attitude, which are barbaric and unacceptable.  

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I find it very difficult to accept the argument given by the honorable minister. What we are discussing concerns employment. Many Ugandans finish University here and cannot get jobs. It is important that when our children go to our neighbouring countries, with all their qualifications, these countries should first of all consider whether we do not have their nationals before they send ours back home.  This not acceptable.  Government must take this matter very serious. Our people will not  suffer and we continue to -(Interruption)

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, my brother for giving way. Hon. Butime is putting up all these excuses because he was once a minister of Internal Affairs and that is one of the problems he created for Ugandans. 

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, it is fashionable to employ a foreigner - Kenyans, South Africans and all the rest in Uganda. Therefore, I really take exceptions to this kind of argument.

THE SPEAKER: Minister -(Interjections)- which ministry? Trade or Communications? 

MR OKUPA: Of Trade, about these aliens. There is another version of aliens we have seen who have come in the churches, who have come in disguised as pastors and reverends, but in the end do double work; they end up as traders.

Mr Migereko: I would like to thank members for the information they have provided from the various sources, both within and outside the country. Some of the information hon. Awori is referring to, is in the Government’s records. We have this information and as I have told you, we are moving in a very steady but sure manner. The Government as you all know, is mindful of the concerns and plight of our people.  This is a matter that is going to be taken up very seriously and hon. Rugunda spends a lot of time ensuring that a very comprehensive solution is put in place. 

Madam Speaker, there were issues raised in regard to the Common External Tariff (CET), rates and variation.  A country can apply for variation of CET rates, such that you are given discretion to apply a different rate, particularly if maintaining a common external tariff causes injury to your country.  

I have pointed out a case of wheat, where we do not produce enough, yet our bread industry must run. It is true, we need to carry out sensitisation and education in the business community, the general public and even for the Parliamentarians in as far as the issue of East African Common Customs Union is concerned.  In the past, the problem we have had is that we hold sessions to sensitise people on some of these matters but the turn up is very low. If we can find a solution to this problem of low turn up, I am sure we would be in position to bring many people on board. Nevertheless, I want to assure the House that we shall continue holding educative seminars and sensitisation workshops. 

We shall also try to get a number of Members of Parliament and the business community to interact with colleagues in other countries. I think this will make it easy for us to get into the Common Customs Union.

However, I must point out that as a country, we still have a problem of the pressures of other countries, which export their products here.  I have had several visits from the Ambassador of Pakistan on the issue of rice. A number of Western countries have contacted me on the issue of second hand clothes.  All I can say is that we should just remain firm and at the end of the day, we shall be in position to come up with a sustainable solution to these problems.

Madam Speaker, most of the issues members raised about URA have been very ably tackled by the Minister of Finance. All the pertinent points members raised will definitely be followed up.

About the cost of transport, members should remember that we are a land locked country, which inevitably puts us at a disadvantage.  However, it is also true the fuel prices have been skyrocketing ever since the Iraq war.  The price of oil per a barrel has increased from US$ 30 to nearly US$ 75 per a barrel.  Government has tried all it can to address the constraints arising out of transportation bottlenecks, but some of these are beyond our control.  When the prices go high, we are all affected and it takes time before we get a solution.  I would like to thank all of you who have supported Government’s position in this matter, and similarly commend those who have disassociated themselves from the wrong move of instigating strikes. The Government is always prepared to talk.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister.

MR AWORI:  Madam Speaker, what is the minister going to tell KACITA?  You have informed us but what are you taking back?  Our views or are we to synthesise what we have told you?  Are you going to tell them that we support you or otherwise?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But, are there no recommendations at the end of this report concerning what the minister is planning to do?

MR OKUPA:  Madam Speaker, we had expected the minister to make a genuine appeal to KACITA to suspend this strike. Otherwise, the situation will be bad tomorrow.  Should I make the appeal on his behalf?

MS KIRASO:  And probably to appeal to the Members of Parliament, who have said that they will support the strike by KACITA. He should appeal to them to join him in talking to the traders.

MR SSEKIKUBO:  Madam Speaker, the crux of the matter is over the reference value. Can the minister promise that he is going to consider averting this? The immediate cause is over the reference value; can he put it in abeyance for a day or two? This is the crux of the matter.

MAJ. BUTIME:  And of course, Madam Speaker, to inform the traders that it was not during my regime as Minister of Internal Affairs that many Indians came.  Instead, the biggest number of investors in Uganda was registered.  Thank you.

MR MIGEREKO:  Madam Speaker of Parliament, when I made this statement, I came out in finality with an appeal to all of you and the populace to support Government position and consider discussion and dialogue.  I have also pointed out that a strike will disrupt business and I called upon KACITA to refrain from the strike. (Applause) We are discussing; we are in dialogue.  

The chairperson of the committee has reported his own experience with KACITA.  I have been in constant contact with KACITA. I have written to them about the reference values and they know the position of Government very well. The fact that we have instructed customs officers not to use these reference values for the time being is clear.  I have also pointed out that those who have suffered because of these reference values in the past are free to bring up their case before the Commissioner of Customs for redress, provided they have supporting documents.  I have been so clear in this statement. I did not know it would require a second listening.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much and we wish you well tomorrow.

report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Policy Statement for the financial year 2005/06.

6.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj.)(Rtd.) Bright Rwamirama):  Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to apologise that you will meet some typographical errors, because we did not have time to edit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, are you walking?  I will call your name if you are going out.  Please come back.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Policy Statement for the financial year 2005/06.  I will not go into the routine introduction and methodology, which is known to be standard. I will start from page 2, item number 3, Vote 08 the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Performance of the previous budget 2004-2005 as reported.

At the micro-economic level the following were realized:
Real GDP was at 5.8 per cent against the target of 5.9 per cent, which is a commendable level. There was increased total export earning by 10 per cent as a provisional figure against a target of 20 percent. The inflation was kept at 4.5 per cent, which is below the target level of 5 per cent for the year. This is a commendable performance and we should applaud the ministry. The deficit declined by 9.9 per cent against the target of 11 per cent, which is still fair.

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the performance on poverty issues, Policy Review and development refocused public expenditure on priority actions for poverty reduction. This was incorporated in the revised PEAP.

It was further reported that the analytical research on poverty issues, fertility and mortality were completed and this will help in planning activities.

Micro Finance

The purpose of this policy is to intervene and help the poor access funds for poverty eradication. It was reported that the ADB is now disbursing the funds for this purpose.

The savings from the rural people through MFIs has increased to Ugshs 3.5 billion. These micro finance institutions are holding a lot of deposits from villagers who no longer use these commercial banks and cooperate banks because of the interest charges and bank charges that are associated with banking in the sector.

Accountability and Financial Management

The intergrated financial management system is rolling out from the pilot districts. This mechanism is intended to improve on public accountability and proper management of public funds by minimizing corruption. This has also improved on the reporting mechanism, which will in effect help the office of the Auditor-General in his duties.

The office of the Accountant-General was restructured in order to improve its performance.  The ministry has also finalized on an amendment bill, to the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

In the same spirit, the ministry completed the Treasury Memorandum for the period 1999/00 and 2002/01

Privatization

The Privatization unit is proceeding with preparation with the privatization of the following Enterprises:
·	Kinyara Sugar works
·	20 per cent shares of New Vision printing and Publishing Ltd.
·	Uganda Railways Corporation jointly with Kenya Railways
The unit also has completed the divestiture of NIC where the Government retained 40 per cent of the shares.

Revenue Collections

URA was restructured during the course of the year and the results have so far shown improved results as revenue collection has gone up. Tax collection generally has improved. The relevant bills which include the Finance Bill 2005, VAT (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and Income Tax (Amendment) Committee Bill 2005 are being considered by the committee.

The Government signed bilateral agreements and negotiated investment promotion and protection agreements with China, Sudan, Sweden, Ethiopia, France, Belgium, China and Mozambique. This will create a better environment of business and subsequently improve on the revenue collection for government.

New Economic Partnership (NEPAD) initiative

The coordination of these activities have been moved to the National Planning Authority and other start up activities were undertaken. This is in line with the recommendation of the committee for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to divest itself from such programmes.

Budget Issues

About 80 per cent of project accounts have been transferred from commercial banks to Bank of Uganda.

There was integration of external funding of the ceilings. This was effected in the current MTEF ceilings.

Capitalization of EADB

Capital shares worth 3 million dollars were paid to EADB in accordance to the agreements. This will lead to accessibility to a long-term development loans.

Private Sector Development

The ministry provided technical support in form of capacity building, equipment, infrastructure and funding to micro-finance institutions through the micro-finance support centre.

The Government set up a Credit Reference Bureau to provide information on borrowers, which is an intervention to fight corruption.

Achievements for the Sector during Financial Year 2004/05

PEAP Policy:
(i) 	Poverty levels reduced from 35 per cent to 30 per cent
(ii) 	Poverty monitoring indicators developed
(iii) 	Poverty related activities funded
(iv) 	PAF related activities monitored and supervised

Fiscal and Monetary Policy:
(i) 	Real GDP growth restored to 7 per cent per annum over the medium term
(ii) 	Inflation maintained at <5 per cent
(iii) 	Budget deficit 10.6 per cent of GDP
(iv) 	Stable tax rates

Statistics on Population agriculture, livestock and finance:
(i)	Population census conducted and reported at 24 million
(ii)	National household surveys carried out
(iii)	Poverty levels established
(iv)	Financial data for economic analysis updated

Integrated Financial Management Systems (IFMS):
(i)	Six ministries and four local governments piloted
(ii)	Government payroll computerized
(iii)	Ministry’s Local Area Network installed

Integrated Urban Rural Development:
(i)	Increased loan portfolio of MFI’s
(ii)	More financiers solicited
(iii)	Enhanced capacity of MFIs
(iv)	Rural trade and agricultural enterprises funded

Budget Consultative process in accordance with the laws:
(i)	Budget framework paper
(ii)	Medium term expenditure framework

Private Sector led development through diversified, value added and increased exports:
(i)	Increased number of investors
(ii)	Increased export earnings

Human Development:
(i) The Accountant-General’s Office created
(ii) The Accounting cadre professionalised

Honourable members, this is to say that the office of the Accountant-General has been strengthened and his team well trained to take on the mandate to fight corruption.

Planned Activities and Programs for Financial year 2005/2006.

i.	Implementation of an annual fiscal programme that is consistent with the monetary programme.
ii.	Preparation of medium term projects for monitoring the performance of the economy. 
iii.	Continued research and in-depth economic analysis of PEAP implementation.
iv.	Collection, processing and analyzing of financial data and dissemination to stakeholders.
v.	Preparation and execution of the National Budget in line with the Budget Act 2001 and the PPFA guidelines.
vi.	Computerization of central registry record.
vii.	Formulation of appropriate policies to address private sector development taxation, fiscal and monetary issues.
viii.	Conduct participatory poverty assessments and effectively monitor public expenditure for poverty reduction.
ix.	Mobilization of resources to finance Government programmes.
x.	Implementation of the electronic fund transfer system
xi.	Roll out of IFMs
xii.	Initiate private sector and public service pension reform.

Amount of Funds requested by the Sector Ministry.

i.	Recurrent expenditure: - Ugshs 32.617 billion
ii.	Development expenditure: - Ugshs 111.7 billion

Recommendations by the Committee in the May 2005 Reports and action taken.

The committee had recommended that in order to avoid double payment, the budget for Whitaker should be put under one vote in the relevant ministry. We were informed that there was double payment; funds were not available under any other sector for the same purpose. Promotion of investment and private sector development is part of our overall mandate.  

Uganda’s obligation to International organizations

The committee had recommended that the ministry clears its arrears on its obligational international organizations for which Uganda is affiliated and also rationalize to choose those which are very relevant. We were informed that with globalization the world has become more competitive and that the ministry is complying with our recommendation.

Prioritization of PPDA operations

We had recommended that this department was under funded as a result it is not working and we are being informed that the department is now funded and is working.  

We had also recommended that NPART be phased off as had been earlier recommended by Parliament. We are informed that the process is underway.  

We also recommended reducing energy costs by empowering more efficient alternatives in the ministry and we were informed that the ministry is complying. 

National Planning Authority

We had requested that National Planning Authority be divested from Ministry of Finance and that it should be totally independent. We are now informed that with the completion of the PEAP revision, the mandate for medium term planning was handed over to National Planning Authority.

We had also recommended that the ministry divests itself from the projects and transfer them to relevant sectors for better management. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic, we were informed that it plays a both coordination and resource mobilization role and therefore, it is only retaining those relevant projects that are supervised directly by the ministry. In recognition of this, Uganda Bureau of Standards and Uganda Revenue Authority have now become totally independent.  

We had recommended that the ministry utilizes capacity building money more efficiently and put it to productive sector and we are informed that they are complying with our recommendation.  

We had recommended that in order for URA to function, the Government should reduce political interference and have it professionally structured.  We are informed that they are doing this and that revenue collection is improving.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, these are the observations of the committee:
1)	The committee welcomed the approach to mobilize rural savings. It was however noted that whereas micro finance institutions are operating at the grass root level, there are no regulations to date for this sector, which is growing at a high rate.  

The minister promised to table a law to this august House to regulate Tier IV MFI in 2003 in July 2003 and gave us six months within which to table this law but up to today it is not in place. The interest rates are prohibitively high and inhibit local trading and commercial farming. 

2)	Micro Finance Institutions which would be a source of funds for rural development are instead impoverishing the same people due to high interest rates ranging from 30 per cent to 60 per cent, unplanned and unproductive borrowing of short term nature and this has led to selling of their mortgaged properties to repay the funds. The victims have been rendered homeless and are struggling for survival.  

Honourable members, this is a very serious matter, most locals who borrow this money without proper business plans have sold their bibanjas, they have sold radios, they have sold anything. Actually they are now totally impoverished and struggling to survive.  

3)	This was a very interesting observation that the Government borrows at 1 per cent but then it lends at about 13 per cent per annum. These micro finance institutions lent it at about 26 per cent per month. Government itself is contributing to this problem by borrowing from external sources at low interest rates as indicated above, 1 per cent, and lending it at 13 per cent per annum. This has a serious impact on the end users and it is increasing costs of investment. When we talk of cost investment we are talking about the rural poor. You cannot trade favourably especially if you are trading on farm products at 26 percent.
  
4)	There is inadequate planning for improving productivity in agriculture. The animal sub-sector needs adequate intervention; government intervention to lend to agricultural activities at an appropriate interest rate is urgently needed.

Although the minister informed the committee that he is going to set up an extensive financial infrastructure supporting the Savings and Credit Cooperatives (SACCO’s) in the next three years, we noted that the same problems have persisted in spite of the enactment of MDI Act because they are also receiving money at a very expensive rate. And the other ones, which are regulated, are just killing the peasants who venture to borrow.  

Rural development programs

It was noted that some government programmes like NAADS, PMA and PEAP related programmes have less value for rural majority due to their scope of operation and being area based hence leaving out many areas uncovered.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is not to say that we don’t appreciate the NAADS and PMA contribution, but the coverage is very minimal.

Productivity

i.	It was noted that the majority of Ugandans depend on agriculture for their livelihood and to fight poverty effectively this sector should be the focal target. 
ii.	The committee noted that there are inefficient programmes to avail water for production.
iii.	Productivity without direct investment by government to increase funding, appropriate technology, improved skills and efficiency of labour for the agricultural sector is just misguided. 
iv.	Government needs to support the private sector growth by focusing on problem areas and providing solutions for them. E.g. capital for investment and realistic taxes. In order to enjoy the fruit, you must water the tree that bears the fruit. If we do not support the private sector, it is like milking a cow without feeding it. We need to create a better environment than is available today for the necessary environment for the private sector growth.  
v.	Government should put in place a clear incentive scheme for investment in strategic areas of the economy.

Efficiency

Madam Speaker and honourable members, there was a small paragraph that was omitted but permit me to talk about efficiency in the economy. The committee observed that government has not put adequate necessary measures to increase the efficiency in the economy. In the transport sector we are still using roads for our cargo from Mombasa to Kampala, we are still using roads for trucks and cargo destined to our neighbours in Zaire, Southern Sudan, Rwanda and Burundi and tear and wear on our roads is enormous. The amount of fuel the diesel engine consumes is very expensive and we do not produce any. 

There is need to invest in the railway network, and when you invest in the railway network you reduce the costs and you safeguard tear and wear on our roads hence stop smuggling because most fuel is offloaded in transit. Cigarettes, which are killing the local industry, are smuggled because they have to go by road. But if it is by rail, you control it.

I want to remind members that in our last year’s report, we did recommend this area where you have one engine pulling about 50 wagons. If you silence equally 50 engines of vehicles, the amount of saving is enormous. We would get more revenue on cargo going through Uganda.

Energy sector

Our energy sector is most inefficient, our cost per unit is still very high and in an effort to improve it, we went for some engines. Our committee did point out that once you use some engines, it is going to be expensive.  Government has responded by exempting fuel diesel on these engines. But those of you who are conversant with the market, there is now diesel of Ugshs 21,000 for 20 litres on the market. This diesel must be coming from linkages of those imported untaxed.

There is 20 litres of diesel you can get anywhere in some places in Kampala at Ugshs 21,000 and the explanation could be that this diesel is the one which is exempted from tax that is being imported to run those engines that are boosting our power and energy sector.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon chairperson, maybe you could be clearer. I am not sure whether diesel costs Ugshs 1,790 and petrol cost Ugshs 21,000.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, diesel is approximately - we can put it at Ugshs 1,800 and 20 litres should go for Ugshs 36,000. But now 20 litres is Ugshs 21,000. But I am just reporting, you go and find out.

Cheap water in agriculture sector

In the agriculture sector, we need cheap water for production. We need incentives to improve on agriculture for mechanization to make it commercially viable.

On the housing, we need to improve a housing policy.

Finally, on communication by telephone, Uganda is the only country and a few African states, which charge airtime. The moment you charge airtime you actually increase inefficiency in the system.  

Domestic arrears

Members noted that this item affects many local suppliers but government is not seriously addressing it. This is crippling the private sector, government revenue banks and in the end retarding the economic growth of the country.  

The committee further noted that out of Ugshs 33.7 billion arrears for court awards, Ugshs 25.7 billion were awarded in the financial year 1999 – 2000 up to date. 

Failure to pay pension is another way of entrenching poverty in the society and reducing the life expectancy of pensioners because they are on tension. (Applause)  

Honourable members, these are people who were used to earning and sleeping comfortably. You send them home and you do not pay them, you are running around that you are fighting poverty but this is what you are doing.

The Commitment Control System, which was introduced by government to eliminate domestic arrears, has failed. To date a total of Ugshs 478.8 billion is outstanding as domestic arrears. The biggest portion of this is pension with a total of Ugshs 293 billion, which is 61.2 per cent.

Number five which was omitted is that, the pledge by government to pay local government pensioners has not been fulfilled.

International obligations

It was noted that Government is a member to many International Organizations, some of which do not serve the interests of Uganda but simply duplicate the activities carried out by others.

The committee was informed that Government has allocated Shs 6.07 billion in the financial year 2005/2006 to cater for some of the obligations and that Cabinet has decided to scale down on the Government’s affiliations.

New Policies and Programs

i.	To carry out census of agriculture and livestock for accurate data and effective planning.
ii.	Establishment of e-governance through information technology.
iii.	Development industrial park in Namanve for private investment.
iv.	Rural and industrial development by increasing research and advisory services using appropriate technology.
v.	Financial management reforms by rolling out IFMS to all sites and revising the PFAA guidelines.
vi.	Recapitalising UDBL to extend medium and long term financing and to act as a wholesale bank to commercial and development banks.
vii.	Safeguarding the integrity of the financial system from financial crimes by introducing anti-money laundering laws.
viii.	Pension reforms: approving the framework for private and public service pension reforms.

Recommendations

i.	Madam Speaker and honourable members, the law to regulate the tier IV Micro-finance Institutions should urgently be put in place to stop the suffering of the peasants who venture to borrow.  
ii.	The high interest rates charged by MFI should be addressed to avoid deepening of poverty in rural areas.
iii.	Government should urgently address the problem of long term financing for the agricultural sector.
iv.	Government should support MFI to gain efficiency and lend out at affordable rates.
v.	Government should urgently come up with a comprehensive plan to clear domestic arrears. In actual fact funds should be mobilized to clear these debts especially pensions to avoid the embarrassing situation of Ugandans who served the country for such long periods. Denying pensioners their money is entrenching poverty in society.
vi.	Government should rationalize its membership to international organizations and retain membership to those, which benefit the country. Subscription arrears should be cleared.
vii.	The scrapping of tax holiday to investors was done by the Act of Parliament and therefore should be restored only by another Act of Parliament. Government should not breach the law by reintroducing tax holidays without involving Parliament.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, when we were interacting with the minister on this policy statement he informed us that they had actually reintroduced tax holidays and we wondered about that. Therefore we wanted to put it on record that if they did so it was illegal.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee appreciates efforts by the ministry to achieve high economic growth and maintain the macro-economic stability but calls on the ministry to address the critical issues raised in this report.

The committee recommends the following resources for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the financial year 2005/2006 in order to accomplish the outlined programs and activities.

Vote 008

i.	Recurrent Expenditure      - Shs 32.617 billion
ii.	Development expenditure    - Shs 111.7 billion

The committee begs the House to adopt the report and the recommendations therein and approve the Budget proposal for Vote 008.

Vote 108 – National Planning Authority

The amount of funds appropriated for 2004/2005 were Shs 1,585,230,000 on recurrent expenditure and that on development expenditure was Shs 163,500,000.

Supplementary Appropriations

Recurrent expenditure was Shs 415,000,000 and there was no expenditure for development.

The amount of funds released by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development were as follows:

Recurrent expenditure	- 	Shs 2,000,230,000
Development expenditure	-	Shs 147,150,000

NPA Achievements

Madam Speaker, allow me to skip this and go to planned programmes.

Planned Programs

i.	NPA will carry out wide consultations on finalizing the National Vision 2035.
ii.	The Development and Operationalisation of the comprehensive National Development Planning Framework (CNDPF).
iii.	Development of the first ten-year National Outline Perspective Plan (1NOPP) and a five-year National Development Plan (NDP).
iv.	Developing NPA Strategic Plan.
v.	Reviewing and harmonizing the National Planning Legal Framework and developing Mandatory Statutory Instrument.
vi.	Establishing a resource centre at NPA

Amount of Funds requested by the Sector.

i.	Recurrent expenditure    - Shs 3,608,850,320
ii.	Development expenditure  - Shs 369,061,000
iii.	Other projects and programmes attached to NPA – Shs 10,784,150,000

Observations

i.	The NPA has not submitted any annual report as provided for in the Act and this is worrying.
ii.	The NPA is still facing an acute problem of staffing which has hindered the Authority from putting in place a strategic plan.
iii.	The NPA is still regarded as a department of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and as a result this has compromised its operations and independence.
iv.	Members observed that National Planning Authority Act makes Board Members full time employees and this may be a source of conflict between management and the Board.

Recommendations by the Committee on the Budget Proposal

i.	In future the National Planning Act should be reviewed to correct the seeming conflict or anomaly of NPA board members being full time employees of the Authority.  

ii.	The law should further be amended to house the Authority in an appropriately high profile office for its dignity and independence.  

iii.	The Authority should adhere to the law and bring its annual reports on time.  

iv.	The staff of NPA should stop attending management meetings of the Ministry of Finance as this will compromise their ultimate function of developing national plans. The ministry should look for funds for implementation.

v.	The National Planning function should be transferred from the Ministry of Finance to a fully-fledged Ministry of Planning as it is in Nigeria, Tanzania, India, Ghana, to mention but a few.

vi.	The budget proposal by Parliament to increase the budget by Shs 1 billion should be effected this financial year. Given the above proposal to increase funds, National Planning Authority should go ahead and complete programmes that were suspended last financial year.

	The National Planning Authority suspended the staff recruitment as recommended due to inadequate funding of the Authority. Advertisement and public relations activities were also suspended as per recommendations.  

Madam Speaker in conclusion, the committee notes with concern that the continued under funding of NPA has affected the programmes of the Authority. NPA has however tried to achieve some level of performance given their mandate. The critical areas of concern in this report should be adequately addressed. 

The committee recommends for approval the following resources for the Authority for the financial year 2005/2006 as funds affordable by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development:

Vote 108

i. Recurrent expenditure 	- Shs 1,690,000,000
ii. Development expenditure - Shs 430,000,000

However, Government should source for Shs 1 billion to cover the budget deficit. The committee begs the House to adopt the report and approve the budget allocation for financial year 2005/2006 for Vote 008. I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the report was signed by 11 out of 24 members so it is eligible for debate.  

6.47
MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a few observations.  I have noticed in my district that a lot of efforts have been expended to mobilize people to form micro finance institutions (MFIs) and the Government has had a hand to play in this. However we have noticed that all the MFIs that we have in place are giving out money at very high interest rates. 

Could the honourable minister listen because we are raising very important issues? Can the honourable minister tell us what plans they have as a government to ensure that these villagers get this money? We have been complaining for the last four years I have been in this Parliament over the high interest rates. Can the minister really give us an assurance that before the seventh Parliament winds up its activities Government is going to do something on the ground to ensure that these villagers get money at reasonable interest rates?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what we should be asking is why since 2003 they have never brought that law when they had promised to do so.

MR YIGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other issue I would like to address is about pension. This matter has been discussed by this Parliament over and over again and in one of our deliberations Parliament recommended that Government borrow money to clear pension arrears. To-date no action has been taken. I am a member of the Public Service and Local Government Committee but even in our committee the Government has taken no action and this is worrying. 

Could we know from the honourable minister whether Government has taken the recommendation of Parliament seriously and when are they going to clear these obligations? Otherwise as presented in this report these pensioners are suffering and we are making them poorer. They are dying without getting their money.

Madam Speaker, there was a comment in this report about National Planning Authority (NPA) to the effect that so far there has been no report on their activities. When you read further, the committee is very sympathetic about NPA and they state their lamentations, which include that they are inadequately funded. This has perplexed me. There is no report on their performance but the committee is pleading for them to be given more money. I wonder what for. I would like to know why we do not have any report from NPA. 

The minister could answer that one since he is in charge of planning and therefore in charge of NPA. Furthermore, could chairperson of the committee tell us why they recommend more money for an organization that does not report? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.50
MR JOHN ARIMPA KIGYAGI (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few issues to point out since the report is well written out. On page four the committee talks of Government signing bilateral agreements and negotiated investments with countries like China and Sudan. I want to talk about Sudan because it is now the catchword in this region in as far as a big market that has opened up is concerned. 

Neighbouring countries like Kenya have already started building depots and warehouses to assist their companies and businessmen in dominating the Sudanese market. Through this committee, I think the Government of Uganda should also do something since we are closer to Sudan than some of these countries. I think we also need to benefit from that.  

Madam Speaker, we have on page 7 the issue of transfer of projects to relevant sectors. The Ministry of Finance already has a tendency of being overloaded with many projects. If you look at their staff list, it is not exceptionally big yet there are certain projects which should not be under them. For example there is the project to establish the industrial park that is to cost Shs 22 billion. Why shouldn’t it be under the Ministry of Trade and Industry since this is an industrial factor? 

I think Ministry of Finance should coordinate and mobilise resources but not be involved in the implementation of projects because it will be overloaded. Projects currently under Ministry of Finance include Good Governance for Poverty under Poverty Eradication, Private Sector Competitiveness and Procurement Reform Implementation among others. 

I think all these programs are too much of a burden to the Minister of Finance.  There is a belief in the general population that the Minister of Finance does not want to let go, where the projects involved have a lot of money. They would first want to see how they are implemented. I do not know whether they have personal interest in them. But I think this should not be the case. They should allow these programs to go to the sectors where they belong. 

On Micro Finance, this is another area where we have a very big problem.  In the urban areas, in fact, Micro Finance is confusing. There are Micro Finances owned by one, two, or three people. These operate like Micro Finances. Interests are very high.  

As the Chairman has indicated, people have been fleeced. They have sold their little properties; they have sold everything they have because the interest is 30,40,60 percent per month and this is too high. (Interruption)

MS AMAJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, my colleague. As you said, there is confusion between the micro finance institution and the moneylenders.  A lot of the people charging about 15 to 20 percent per month are really moneylenders and they operate under the Moneylenders Act. Thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you very much for that clarification. This issue needs to be brought to the notice of the public. I do not know whether it will be the Minister of Finance to educate the population because there is a problem in the society and it has to be addressed urgently. 

Now, on page 8, the Committee on Rural Development programme noted that some Government programmes like NAADS, PMA and other related programs have had less value on rural majority.  I think the committee is confused here.

For NAADS, yes- because it is in a few areas, but a program like PMA is embracing the totality of the PEP program. When you go to Health, it is PMA, Education- UPE it is PMA, Works, you go to roads it is PMA, Water- rural water, it is PMA, mention anything. 

Now, when you say that PMA has not rolled to the general population, then I think you are confusing PMA with these other NARO programs because PMA is the whole structure of PEP and all the programs of Government are under PMA. I think this position should be reconciled because it is going to confuse people. You cannot compare PMA with NAADS; NAADS is a very small component under PMA. 

Lastly, is the issue of pension on page 9. Madam Chairperson, I cannot put more emphasis than has been put by the committee and other Members; all of us are moving towards the pensionable period. It is very unfortunate for you and me if we cannot prepare not only for ourselves but also for the people who have served this country in all capacities.  

I would rather suspend all the other programs, and avail money for pension. Make these pensionable Ugandans comfortable because they have served this country and they deserve decent terminal years of their lives. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

DR ESELE (Bukedea County, Kumi): Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this concise report, but I would like to observe one omission in the report. I understand that the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology is under Ministry of Finance. But this report has made no mention of the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology. Yet as, you know, Madam Speaker, this is an important scientific institution that is supposed to guide this country in development and science and as we all know that development throughout the world is now based on advances of science. 

So, we are missing out here in Uganda. If we are not going to put some reasonable attention to Uganda National Council of Science and Technology- (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Esele, is it also not in their policy statement at all?

DR ESELE:  Since the report has not mentioned it, it looks like the report is down played. Madam Speaker, I beg to continue. 

Still related to the National Council of Science and Technology is the policy on Biotechnology.  I understand that the draft policy has been with the Minister for the last two years.  Biotechnology is a scientific advancement that can help in development in areas of agriculture, health, environment and industry. Our scientists are ready, we have the capacity, and the scientists are there. We also have the facilities in Kawanda and in Makerere that can help in advancing this country using biotechnology, but we cannot proceed because we do not have a policy in place.  The draft policy has been with the Minister of Finance for over two years. I would like to request the Minister to please bring this policy up so that we can benefit from this scientific advancement. 

Secondly, is the matter of the micro finance institutions; where are they? We feel that this institution should be in Teso. Because Teso being is very poor area, it could develop around through agriculture and marketing. But this institution is lacking. Could Government or somebody interested attract these institutions to come and operate in Teso as well?  Thank you. 

MS OLIVER WONEKA (Woman Representative Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report.  On the issue of micro finance, I would like to hear exactly what measures are going to be taken on the small agricultural farmers.  We all know that the micro finance is actually not interested in smallholder farmers at all. They are interested in urban and semi-urban people.  

So, what is in place for agriculture? I would like to urge Government to invest in agriculture and indeed this report is pointing so much in that direction.  In this House, honourable members know that the majority of the women in this country are actually in agriculture.  We provide 70 to 80 percent of labour in agriculture.  But what measures are there to relieve this woman who is providing labour for agriculture in terms of making it easier for her to get water for production?  This is in section 8.3 under productivity. What measures are there to provide appropriate technology to reduce on the beggary of this woman who provides labour?  

There are also men I know out there, but please remember that it is mainly the women who are over burdened. They are our mothers, our sisters, and children. They are the ones who must fetch water; and dig.  In Mbale, the hoe of a man has a longer handle. He can afford to stand and dig.  But for the woman, it is even bent to the extent that her back is so painful by the end of her lubimbi.  

So I am asking, what appropriate technology is there for the woman to make her provide labour to this agriculture, which is the backbone of this country in a friendlier manner?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, I am a bit intrigued. Why is the hoe different for the men and women, who set that law?

MS WONEKA: This is culture; this is the terrible tradition that exists out there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister has some information.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am reliably informed that the man will stand; but a lady, with a child on the back- it is designed to ensure that the mother, even if she has a child on her back, she should still dig.  So, the point honourable Woneka is making is valid, only that the explanation is that it is the rationale.  That is the wisdom behind the differences in those hoes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So the woman is expected to continue carrying something on her head, and on her back while digging?

MS WONEKA:  Madam Speaker, I am sure you are not amused by that explanation and I hope honourable members are not amused either.  
So we continue to ask Government and I continue to ask the Minister to take it more seriously and make sure that there is provision of resources to address appropriate technology for the people who are engaged in Agriculture, especially the woman.

Madam Speaker, referring to Clause (9) on new policies and programmes, again here, I have the first part, where the committee is talking of carrying out census of agriculture and livestock for accurate data and effective planning.  I am asking for gender aggregated data in agriculture so that we can know exactly who is doing what.  

I am not talking about the woman; I am talking about the woman and man, each one’s needs in agriculture’s strategic needs and practical needs. If we are to move this country forward and continue believing and knowing that agriculture is the backbone of this economy, then we must take those necessary steps and actions to address agriculture and specifically the people who are engaged therein and do the right thing for agriculture.

As we speak, I do not know if any honourable member here can tell me whether there are agricultural statistics that we can refer to and understand that there is proper planning for agriculture in this country?  

Finally, I would like to plead with the ministry to make sure that National Planning Authority in which authority this Parliament has a lot of faith should make sure that it is properly funded and let it give us the reports that we expect of it, because Parliament is looking forward to statistics, to proper planning and to disaggregated data so that we can move this country forward.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I forgot to remind you that we should just ask questions in the new format of our – 

MR BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you Madam Speaker and the committee for the report.  One thing I would like to emphasize is something to do with funding and long term funding.  

Madam Speaker, the committee is saying that Uganda Development Bank should be re-capitalized so as to be able to provide long term financing.  Mr Chairman and honourable minister, in your opinion, do you think only one bank, Uganda Development Bank, if recapitulated can really provide finance for capital development in this country?

Two, I see the emphasis is on micro-finance. Micro-finance means small- because you are saying that you, us, get micro-finance, but how many jobs are you going to create, how many industries are you going to be able to put in that kind of thing?  

Madam Speaker, there is need to find a way of providing long term financing for the development of this economy, not just dancing around.  There is already a good example of resource mobilization through National Social Security Fund.  That is a lot of money.  

Honourable minister, I am proposing a situation- because now we are crying for pension, but where shall we get this money if it is not mobilized and used to build capital?  I am looking at a situation of building an enabling environment or putting up institutions like Natural Social Security Fund for example. Such an institution can undertake to put up a dam or an industry using its own resources. 

I cannot see someone borrowing money from Uganda Development Bank and putting up a dam.  Such an institution can use that money, to put up such an industry and then offload it on the stock exchange for the nationals to buy the shares in which case we shall create wealth.  

So my emphasis here is that the Committee and the Ministry and the government should look at a possibility of looking at genuine long term financing to boost this economy, and not just emphasize micro-finance and Uganda Development Bank, which in my opinion, its interest rates cannot enable someone to put up a very big or giant capital investment in this country.  

I think it is high time those alternatives were thought of so that we can develop this country, but not through micro-finance. You are making a person dance on the same thing; produce one tin or bag using the small loan and then no jobs are created at the end.

MRs KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA (Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you Madam Speaker.  I want to start by thanking the Committee for the good report and I want also to thank the Government because the agricultural budget has been a little bit better than it has been in the past years. I have noted that the agricultural budget has improved so far.  

Agriculture in Uganda and indeed Africa is the backbone of our economy and if it is under funded, then I do not see any meaningful plan for eradication of poverty taking place.  But I want to zero myself on micro-finance institutions.  I live in a rural area where transport is very difficult and expensive. 

When these people go to micro-finance, they have to line up and wait. Sometimes, the rates are very high. So, I want to know why these micro-finances- we have talked, we have done everything and the report itself reflects it; I want to say that this is a very serious matter.  Agriculture with commodity prices fluctuations, the prices of agricultural produce fluctuate especially that of vanilla. We are having a big problem on vanilla and it is not reflected in this report.  No marketing strategies are reflected in this report and yet farmers have –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO:  Thank you, honourable member, for giving way.  I imagine that matters of marketing and price fluctuations are likely to come in the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry and some of them in the report of the Committee on Agriculture. Thank you.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, this was leading to my next point. It was just a preamble. I was coming to my next point about farmers banking, which is also supposed to be looked at when we are planning to eradicate poverty in the rural areas. It should be looked at because the rural areas depend on agriculture.  I am a member of the Agricultural Committee, and I know it is coming on the Floor but I still did not want this report to go without mentioning that we need farmer’s banks and to increase the Budget on Agriculture.  

The Plan for the Modernization of Agriculture has not made much impact on the rural poor. Actually combining the micro-finance institutions scourge on rural farmers is deepening the poverty in our rural areas.  I liked the comment of the Chairman of the Committee when he said, that in order to enjoy the fruit, we need to better the tree that bears the fruit.  Agriculture is the tree that bears the fruit in the rural area. If we do not take care of that then our plan for Modernization of Agriculture is for nothing. Thank you.

MR AHMED AWONGO (Koboko County, Arua):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The issue I want to raise is about the name of this Ministry.  As you may know, all the names that we carry have impact on us like on Buganda. There are people who are called Mutawana and many of them, actually all of them have problems -(Laughter)- most people having this name called Mutawana have problems.  

Then, if for example, you looked at Isoke- Isoke means somebody with a lot of hair and much grey hair- yes. That is what it means. Then Tibarimbasa means that they will not manage me. That is what it means.  

Now, this Ministry is called Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  In my view, I want this Ministry to be called Ministry of Planning, Finance and Economic Development because if we put planning first, that means that a lot of emphasis will be put in place by this Ministry. First of all, to plan to get money, to plan to find different ways of raising money, which money will then be used for economic development and definitely, we shall have better services delivered to our people than what they are doing now.  

So, my appeal is that the name should be changed to say, Ministry of Planning, Finance, and Economic Development. Thank you very much Madam Speaker.

MS SYLVIA SINABULYA (Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to begin with seeking a clarification from the Committee Chair, on page 3 of the report, on poverty eradication fund.  The report says that the EADB is now disbursing the funds for this purpose but the Chair, while reading the report said, that the EADB would soon disburse the funds. So, I want to know which is which. Is it disbursing or are they not yet disbursing.

Madam Speaker, that put aside, I want to know the plans in place to ensure that the Poverty Eradication Funds would benefit the intended beneficiaries, more so the poor people and the women, specifically because this is not the first time Government is coming up with an intervention of providing funds to investment and poverty eradication, but when you look at the list of beneficiaries, many of them are not the poor and if you look at, for example the Apex funds, you could hardly find a woman entrepreneur accessing those funds. 

So what is in place to ensure that this time, the poor people access these funds?

Madam Speaker, I want to be –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like clarification on two areas for the record of Hansard and to avoid Members repeating the same misleading problem.  On page 8, the issue raised by hon. Kigyagi on Rural Development Programs, NAADS, PMA, Agriculture Modernization Program; now what hon. Sylvia Sinabulya is looking at on page 3 is what I said is correct, “will soon”. 

The board has just been put in place and money for restructuring has been put in place. The department, which was handling apex funds in Bank of Uganda, is being transferred to Uganda Development Bank to do that function.  

MS. SINABULYA: Thank you for the clarification but the issue I raised still stands, that we would like to –(Interjection)– Okay, if the Minister will answer then I will leave it.

Madam Speaker, I also want to be assisted to understand this reduction in poverty from 35 percent to 30 percent.  To a layperson’s understanding, it seems to me that poverty is increasing, at least in most parts of the country.  I do not know whether this reduction is in Kampala where I see flourishing buildings going up?  

I think it would have been better if this report would indicate whether the reduction is in urban centres or in rural areas.  But when you just talk about poverty reducing from 35 percent to 30 percent, to me I think it is not just. 

Finally, on the issue of domestic arrears, I had expected mention of the so many coffee nursery operators who supplied coffee seedlings to Government and who have not been paid up to date.  Maybe the ministry has made plans to pay them at present, but what I know is that there are many nursery operators who have not been paid.  I do now know what the Minister has to say about this? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa county East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to raise two issues. One is on micro finance, which has already been raised, but I want to raise it with some emphasis.  

It was in this House, when the Minister of Finance promised to bring a law controlling micro finance, that was tier IV and they gave us six months in which that law would be tabled on the Floor of this House.  I would like to learn from the Minister how far that promise has gone because it is now over two years since they promised to bring that on the Floor of the House for debate?  What happened?

This law is very important because some of us who ventured in starting these micro finances in our constituencies are bleeding internally. People came, some banked and others came, withdrew money and they refused to pay back.  Now that is being seen as a weakness of a member of Parliament who introduced the idea to the constituents.  

So, unless there is a law to manage these micro finances, I think the Government has to be very, careful when introducing these structural adjustments in emphasizing micro finances as a way of enriching the people in the villages.  You remember what happened to the Entandiikwa. Money was given out to people and this money has never come back.  So, the Government has to be very careful on how it is going to introduce these micro finance programs in the country.

Second, I need clarification on- I think this will be clarified by the Speaker– on the effect of the recommendations we make when we go for these committee meetings. Finance and economic planning has been recommending to the Ministry of Finance for the National Planning Authority to be made autonomous.  Every year, they bring their report to the House on the budget. Now about these recommendations made, what happened? Why do we make these recommendations anyway?   

I would like to get some clarification. The Speaker or the Minister will have to make some clarification. Why do we make recommendations? You come, read them here, and we take time in committees to come up with these far reaching recommendations which would be guiding Ministries or Sectors- this committee is reporting about to be effective in the coming financial year?

Thirdly, I would like the Minister of Finance to throw some light about the board composition in the National Planning Authority.  Although the chairman reported that the members of the board are working daily, in other words, it is an executive board. But to the best of my knowledge, the board is supposed to be having a composition of five members and there are about two members or three.  We would like to get some information, if the board is not full, what arrangements are in place to fill this board?  Because we may be thinking that work is being done in National Planning Authority by the board yet, not much is being done.  Thank you very much.

MR OKUPA: From the budget report and this committee, there was a proposal that interest earned by financial institutions on loans advanced or granted to persons engaged in agriculture will be exempted from income tax. 

According to the Income Tax Act, the definition of financial institutions does not cover rural micro finances. So, in this situation, we find that the rural micro finance will not benefit from this exemption. So, there is need to expand the definition of financial definitions if we are to cover all micro finances in order to enable the rural people benefit from these loans whereby the interest rates have been exempted from the income tax.

Two, on the issue of privatisation, the committee stated here that there are some other parastatals that are due for privatisation.  But from the list we got from the report that was circulated about the privatised parastatals and institutions, we did realize that this has a time frame to complete the payments. But up to date, some are three, four years, they have not yet paid them. Some people who bought them have even sold them to second or third people but nothing has been paid. What is the Ministry doing to have these people complete the payment, or should we repossess these parastatals?

Finally, I am rather disappointed -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But honourable Member, if you want results, perhaps you could mention those, which are still in limbo so that the ministers may answer specifically.

MR AACHILLA:  I can give an example of Soroti hotel, Lira hotel and White Rhino from Arua. I have given information here, so there are a number of them.

Finally, I want to say that we are disappointed with the Ministry of Public Service on the issue of pensions.     

DR. KASIRIVU: Thank you, madam Speaker.  I wish the committee would take more interest –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, do not they know the rules?  I am talking to you. (Laughter)  

Madam Speaker, I wanted the committee to take more interest and may at a later time give us information.  What is the status of the enterprises, which are divested, and where Government remains with some percentage of shares, the 49 percent or so?  

We never get to know what is happening, how much Government is gaining or not gaining in these enterprises, which are partially divested.  The impression I usually get is that after this partial divesture, it seems the person who has taken the 51 percent seems to take the entire enterprise because there is no report to give us the status of these enterprises.  

Secondly, it seems like it is only Uganda in this region where Government does not provide for agricultural financing and yet Uganda has the best comparative advantage over other countries in the region in agriculture.  We have got fertile soils; good rainfall and we have always been claiming that agriculture is the backbone. We have even been saying that we want to encourage the private sector to lead the economic development. But this private sector, which is never given support in order to make investments in agriculture, what are we talking about?  We are now relegating it to micro finance- agriculture? I do not think so. It is not supposed to be that way.

Madam Speaker, one time I did attend a workshop where NPA revealed, PEP and NPA made a very good presentation, which I though was original; their only thinking and they said that if Government wants poverty reduced, then money should be put in what they called “wealth creating enterprises” or “ventures.” They highlighted some of them, as roads, mining, energy, agriculture, and in agriculture they were also specific- livestock and fisheries.  

Madam Speaker, none of these has so far got attention from the Ministry of fFnance, which anyway sets the ceiling, allocates the money, determines the MTF and whatever.  Now, what are we doing, Madam Speaker?  

At a certain point, it seems Ministry of Finance is sabotaging this country because when you do not provide where things should be provided, then which word should we use apart from the word “sabotage?”  Thank you.

MR AACHILLA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like the Minister and the Chairperson to assist me in this report. I have looked at it; I have also looked at the policy statement. In order to appreciate the challenges facing the sector or the Ministry, why has the report not shown the outlay of the budget performance for the financial 2004/2005, just like the rest of the statements we have been receiving?  

We have been discussing Works this morning. I compared the reports; yours does not show the sector budget in the snapshots: the actual release and the percentage release. I am interested in seeing this under the various structures that we have, like general duties, planning investment, privatisation and micro finance.  The reason why I am saying this is because it leads to the next point.  

My second point is on the specific directorate of the budget. It deals with the policy and evaluation of policies of all Government ministries and agency in allocation of resources necessary for execution of their performance or duties.  I am a Member of the Legal committee and the judiciary has always given us a wrong picture.  

Let me say that all the sectors under the committee, that we are handling have always been pointing a finger at finance in terms of resource allocation; that you are giving them headache when they make their budgets; you go to the extent of cutting their wages, which is a necessary thing in running administration, leave alone non-wage items. You sometimes even deny them development resources.  

So I wanted know from your department- and since I have seen that you are hiding your performances and how you have been getting the monies, we want to see whether you have also been getting 36 percent of what you have budgeted for; whether you have been getting 12 percent like the rest of the ministries so that we can balance the situation, So that those complaining can also see the transparency you have.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, it is clear that when you sit with the rest of the arms of Government- we have the legislature and the judiciary.  They have gone ahead to argue that it is favourable for the Minister of Finance as advisors in financial policies, that we adopt the Nigerian system of budgeting and the Kenyan system of budgeting.  

The various arms of Government are given a percentage of the GDP.  For example, we can say that Judiciary gets 7 percent of the GDP or Parliament gets 7 percent so much, so that they can operate at certain percentage than just having everything secretively and always having to bend and pray you to assist them.  What do you think?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS RWAKIMARI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Allow me to make a few clarifications on page 4, 4.1, on the achievements for the sector during the financial year 2004/2005. 

4.1 is about poverty levels reducing from 35 percent to 30 percent.  If I remember well, when I was reading one of the people’s reports, it reported that actually poverty was increasing.  But in this report, I see it decreasing.  So, which is which?  

On the same page, Paragraph 3.1.8 – capitalization of EADB.  I would like to know who is eligible for these funds or what are the criteria for selection?  Do you think my people in Ntungamo will benefit from these EADB funds or it is only the city people who are going to benefit?

On page 5, paragraph 4.5, on Integrated Urban and Rural Development. One of the achievements is increased loan portfolio of MFI. I would like to ask the Minister of Finance to look into the requirements before this small village, banks, and circles can access these funds.  

To me, I think the requirements are very rigid and they need to be flexible so that many more circles, villages and banks can access these funds, and on this note, I would like to thank suffice and cooperative alliance for supporting these circles and village banks in the rural areas. But they have not been able to do much because they do not have enough funds.  Can the ministry increase their funding so that more circles and village funds can benefit. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank the Committee for this report. I also want to thank the House for debating the report.  I have a few comments upon which I want to give clarification.

There are those that arise from the Committee report.  The Committee report did talk about the NPA, on page 13, paragraph 3; observation 1, that the NPA has not submitted the annual report as provided for in the Act.  The NPA is hereby directed to ensure that this is done.   I know that this should have been their second report and that second report is going to be produced before this House.

The other one is that NPA is still facing an acute problem of staffing.  It is true and I believe that this problem is going to be solved also.  The NPA is still regarded as a department in Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. As a result it has compromised its operations and independence. But I do not think so, Madam Speaker.  

There are two things I want to consider, the NPA actually has a substantial amount of independence.  It is not just a department in the Ministry of Finance.  It has an Act of Parliament that establishes it. It is even housed independently.  It is even supervised politically by a minister designated specifically to do so by the President under the law.   Yes, that Minister, he has other assignments as well, but he has a specific assignment by instrument from the President to look after or to supervise NPA.  So there is substantial amount autonomy, which in my view is sufficient for the organization to be able to deliver its services.

The other one is that members observe that the NPA Act makes the Board full time workers and this may be a source of conflict.  Again, I am not persuaded that this is accurate.  I do not agree with this observation from the committee.  The National Planning Authority is basically a think-tank. The five people at the top are the core group.  
The Secretariat, which is headed by the Executive Director, services those five principal people.  I am setting out what the law and the structure are set out in the law.   It is a group of five wise people, wise men and women and those are the ones that sit there full time.  Because, as you know, Madam Speaker, you cannot think on part-time basis.  The Secretariat headed by the Executive Director, Mr Kaye, who is actually appointed by that Board, is supposed to service.  We want this information. We want this statistics. Produce this report. 

This Secretariat has a Research Assistant and so on.  But the five people who are appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament are the ones that are called the full time Board.  Those people are there to think for this country and they are to ensure that this country has a plan that will deliver it.  

So I do not see any conflict in the capacity of being specifically assigned. I have been supervising this organization and I am not aware, that this problem exists.

However, I want to thank the Committee for observing that there is a shortage of one billion.  This has come to my attention and the Ministry of Finance should find the money to cover this shortfall.

Madam Speaker, I now want to respond to some of my colleagues who have raised a few observations. Hon. Awongo says that the ministry name should be changed.  Well, the Prime Minister is here, as well as the Minister of Public Service. He has heard that.  

However I think, that is in the name of a rose, because, no matter the name, a rose is a rose.   It will still smell like a rose.  However, again the Prime Minister has heard that. It is in his prerogative to restructure his departments in his government.

MS Sinabulya:  How are the women going to benefit from to access UDB funds?  I think this is a good point, which we must take on.  We must see how we can give affirmative action to the women.  Madam Speaker, that is a very good point, which I want to carry forward and see.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is also a commitment this country made under the regime’s plan of action. 

MR MUSUMBA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Is poverty actually decreasing or not?  Madam Speaker, if you read the Committee’s report, it has informed you about the exceptionally good performance of the economy this year, and when the economy performs well, it translates into figures that by aggregate indicate that poverty is reducing.  

The indicators we use to determine whether poverty is reducing or not, we take a household and determine from that household how many children who are in that household are going to school, whether in that household there is a radio, a bicycle- there are households that are so poor that they do not have a radio or a bicycle. They have nothing except themselves and the children are not even going to school.  

Now, those households are the ones that have reduced.  They have reduced because more children have gone to school because of the Government programmes and more of them have bought radios.  Madam Speaker, the statistics we have are that even more people have bought mobile phones. So it is an indication of the general growth in the economy, but the people who have come out of the hardcore poverty have reduced.  

The policy on biotechnology- Dr Esele, I want to tell this House that we do have a draft policy on biotechnology.  We have been consulting on it. This biotechnology thing has had a number of contradicting scientific information and we did not want to rush this country into something that will allow genetic materials to come here that will destroy our indigenous species without a detailed analysis of the pros and cons.  

There has been a debate that has involved even super powers on these genetic materials.  So we do have the policy. We have consulted; actually the last meeting was a workshop in Jinja, which we had on biotechnology.  We have made consultations with Cabinet. 

In due course, I will bring this policy before this House.  But I have the policy with me and I am continuing with the consultations, with known scientists and so on.

Hon. Woneka - gender disaggregated data. Yes we should have gender. I think we do have this information in Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS).  If hon. Woneka has any specific information that she requires, which is gender disaggregated, I am prepared to have it supplied to her through the Uganda Bureau of Statistics; we have that information.  

We have information about households, what is it that the women are doing, what the men are doing and both are doing?  We do have the information.  I also thank her for emphasizing that National Planning Authority should be properly funded.

The honourable member from Buhweju is asking, that if only Uganda Development Bank (UDB) is capitalized, is that enough?  The intervention into this economy to allow it develop resources is a continuing matter.  We do not just have UDB. We have East African Development Bank (EADB), African Development Bank (ADB) and Apex loans, which are coming in through from European Investment Bank.  It is our intention to make these grow so that more –(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, the Members are aware that all those sources are there. The question is, who is actually accessing these loans?  That is the problem in this country.  In some of these institutions, unless you have a title deed from Kampala, you may not be able to access these loans.  That is the concern of the Members.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Supplementary, Madam Speaker.  The issue here is to raise non-borrowed money to develop this country.  I do not know whether you understood me.

MR MUSUMBA: You also said, should we not use NSSF funds and other funds that we can raise locally?  Yes, mobilization of domestic savings is an important thing; we are yet to name the new Board of NSSF.  We are in the process of naming the new Board of NSSF.  I am going to name them, but I just cannot name them offhand.  But we are going to name them soon. That will be the basis upon which proper management of the current NSSF funds are – but we are also expanding the sector.  We want to liberalize the sector so that people do not have to save with only NSSF, they can save with whatever other operators that may be licensed by the Bank of Uganda and supervised for that purpose to do this.

Honourable members, I want to thank you very much.  There is one biggest observation that has been made literally by every Member; that is on micro finance.  On micro finance, as I speak now, His Excellency, the President, is chairing a Cabinet meeting in State House to finalize the policy on micro finance, and once that is finalized we will come here and inform this Parliament.  

I am now going to the issues that have been repeated by several Members and one was micro finance, the other one was pension and –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I was raising the issue of exemption of tax from financial institutions.  We have a problem with the definition, whereby rural micro finance will not benefit the way financial institutions are defined in the Income Tax Act.  

MR MUSUMBA: I have, hon. Okupa, exemption of income tax from agricultural loans and he is saying: should we not extend these to micro finance?  Yes, until there is an agricultural loan, you cannot qualify.  In the amendment of the Income Tax Law, we are going to define what amounts to an agricultural loan, because if you do not define, someone who is trading in maize or wheat or whatever will say this is an agricultural activity.  

So we are going to define what amounts to an agricultural loan for purposes of this exemption, and that will be debated here and passed here because it has to be part of the amendment to the Income Tax Law.  

MR OKUPA: You have not possibly got me properly. It is not only the definition that constitutes an agricultural loan.  The issue is about financial institutions; that is where the problem is.  

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, maybe I need to be more categorical.  When micro finance starts lending and it lends for agricultural purposes that will qualify for the definition of an agricultural loan. This facility will be extended to those as well.  

Hon. Tibarimbasa did ask, first the pension. We have been struggling with this issue of pension because we have two problems that have caused the compounding of the problem of pension.  The first one is the formula upon which the pension is applied.  When the people’s benefits were all monitalised, the pension formula remained as it now applied to a bigger amount of money than it used to be when it was only applying to a small percentage of their emoluments, which was salary at that time.  

So, as a consequence, the figures ran away from us.  We now have a huge pension amount, which we are trying to address.  We have got some money to the satisfaction of pension in this Financial Year. I do not have the details here though, but I know that we have put aside some money.  But in due course, we can make a more researched statement on this matter to this House.

Finally, honourable Tibarimbasa, he said that the NPA composition were five. Now he says they are less than 5.  Yes, it is true we did lose a chairman, the man who had originally been appointed as Chairman died, another lady also ceased to be a member and another one went for greener pastures.  

Efforts are being made, through the right process to ensure that this board is filled.  As I told this House, these people are appointed by the President with approval of Parliament; that involves five stages of approvals and I am working through them. You have to get approval within your own Ministry, from the Cabinet, from State House, and from Parliament. The process is beginning, and you have to have them vetted and so on and so forth. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much and the honourable Chairperson for a report well delivered.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable minister, before you sit, about this policy of micro finance, you have said that it is going to be discussed as a policy, and then it will come here in the next financial year in your policy statement.  So, when will the law actually come, is it going to be in your policy statement of next financial year? It is not in this one, it means that the law will not come until 2007.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam speaker, I seek your indulgence. I can positively supply that answer after today’s Cabinet meeting.  Thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you and the Members for rising issues and appreciating our report.  Hon. Yiga, you are concerned about interest rates and this has been the concern of the committee too. We have taken the trouble and I want to thank Parliament for organizing resources to go and interact with the stakeholders; very soon the report will be circulated. 

But what disappointed us is that the Minister of Finance was reluctant to come and participate. But finally, they accepted and we have harmonized positions, we have recommendations, which we think they will adopt.  

Why do you want to give National Planning Authority more money an authority that has not produced any report as law required? When I was making a report, I said that you must water the tree that bears fruit in order to enjoy more of them.  You put National Planning Authority in place and we starved them with money to recruit the technical people. They had to engage in some consultations; this money was not released. 

We are reminding them that they have not made a report even with their skeleton staff. But we cannot run away from the fact that there was need to start them. That is why we are recommending that they get this one billion. If they fail to perform, then you know that there is a problem with the manpower. In fact, we are trying to doubt whether the board ultimately picked the right people for the right position. But you must give somebody the tools first before you judge performance.  You do not have to deny him the tools then you can fire them for non-performance.  

Hon. Kigyagi asked why the project of Namanve is under Ministry of Finance?  Thank you very much. This is our question; we recommended that the Ministry of Investment transfer it to Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry. We even recommended that if that was so cumbersome to the Government, then reduce it to an authority to go to Investment Authority. 

So, the project is under Ministry of Finance because Ministry of Investment is still under Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Agriculture; Modernization is a broad program. That one I have corrected it; it was on page 8. 

Dr. Esele mentioned something on Council for National Science and Technology. We have actually mentioned the activities and it is a culture of our committee not to praise areas, to which we do not need attention.  We are here to solve a problem, that is why we put Government where it was not performing and we have not had a complaint from this department. 

Hon. Olivia Woneka said that there should be a consideration for gender issues and in our view that technology should be available for all without discrimination.  As far as I am concerned, women have proved better in many areas, so if we make a recommendation, we are recommending broadly.  

Hon. Bikwasizehi asked: could UDBL (Uganda Development Bank Limited) provide enough capital for long time investment in the whole economy? 

Yes. Why not? What we recommended and Government is adopting is that UDBL is going to be a wholesale bank. When a report was made here on Apex, you recommended that this money goes to Development Banks and we also recommended that it goes to Centenary Rural Development Bank. So, we want to regulate it, through a Government-controlled bank, to know whether our intentions to fight poverty are filtering down. So, if Government does it, then we shall be happy.  

Hon. Sebagereka talked of farmers’ bank. Yes, but the most important thing is to make sure that capital for farming is accessed at affordable interest rates. We are talking the same language. 

Hon. Awongo talked about the name. For you, you want to change the name, but for us, we want National Planning Authority to be divested from Ministry of Finance, to be independent and to have a portfolio of its own. 

Hon. Namabidde asked about 30 percent; how we reached at that? That it seems poverty is more.  I want tell you that those figures, when I was presenting, I said as reported that we are yet to find another source from International agencies to see whether we can – normally World Bank and these other international agencies have their own reports. But at the moment, we have not received one.  When we receive one, we shall compare and ask the Minister to explain where there is a problem; if there is a discrepancy or disagreement between the two.

Hon. Tibarimbasa said that we recommend every year but the Ministry does not respond. In Runyankole, we have a proverb “Otoomize tabura kukaranga” (that one whose groundnuts are not dry cannot avoid roasting them to make them dry enough for pounding.)  So, we shall keep reminding them and bringing this report to the House so that we can receive the necessary support. Perhaps then the Ministry of Finance can listen to what we are talking about. 

It is high time we imposed sanctions. I would be happy if you supported sanctions against the Minister of Finance in order to perform, especially with regard to what they promised.  

Madam Speaker, we asked him- actually from our report, they promised six months and he has not brought it, and the constituencies are very serious.

Hon. Okupa asked about the parastatals that are not yet paid; why we have not included them?  Honourable members, this will come under the statutory reports. We have not been able to present them to this House, because as you know, the business has been in plan.  So, after the budget, the Finance Bill and other tax related bills, we are going to bring it here and I agree with you. 

You talked of Lira, but it is not Lira alone.  We can talk of Nile – you know all that. Fortunately enough, you once attended our meeting.  So we are going to bring in that report.  

Hon. Kasirivu requested for more interest to give this House the status of enterprises after privatisation.  This is the same story and we have already sourced fund in support of Parliament. We are going to visit those, which were privatised partially, and those, which were fully privatised, and we shall report after the tour.

Hon. Aachilla, the minister tried to answer you.  But what I can say is that fortunately, these figures are in the policy statement.  But if it is your strong view that I avail them, I will make sure I circulate them.  I am sorry for that omission, but they were captured. 

Hon. Rwakimari, I cannot challenge figures given by a technical team that is owned by Ministry of Finance. I can only believe the figures and I think as I explained to hon. Sylvia that until we get contrary views from our independent body, we must take these as correct figures.  But what is true is that, in some areas of this country, you can see that poverty is increasing and it was a concern of several members that poverty is increasing. The figures are showing a different view, but you know that we do not have the mechanism here, unless we have an independent body to verify.  

Finally, the law on micro-finance; if this law is not in place, we have a very big problem in the economy.  One, the interest rates charged are prohibitively high. The banks are taking advantage of the absence of this law and they are selling people’s property.  And we shall have a problem of trying to rehabilitate people’s minds, as hon. Okupa put it. In fact if this law is not in place, then what you are talking about will not be realized, because you need to get money from a regulated institution in order to reap Government benefits.  But if there is no law, then how can you get the money?  The ministry has promised that they will bring this law.  

I would like therefore, before we leave, the Minister to tell us whether he is giving us another six months or two. But the cabinet meeting can be after two years.  We need a time frame Madam Speaker. I support you, let the minister commit himself and the Prime Minister is here too. Let them make a commitment on when the law will get here. The law is affecting us. It is killing the economy. The peasants are suffering.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the minister has said that he will get back to us after the cabinet meeting. So we expect that before we finish this budget debate, we will have some firm position on when that law will come, because the situation is really getting out of hand.  

Now, honourable members, let me thank you very much for the work you have done today. We have already given notice that tomorrow, we shall start at 10.00 O’clock and that there will be no cabinet meeting.  So we expect to do four reports tomorrow.  So, please let us convene at 10.00 O’clock in the morning and we work diligently until we finish the four reports. We are starting with Natural Resources at 10.00 O’clock.  So the House is adjourned to 10.00 O’clock in the morning.

(The House rose at 08.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 31 August 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)


