Tuesday, 31 August 2004

Parliament met at 11.04 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, arising from the Budget debates so far, I would like to give some specific instructions to two of our standing committees. First is the Committee on Government Assurances. I would like to restate the responsibilities of that committee as under rule 146:

“The Committee on Government Assurances shall scrutinize the assurances, promises and undertakings given by Ministers and other agents of Government in Parliament from time to time and report on –

(i) The extent to which those assurances, promises and undertakings, have been implemented; and 

(ii) Where implemented whether the implementation has taken place within the minimum time necessary for the purpose.” 

So, I am aware that the Budget Committee has each financial year compiled a list of the recommendations, resolutions and undertakings. I would like this committee to take up those reports, which are now with the secretariat, and review them so that in October we can have some sittings to examine how the recommendations of this House and the undertakings of the Government have been handled. It is very important because we have realized that the sessional committees are being over-burdened by the oversight role, which should be done by some other committees.

Similarly, the Standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises is now instructed to look at the recommendations and undertakings with regard to the remaining state corporations, especially those that are in transition for privatisation, because some of the recommendations of the sessional committee are here and they reveal that there is insufficient oversight. Those two committees have now to take up those responsibilities and will report in October. We shall have a sitting to evaluate the outcome. I think yesterday we had agreed on how we were going to proceed.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

11.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Madam Speaker, yesterday you did make a ruling that we go ahead and pass the figures of the Budget and then have the four reports, which are remaining, debated after we have passed the figures. I want to pray once again that you invoke section 22 of the Budget Act. If you may allow me to read it, it says; “The Speaker may extend any period provided under this Act, for a reasonable period.” 

The reason I am requesting you to do this is because it is not Parliament’s doing that there was this delay in enabling us finish all the reports by the 31st, which is today. Madam Speaker, the Budget Act, section 6, requires that ministers present their policy statements to Parliament by the 30th day of June in each financial year. However, I think five out of the ten sessional committee chairpersons have already indicated that they received their policy statements during the month of July, and some of them as late as August. 

There is a requirement in this Act that policy statements should be in a standardised format. Those chairpersons who found that the policy statements were not in the standardised format, which was passed by the Ministry of Finance together with the Budget Committee, returned the policy statements for them to be done afresh.  

11.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, the issue being raised by the hon. Chairperson of the Budget Committee was raised, debated and a decision was taken yesterday –(Interjection)- the decision is on record. The chairperson has not brought any additional or new matters. Why should the same issue be re-opened? Is it procedurally correct for the honourable chairperson to this morning raise the same issue again, which Parliament had occasion to debate and to take a decision on the Floor of this House, and bog down the business of the House today?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, yesterday I did not allow her to present the case for an extension; I did not allow it.

MS KIRASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. One issue that I did not touch on yesterday is the fact that the day we were going to start debating the policy statement reports, the Minister of Finance came up with very comprehensive corrigenda, which caused the Speaker to adjourn the House for a week for us to synchronize those figures. That one week that we lost, I would like us to recover it by invoking section 22. It is not the point of Parliament; it is not the committee chairpersons that the corrigenda came and the figures were so different from the figures, which we had earlier received.

Madam Speaker, the chairpersons of the committees, which are remaining – I will talk for them because we have consulted - they feel that debating their policy statement reports after we have passed the Budget dilutes their reports. They lose steam and then there are some issues, which are raised therein that will have an impact on the figures that we are going to pass. I will give an example; there is one item, which is appearing under Social Services, which is also appearing under Presidential and Foreign Affairs. So, if we do not clear these issues, we cannot know which money we are passing under which Vote. I would like to beg that you reconsider yesterday’s position. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

11.15
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Having heard from the hon. Beatrice Kiraso, I think the Frontbench is equally in concordant with that tune. Sincerely, if there are some anomalies, which we need to harmonise, it is in good faith. Besides, it would save the image of your Parliament and of government if we stood to be counted that we never rubber-stamped postmortems. It is better we deal with matters fresh as they are; we debate them and allow these members who represent the people to make their input. 

I know it will be hard to transfer or move Votes, but we can still harmonise them within the ministries concerned. I would like to suggest to the Members of the Frontbench to take this in good faith after all it is for the well being, image and development of this country, Madam speaker. 

I do not envisage any haggle over this matter and I would like to use discretion to move ahead. The technicalities are already cleared and besides the appropriation limits us to October. We still have that leeway, Madam Speaker. I do not see any problem why we cannot proceed to have these policy statements. I thank you. (Applause)

11.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE (Mrs Margaret Zziwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday when I was in this House ready to present my report, I was really saddened when I was told that time had caught up with us. And as I mentioned yesterday, my report has been ready since Thursday and I want to mention that the aspect of strictly following the Budget Act has not been really adhered to. I know some of the sectors, which I deal with, their policy statements reached us on the 15th of July and that is precisely 15 days after the stipulated budget day of the policy statements. For that matter, definitely we were affected.

And to add to that was the aspect of the corrigenda, which until the other day we were moving up and down in the corridors trying to harmonize with the ministry officials; to work out how or what they implied to our specific votes or our specific sectors. So this move, which the Chairperson of the Budget Committee has made by bringing this motion here, will assist us to be able to expedite and really be part of the process to be concluded until the end. Madam Speaker, I beg to support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is anybody speaking against the motion? Since nobody is speaking against the motion, honourable members - yes?

11.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Definitely, Madam Speaker, I am totally against the motion. I concede there is a rule allowing you to exercise your discretion to extend time but for you to do that, there must be sufficient grounds. The fact that you are just late is not sufficient to extend this from the time permitted by the law. 

Madam Speaker, it is true we presented corrigenda but this was served on each and every committee well in time for discussion. What was delayed was the tabling of the corrigenda in the House. By the time we tabled it each committee had thoroughly scrutinized and considered the corrigenda. So, that cannot be added to the reasons for delay. On the contrary, what I know as the reason for delay is the fact that we departed from the normal practice. We allowed ourselves to engage in protracted general debate on issues of the committee reports, when we were supposed to only consider figures and prioritisation under the Budget. That is why yesterday I was not in position to make an application for extension of time, because this is my motion. If there was anybody to apply to extend time it would be me because I am the mover of this motion. Knowing that it is the undue engagement in the protracted debate on committee reports, general debate, I said, I am not prepared to move this motion.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, we were in this Parliament last week, it was on the 18th of August, a Wednesday, that the same honourable minister who having accepted and even apologized to us here that he was sorry that the corrigenda had never been tabled before this House, begged you to adjourn the House for 20 minutes. It is here in the Hansard of Wednesday the 18th, on the second last page. Can I please, with your permission, read it? Hon. Rukutana, Minister of State for Finance, General Duties said that if he could not get it right then, it needed a whole document - Madam Speaker, I can lay it on the Table -(Laughter)- but just give me a minute or so, I will get it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was the gist of it?

MR WADRI: The gist of it is that hon. Rukutana asked for permission for you to suspend proceedings for 20 minutes and that was granted. It is here in this Hansard, I lay the whole thing on the Table. It is here, “Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa: For that matter, Madam Speaker, I would beg to move that the House adjourns for 20 minutes so that I get a copy.”

The corrigenda, you did not have it on that day. So, is it in order for you to continue throwing the blame of the delay on Parliament when actually the blame lies squarely in your own office? You did not give us this thing in time. Are you in order?  

MR RUKUTANA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. If the extension sought is the 20 minutes of suspension, I will concede. I sought a suspension for 20 minutes, I went and within those minutes I laid the corrigenda on the Table. By the time I laid the corrigenda on the Table, it is –(Interjections)- the corrigenda were already with the committees. It was only a formality of tabling it here. But if you look at the Hansard, it will show that each committee had earlier on, in good time, received a copy of the corrigenda. What was being raised was that the corrigenda were not tabled in the House, but the committee had considered it. 

So, if the extension sought is of the 20 minutes for which I sought a suspension, I would concede. We suspended for 20 minutes and if that is the reason we delayed, according to honourable members, -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, it is a well-established fact in the proceedings of the august House that when an honourable member cries out, “Procedure” or “Motion” or “Point of order”, the person holding the Floor shall resume his or her seat. Is it in order for the honourable member to continue defying this procedure of the august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. Prime Minister, did you want to say something?  

11.26
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My view is that you cannot blame one side only. We both share some blame, for example for time management. This has been a problem, which cannot be attributed to only one side. 

There has also been a problem of discussing the reports in a lengthy manner and then coming here and continuing to debate for longer than required, and the Speaker has had a difficult time asking colleagues to take less time. The point I am trying to establish is that the frontbenchers have made mistakes and so have the backbenchers. There is no doubt about it. In national interest I want to appeal to all of you that we follow the advice given to us by the Speaker. We can pass the Budget and then complete the discussions. After all, these matters were discussed thoroughly. I so recommend.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are two pieces of information that may help the debate. The first piece of information is that the House passed a Vote-on-Account. The House passed the Vote-on-Account to permit government to spend for at least four months after the Budget. So, you have July, August, September and October. That allows government flexibility to operate its programmes. 

The second piece of information is the Budget Act. The Budget Act put deadlines in law but foresaw a situation where we could not have completed all the processes required in the debate by 31st of August; and allowed the Speaker that flexibility. The logic of the debate is that when you have debated all the policy statements, it must logically lead to numbers, numbers that are Votes of each respective ministry. So, if we pass numbers before the policy debate, it would be putting the cart before the horse and the logic would be completely lost. It is not a question of debating and debating; we must debate and ultimately reach the numbers and pass the numbers following the debate that has gone on through the policy statements. If we did it the other way round, Madam Speaker, it would be illogical. Those are the two pieces of information I wanted to give. Thank you.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, let us really handle this issue without being sensational. It is true we passed the Vote-on-Account but because we are operating a hard cash-constrained budget, I can tell you now that all the releases under the Vote-on-Account are already exhausted. So, if we do not pass the Budget today -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, before we take a decision, I beg that we know the consequences of the decision we are taking. If we do not pass the Budget today that means that all government departments and all ministries, including this august House, will come to a standstill. That is a reality because of the nature of the budget we are operating.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Could the minister clarify what he means by the releases for the Vote-on-Account are exhausted when we know that some ministries are crying that what was given is not disbursed yet? I will give an example of the institution of Parliament.  

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, that is precisely what I am saying. Because of the budget we are implementing, the projections we could have released under the Vote-on-Account have all been released. You see, a budget is a projection. It is true that some provisions, even on Vote-on-Account, have not been released. The same reason shows you that we are operating a cash-constrained budget and what we had projected to release under Vote-on-Account - the proportion that we had projected to release - could not be released. If we do not pass the Budget we would be constraining ourselves even more.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday in the morning I put a proposal to you, those of you who were here, and we agreed on it. In the evening I put it again to the members who were here. Since then there have been representations that the problems that caused the delays were not of the making of Parliament and that members would want to complete debate, and want an extension. So, I want to hear arguments for and against that one before we decide.  

MR KAKOOZA: Clarification, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What clarification? Speak for or against the motion.

11.32
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): We are on the motion, Madam Speaker. I really understand the concerns of members of debating fully and internalizing this. But we should also look on the other side; what is the evaluation of the impact as the minister has stated? After discussing the merits and demerits then maybe we can forge a way forward on how we can all move together, because the problem has been that of time management. Time has gone, what should we do? The environment now is that the Government is saying that there will be a problem if we do not pass these Votes today. We could maybe discuss that and get a compromise position so that we can move forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I am asking you to do. I am asking you to express yourselves on the matters the minister has stated. He has said everywhere is dry; that is what the minister is saying. Yes, give us the information then we can have an exchange.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, before the Leader of Government Business assisted me with the explanation, I had myself wanted to say - and yesterday I was shy to say it - all of us are to blame. You are laying the blame on the ministries but all of us are to blame because I have sat in this august House for the last three weeks and I know that the debate for a number of days could not take off because there was no quorum for a long time. That is point No. 1. 

Point No. 2, saying that because of these faults whether by the ministries or ourselves we have not been able to hit the deadline, is a fault. We are all to blame and by natural justice you cannot be allowed to benefit from your own wrong. Extension of time could only be accorded if there are unexpected and unforeseen circumstances, but now you want us to use our own default to benefit from our own wrong? I think that would be to negate the very principles for which this law was enacted. I want to say, Madam Speaker –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us try to honour one another, please.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are in a kind of procedural conundrum. I would like to support the proposal by hon. Kiraso that we take the benefit of the insurance policy built into our budget procedures and ask for an extra two days in order to clear up all the matters outstanding regarding the reports. 

Number two, even if we are to preclude that insurance policy and we go directly into the Committee of Supply to vote on these Votes, I am not being - but I know it would be very hard for us to get 100 people this morning to vote on each item. That means again the time will be lost. So, I propose and I support the position of the Chairperson of the Budget Committee that we take advantage of that insurance policy in the procedure, and two more days are accorded to the debate of these reports. We hope in the course of that period we can raise quorum to start on this issue of Vote by Vote.  

Furthermore, Madam Speaker, we have four reports that have been presented and debated, which means we are already ahead. So, I would like to support the motion that we take advantage of the three days extra put in our Rules of Procedure.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, this august House could look at two more days as a very short time but the implications have far reaching consequences. This is the end of the month, the paper work, the documents that are necessary to make releases to local governments, to make releases to ministries, and to make releases to departments; all has to be done. If we take two more days –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of order. This House passed the Vote-on-Account to last the Government four months, up to the end of October. That is the money we have always passed and that is the money provided for in this Constitution. The Budget Act came out of a Private Member’s Bill when Parliament thought they should get involved in the budget making process and make things easier. Otherwise, the position of government was to actually fight the Budget Act, so it is Parliament, which brought this date from end of October to end of August. Given that background, is it in order for the honourable minister to start misleading this House and say that the money that was approved for four months is already over in two months? Can he bring evidence to the Budget Committee and show us the disbursements and how these moneys have been used? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have heard some arguments for and against the motion. Is there anybody who wishes to make any further contribution on it as to whether we should –(Interruption)

11.41
MR AMON-REEVES KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have only two points to make on this issue. As we talk now I do not know whether the Members of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs have even finished signing the report. It is being unfair to government for Members of Parliament to say that government is the one, which has delayed this process. Our members of committees are not doing their work. An extension of two days, let us agree, the extension of two or three days shall not help us because we are not yet even ready. It is only unfortunate –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, yesterday you mentioned very clearly that we shall not simply pass figures but all the codes shall be read. And where there is double entry, one entry can be removed and we pass the figures and then we discuss it at length later on. I do not see any problem with that. 

It is, therefore, self-defeating. We are actually nailing our own feet to the ground by so resisting to pass the figures for which we know each committee has passed through; they are known. If there is any mistake it can be rectified here. Why should we tie ourselves up by debarring functions of government? That is my contribution, Madam Speaker.

11.42
MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I am standing to support the motion that we pass the Budget today. (Applause). When I receive reports from my colleagues indicating that policy statements from ministries came late, I just get perplexed because the Social Services Committee handles three ministries. As far as I am concerned we received all our reports on time, debated them and by –(Interjection)– why do you not allow me to contribute -(Interruption)

MR LULE MAWIYA: She is misleading the House, Madam Speaker.

MRS HYUHA: I am not misleading –(Interjections)- -(Mrs Zziwa rose_)- can I be protected, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order, Members.

MRS HYUHA: I am not taking the information, Madam Speaker, and I am reporting on behalf of Social Services, for which I am the chairperson. I am informing this august House –(Interjection)- can you allow me make my substantive contribution?  

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rarely rise on a point of order. The Chairperson of the Social Services Committee presented her report. It was a very big report; we debated the report for four full days. I have known this House, all honourable members, to be nationalist. I, therefore, wonder why this time the Chairperson of the Social Services Committee wants to be selfish. We exhaustively debated her report for four full days. What about these other reports? Are we doing justice?

And actually as Members of Parliament - before I raise this point of order - let us not abdicate our responsibilities. You very well know why we are here. All these sectors, we have a constitutional role to oversee these sectors. The committees that are remaining –(Interjection)- I am coming to that, I am building my point. The sessional committees that are remaining, if you looked at the general budget, they constitute quite a big percentage of the national budget and we simply cannot pass figures without going through or scrutinizing these figures. Is the Chairperson of the Social Services Committee in order to be selfish - I use my words selectively - to be selfish, when dealing with national matters? Is she in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me just say that the Committees of the House are equal and they ought to be given equal opportunities. But finish your contribution, chairperson.

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Madam speaker, for that ruling. I want to stand by my position. I want to make a substantive contribution –(Interjection)- can I be allowed to be complete?

MRS ZZIWA: I want to give you information; take it.

MRS HYUHA: No, please. I have not made any substantive contribution, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take the information? 

MRS HYUHA: No.

MRS ZZIWA: Point of order. Madam Speaker, is the hon. Chairperson of the Social Services Committee in order to stand in this House and say she is perplexed when we mention that some of the policy statements came late? By the 30th of June, as the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee, we had only received the Office of the Prime Minister’s policy statement. The Prime Minister went ahead to even write to the Office of the President; by the 14th of July we had not received that policy statement. We had to stand in the lobby with the National Political Commissar – no, the date says 30th of June but by the 20th of July we had not received these policy statements. Is she in order to continue misleading this House and present us as ineffective when in reality it is a double –(Applause)

HON. MEMBERS: Order! Order!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should put an end to this exchange –(Interjection)- yes, we have to put an end to this exchange -(Interjections)- I am saying we should put an end to this. Having listened to various committees, their experiences and the acknowledgement from the Prime Minister that there were some faults on the Executive side and there are some faults from our side, I think we can extend the presentations until Thursday. (Hear, hear!)

Let us now receive the Presidential and Foreign Affairs -(Interjections)- please, honourable members, I have not finished. Let us receive the report on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, which we should discuss and complete by 3.00 p.m. Then we shall receive the one of Trade, discuss and complete it by 7.00 p.m.; then tomorrow we shall take Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Defence. These should be concluded tomorrow. So, I will alter the Order Paper to permit the Chairperson of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee to present her report. Can you please summarize it? These reports have been with you for some time but some of you come here and present for two hours then the ministers respond for another two hours, and the members also want to speak for 25 minutes each. So, Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee Chairperson.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2004/2005

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can see some honourable ministers moving out. Please, no. Hon. Minister of Water, please come back here.  

11.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mrs Margaret Zziwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish on behalf of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs to present our report. I beg that I make some corrections. These corrections were made in the report but the machine broke down and they could not be printed. So, I will beg honourable members that we have the corrections made now. 

On page 1 we should have “methodology” inserted. 

On page 5, we should have “Uganda Broadcasting Agency Policy” inserted. 

On page 12 there is a very unbecoming word. It is supposed to be “public” not “pubic”. That is on page 12. I know you have your reports, and the Speaker said we should be quick. 

On page 22 the recommendation was omitted. We shall insert a recommendation there and I think I can even read it out. That, “The committee recommends that further resources be found within the budget to complete this programme.” That is an addition on page 22. 

Page 31, we are going to delete that recommendation because it was just an observation, it was not a recommendation. We have a recommendation that, “The committee will hold further interactions with stakeholders on the effectiveness of this ministry and will advise the authorities and the House accordingly”. That is a recommendation on the Luwero Triangle. That is page 31, the recommendation is 3.6.1; that recommendation should be deleted. It was just an observation not a recommendation.

On page 32 we shall insert, “The premises of Ministry for Foreign Affairs” and the paragraph reads that, “The committee congratulates the Ministry of Foreign Affairs upon acquiring a new home under the bilateral arrangement with the Chinese Government”. It was also recommended that we shall, as a committee, take time to visit the premises.

Then page 36, we are inserting an item 4.8 on the ratification of protocols. “The committee observed that there were so many protocols ratified but not yet domesticated into Uganda laws. The minister pledged to expeditiously deal with this matter and have the laws presented to the committee and this august House”. 

Madam Speaker, I want to say that appendix 1 is being circulated. What had been attached to the report is not appendix 1; it was just a combination of the totality of all figures. With those corrections made, I want to present the report of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee.  

Madam Speaker, rule 154 of the Rules of Procedure mandates sessional committees to critically examine government’s recurrent and capital expenditure.  

The Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs takes on Votes 001 - Office of the President; Vote 002 - State House; Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister; Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Vote 107 - Uganda AIDS Commission; Vote 135 - Mass Mobilization; and Votes 201 and 229 Missions Abroad.

As the methodology, the committee interacted with ministry political heads and their technical staff, but decided not to visit the operational premises of the ministries. It relied mainly on the previous committee’s report.

The Office of the President, the mission statement is there and the team was led by the Minister in charge of the Presidency. The observations under the Office of the Presidency were on RDCs. This, I understand, is an issue that has been well dealt with, but mainly the RDCs were seen as becoming very partisan and those partisan tendencies really were the concern of the committee as well.

Also the under-facilitation of the RDCs was a concern and the Office of the President informed the committee that five percent of the poverty alleviation funds, which are sent to the districts, should be utilized or should be given directly to the offices of the RDCs in order for them to monitor the funds. 

The committee recommends that the RDCs should desist from partisan tendencies and there should be strict adherence to Article 203 of the Constitution, which relates to the recruitment and duties of RDCs.

Madam Speaker, the Directorate of Information has the mandate of maintaining a robust, national information infrastructure to correct and analyse, broadcast and store information for national unity and development.  

The committee made observations on the Uganda Broadcasting Incorporation, and observed that the sovereignty and security of any country is greatly hinged onto its public service broadcaster. Uganda Television and Radio Uganda, under the Directorate of Information, are charged with this responsibility but have been operating far below capacity with some parts of the country in complete information blackout due to inadequate finances.

The Directorate of Information is in the process of merging Uganda Television and Radio Uganda to form a public service broadcaster called Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC). The new organisation will be an autonomous body and will operate under strict, business principles.

The committee observed that the operationalization of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation has been delayed for a long time yet the capitalization of UTV and Radio Uganda depend on it. The morale of the staff in UTV and Radio Uganda has degenerated because of their working conditions.

Our recommendations are on page 5. One of them is that the operationalization of UBC should be expedited and in the meantime funds must be sourced within the departmental budget to purchase small but essential items like headphones, which greatly impact on the performance of the staff. 

On a separate occasion, the committee met with the Uganda Broadcasting Agency to interact with them on the issue of the international broadcasting policy soon to be passed or tabled.

On the licenses of televisions, the Committee was informed that a proposal for owners of television sets to pay annual fees will soon be brought to this House after Cabinet proposal.

On the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity, its mandate is there mainly to spearhead government’s resolve to eliminate corruption and build an integrity system that promotes ethical standards for good governance.

The Committee had observations on pornography: Pornography has invaded Uganda from outside.  Cultures that are essentially not African are being introduced to Uganda. The Committee was informed that the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity has put a vehement fight against pornography. 

The Mirror, a pornographic tabloid and Entango ya Rukundo, a pornographic publication from western Uganda are now before the courts of law. However, the fight against pornography in Uganda today is met with a major drawback that lies in the lenient laws against the crime. An offender is liable to two years in prison or a bail of Shs 2000 only.  The Directorate of Ethics and Integrity is coordinating with the Directorate of Information to come up with laws that are more stringent and deterrent.

The Committee recommends that the Executive should bring to Parliament the proposed amendment without further delay against the laws on pornography.  

Other concerns regarded the publicizing of the achievements of the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity. There was concern that its effectiveness was barely known. The Committee was informed that the work done by this directorate involves coordinating anti-corruption efforts in other agencies, and that is where always credit is attributed.

The Committee observed that there is need to publicize the efforts of this directorate in order to motivate and encourage public to report corruption cases because they are confident that government is with them in this fight.

The Committee recommends that the directorate should periodically brief the public on government achievements in the fight against corruption.

On the Leadership Code, it was reported that this Act will soon be amended in the view of the recent court ruling.

The Committee observed that declaration of assets under the Leadership Code does not cover junior officers, yet some of these officers in this category have access to public funds and this is an anomaly. 

The Committee recommends that the amendment to the Leadership Code should not only focus on the judgment, but also cover the attire Act to eliminate all possible loopholes including all public officers who deal with public funds.

On the Directorate of Economic Monitoring and Research, its mandate is there. The Committee had these observations: -

There is personalisation of government programmes. The Committee observed that many programmes are highly personalised, particularly at local levels. Politicians often give incorrect information to the population with a view of scoring political goals.

The Committee recommends that government must come up with a method of availing correct information to the population to minimize the personalisation of government programmes.

Also on the nature of investments in Uganda, the Committee was informed that Ugandans have specialised in idle investments, particularly in property. The economy is having difficulty in absorbing money from Ugandans in the Diaspora because they mainly invest in property.

The Committee recommends that government should institute a policy that encourages the population to venture in productive investment like acquiring shares, say, in industries. 

The Department of Security:

This department is comprised of the Internal Security Organisation and External Security Organisation. These organisations are established under the Security Organisation Statute 1997 and they are upheld under Article 218 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. They are mandated to: - 

• Collect, receive and process internal and external data on the security of Uganda. 

• Advise and recommend to the President or any other authority as the President may direct on what action should be taken on such data.  

The Committee had a detailed discussion with the department on its operation and made these observations:

• On professionalism in the security agencies, the Committee observed that professionalism has dwindled in the Uganda security agencies. It was even of the view that some of the professional security agencies should be invisible. In the Uganda situation, however, security personnel are obvious and in some instances, they have even their ammunitions like pistols visibly carried.

• A dispute among security chiefs was recently publicized in the papers. This is an anomaly! It puts the country’s security in jeopardy.

• Intelligence is treated as a minor aspect of security yet it does the preventive work, which if well done, could prevent the excessive spending on defence.

Recommendations:

• The Committee recommends that strict professional discipline must be inculcated in the security agencies. They should all come under an autonomous organisation headed by a Director General. All the intelligence chiefs should report to the Director General, who will in turn directly report to the head of state. This view was also shared with His Excellency, the President who promised to further study it.  

• Government must invest in the media to avoid the publication of material that would be threatening to national security.  

• 25 per cent of the total of defence and security budget should be allocated to intelligence.

On cyber terrorism, the Committee observed that there can be a danger of cyber terrorism if there exists under-capitalization of intelligence agencies, especially in the areas of technology and sophisticated equipment. Cyber terrorism is a form of terrorism that is rapidly spreading in certain parts of the world. It involves jamming and intercepting of all forms of electronic communication. And in the face of the modern technology, and the fact that the world is now a global village, a country cannot individually defend itself from this kind of terrorism. Perhaps we may need to go together as a regional block, perhaps the East African Community. 

The Committee recommends that Uganda takes up this matter with other partner states of the East Africa in order to deal with this urgently.

Vote 002 - State House: 

The mission is stated there. It is to provide at all times support to His Excellency, the President and His Excellency, the Vice President in order to facilitate effective and efficient performance of their constitutional and administrative responsibilities.

The Committee held two meetings with the officials of State House, and they were headed by the minister or the State House comptroller and these are the observations: -

Discipline among State House officials: The Committee observed that there is growing lack of discipline among State House officials. Civil servants in this government department behave contrary to Public Service regulations by making political statements, among others, which are disrespectful of senior government officials and other senior citizens of this country. This creates a negative image for His Excellency, the President and it brings disharmony among government institutions and it impacts negatively on the country internationally.

The Committee recommends that government, particularly Public Service, should immediately discipline these civil servants who flout civil service regulations.

On the public relations of PGB.

The Committee appreciates the fact that the security of His Excellency, the President is paramount and security procedures dictate that every person attending the President’s function must be checked. But it was observed that the PGB often treat both local and international dignitaries in a disrespectful manner. 

The Committee recommends that: 

• PGB should get training in public relations and protocol.
  
• It also recommends that at presidential functions, PGB should reserve a special gate for VIPs and accord them the respect they deserve.

• It is recommended that State House should acquire more sophisticated equipment that will facilitate the work of PGB without unduly inconveniencing the public.  

On coordinating between the presidential air and ground transport:

The committee observed that on several occasions His Excellency, the President’s fleet of vehicles have failed to catch up with him at destinations where he arrives by air. The President has then had to use unauthorised transport. This poses a great danger to his security.  

The Committee was informed that coordination between the President’s aircrew and the ground transport is very difficult because the number of vehicles on the ground is inadequate. 

The Committee recommends that State House must procure enough vehicles for the President to ensure that he is always well facilitated with transport so that his security is not compromised.  

The crew for the presidential jet:

The Committee observed that there is only one crew for the presidential jet and this is very dangerous for the security of the President.  

The Committee was informed that it was difficult to maintain pilots under the public service because of the low remuneration levels of public service. The private sector jet pilots could earn well above $10,000 per month, while in accordance to the Uganda government salary structure it is unlikely that a pilot can even be paid about Shs 2.0 million. However, discussions are ongoing with government to improve the remuneration of the pilots under the public service by giving them additional allowances. The issue was also shared by His Excellency, the President.

The presidential helicopter:  

It was reported that State House requires US$ 2.5 million to overhaul the presidential helicopter airframe. The airframe has been in operation for seven years now. During the overhaul that is due in November/December 2004, State House plans to modernize the helicopter and operate it for another seven years.  

The Committee, however, retaliates its prevails recommendations that State House should ask for an additional US$ 3.5 million to buy a brand new helicopter and within time overhaul the old one to become a backup for the presidential helicopter. 

Un-honoured pledges:

The Committee notes that because of the President’s or the country’s limited resource envelope, several pledges that were made by His Excellency, the President in many parts of the country have remained un-honoured for a long time. This is eroding people’s trust in their President.  

The Committee recommends that: 

• Government should structure the pledges and streamline them in their respective sectors so that they are factored into the regular ministerial budgets. State House should only be left to source for funds for the pledges that cannot be structured. 
 
• His Excellency, the President should rationalize his pledges.

• His Excellency, the President’s budget should include a slash fund - and this is a re-representation of last year’s recommendation - to cater for gratis and other unstructured pledges so that we have the opportunity for him not to make all these pledges, which cannot be met. 

Also the other issues, which were raised with the President, which have not been reflected in the report directly, concerned government office accommodation and the President promised to follow up on this matter.

The office of the Vice President:
 
The Committee raised concerns that the Vice President seems only to operate within Article 108(3) of the Constitution namely; (a) “Deputize for the President as and when the need arises.”  This overlooks Article 108 3 (b) namely; “Perform such other functions as may be assigned to him by the President, or as may be, conferred on him by this Constitution.” This has rendered him relatively idle.   

Under the current arrangement, many of the Vice President’s programmes have been hampered because of insufficient funding. This was the case last financial year when we could not even complete a programme for touring the whole country.

The Committee recommends to His Excellency, the President that a specific schedule should be assigned to His Excellency, the Vice President to make his programme definite, and let this programme be known the public and be budgeted for.  

We had general observations:

The Budget Committee in its report of the three-year Macroeconomic Plan and Programmes for Economic and Social Development fiscal year 2004/05 to 2007 of 13th May, observed that State House budget is the most growing area of the budget expenditure. That was on page 64. This concern was ably charged on the State House controller for explanation.  

In his response, he asserted that there has been no increment within the recurrent expenditure for the last three years. If anything, it has been reduced and we have attached that appendix which I have sent around. Though it captures only one year but we were able to see the previous two years and it has been reducing.  

The growth or expanded budget has been registered on the development budget, which is due to the huge capital developments like State House redevelopment and helicopter purchases and overhaul. 

The Committee recommends that these capital items should be domiciled and voted for in their respective sectors to avoid the misrepresentation of this sector.

Office of the Prime Minister:

Madam Speaker, under Article 99 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Executive authority is vested in the President. Under Article 113(3) and 114(4), the President is empowered to assign responsibilities and functions to ministers and ministers of state. Under Article 113 (3) the President assigns the functions of the prime minister to one of the ministers.  

The mandate of the Office of the Prime Minister is to head Government Business in Parliament, and to ensure efficient and effective implementation of government policies and programmes, coordinate and monitor policy and management of issues on disaster and refugees and special programmes on pacification and development.  

This Vote caters for the Prime Minister, the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, the Minister for General Duties Office of the Minister, Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs, the Minister of State for Luweero, the Minister of State for Northern Uganda, Minister of State for Karamoja. All these ministers appeared before the Committee, Madam Speaker. 

I want to mention that the Committee continues to salute the Prime Minister for this observance and discipline in time management and recommends that it should be emulated across the board.  

On the general issues Office of the Prime Minister, the areas of concern were on office accommodation. It was reported that pursuant to last year’s committee’s recommendation, Office of the Prime Minister should look for an alternative office space owing to the fact that it is currently housed in a building that is highly dilapidated, it is dark and it is difficult to access. The ministry had secured office space, we were informed, in Crested Towers but it was advised against it for security reasons. The Office of the Prime Minister still awaits further guidance on this matter.

On monitoring and governance, Madam Speaker, the Committee was informed that the Office of the Prime Minister is charged with a vital responsibility of monitoring good governance in the country. But due to a limited resource envelope, it has dictated that just samples of government projects are taken and monitored. This method was commended as relatively effective, but we have thought that we should have a more representative, comprehensive monitoring arrangement when funds allow.

Consultation among the three arms of Government:  

The Committee observed that in Uganda today, there is no forum for periodical consultations among the Executive, Legislature and the Judiciary. This has at times caused unnecessary tension among the three arms of the state, and this was also shared with His Excellency, the President. 

The committee recognizes that cognizant of the principle of separation of powers within government, a forum for periodic consultations among the three arms of the state should be put in place.

On the Department of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, the department is divided into two parts:

• Disaster Preparedness and
• Directorate of Refugees.

For Disaster Preparedness division, its mandate are there listed up to page 19, and our observations were on IDPs:

It was reported that government does not want to concretise the presence of mobile IDPs in the different districts where they have sought refuge.  It is too expensive to support these people in these different districts. So, government can only afford to provide them with a run-off support while they are there. The more affordable programme that government has adopted is to provide support for these people in their sub-counties. The minister urged Members of Parliament who have IDPs, say, from Teso and Lango or Masindi in their constituencies, to encourage them to go back home since their districts are relatively secure now.

The Committee observed that whereas government efforts to deal with IDPs displaced by war are visible, there is an apparent lack of interest in IDPs displaced by natural disasters. The latter categories of IDPs exist in different parts of the country and are in desperate need of relief items.  A case, for instance, of Manjiya County was quoted, where there are over 15,000 IDPs who have been displaced because of landslides. 

The Committee recommends that: 

• Government should appreciate the fact that the livelihood of all categories of IDPs has been gravely disorganized irrespective of the cause of their displacement, therefore, all need government intervention and help for them to survive.  

• Government should as soon as possible deliver relief items to all IDPs wherever they are.

• Government should expedite the operationalisation of the IDP policy.

The second observation was on the roads in the Northern Uganda, and this was also after the consideration of the recommendations of the report of the humanitarian committee placed in this House.  The Committee was informed that most roads in Northern Uganda are in a pathetic state. Trucks that deliver food in the IDPs have on several occasions been unable to reach the camps, and the IDPs have had to walk long distances to reach the points at which the trucks have stopped.  

The Office of the Prime Minister informed us that is working with the Ministry of Works to ensure that the roads are repaired. District leaders have also been asked to put priority on the repair of roads.  

On the Directorate of Refugees, its mandate is there. We had concerns on the following areas:

On Nakivale Refugee Settlement: The Committee observed that people have encroached onto Nakivale Refugee Settlement in Mbarara District, and some of them have even acquired land titles for the land they occupy.  

The Committee was informed that the land in refugee settlement fall under the Uganda Land Commission and settlement on such land is prohibited. The Office of the Prime Minister in liaison with Mbarara District Land Board has put an injunction on the processing of land titles for the plots in Nakivale Refugee Settlement and nullified the already received land titles. Plans are underway to survey the land at this settlement. 

The Committee recommends that the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment should speed up the process of surveying the land at Nakivale Refugee Settlement.

Influx of Refugees to Uganda:  

The Committee was informed that there has been an influx of refugees to Uganda from Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). The Refugee Eligibility Committee from Office of the Minister has been dispatched to assess the situation. A report will be availed to this House and to the Committee, and I want also to inform the House that the Committee is in plan to go and visit all these refugee camps, mainly in western Uganda and south western Uganda.

Returnees from Tanzania:  

The Committee was informed that Ugandans who were expelled from Tanzania and came back to Uganda have been successfully resettled in Kahunge, Kamwenge District. The district council has integrated them into the district plans and have started on economic development for their sustainability.

On the expansion of the Directorate of Refugees, the Committee was informed that the Directorate of Refugees is currently housed in the premises that are too small for its operation. The directorate has decided to embark on a programme of expanding the building. The GTZ (German technical Services) has contributed 120,000 Euros towards this cause, but the directorate needs a total of 250,000 Euros to complete this programme. 

The Committee recommends that further resources be found within the budget to complete this programme.

On Parliamentary Affairs department, its mandate is very well stipulated, which is to give functional support to the Prime Minister as a Leader of Government Business in Parliament, and to help improve the efficiency of the legislative programme.

The Committee made these observations:

Questions for oral answer:

The Committee was informed that there has been a backlog of questions for oral answer, many of which were similar. Providing answers to these questions separately wasted a lot of parliamentary time. The Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, in conjunction with the Office of the Speaker and Office of the Clerk, decided to categorize the questions into similar questions to be answered collectively.  This new practice has cleared the backlog and will continue to be used, and honourable members you are advised.  

Operationalisation of certain provisions of the Constitution:  

The Committee observed that some provisions of the Constitution have not yet been operationalised because government has not yet enacted the relevant laws. 

It was reported that the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs is working to identify the areas where the Executive should draft bills for legislation. 

The Committee recommends that the Executive arm of government should speedily bring the necessary bills before Parliament for consideration.  

Prime Minister’s question time:  

The Committee observed that a lot of time is wasted at the beginning of most sittings of Parliament because Members raise lots of impromptu issues.

It was recommended that a particular question time should be provided in the parliamentary business schedule by setting aside a day when the Prime Minister and his team answer any question from the back bench. (Hear, Hear!)  

The department of Northern Uganda Rehabilitation: the portfolio for Northern Uganda Rehabilitation covers 18 districts of Adjumani, Apac, Arua, Kaberamaido, Katakwi, Kapchorwa, Kitgum, Kotido, Kumi, Lira, Moroto, Moyo, Nakapiripirit, Nebbi, Pader, Pallisa, Sironko, Soroti and Yumbe. 

The mandate is on page 24 to 25 and the committee’s observations, which it wishes to report on are the following:
  
The minister’s presence in Northern Uganda: The committee observed that the department for Northern Uganda Rehabilitation for the last four years has been operating in Kampala. But during the financial year 2003/04 it reactivated its offices in the Northern district of Gulu. The committee commended the minister for her physical presence in Northern Uganda.  

Coverage of NUSAF: 
In regard to the coverage of NUSAF, the committee was informed that choice of districts benefiting from NASUF was based on the results of the study on the national poverty levels. Those districts under NUSAF scored very badly in all aspects of life that were studied. These areas were plagued with armed conflict, they exhibited high levels of poverty and were highly marginalized. The overall picture presented a socio-economic distortion and that, NUSAF project envisaged to mitigate this picture.  

The choice of projects to be funded under NUSAF:  The Committee observed that NUSAF implementers have totally left the choice of projects to the local communities who might not be fully aware of the benefits of alternative projects. 

There is a delay in approval of proposed projects and the release of funds for the approved projects.

The  Committee, therefore, recommends that: 

• NUSAF implementers should scale priority projects that will guide communities in choosing projects for funding. The guiding principle for choice should be the capacity of the project to improve livelihood, household income for the communities. 

• The red tape involved in dealing with projects under NUSAF should be shortened.  

The Office of the Prime Minister urged Members of Parliament from the districts benefiting from NUSAF to take keen interest in the projects and guide their constituents in choosing the required projects.  

The framework to guide the Minister for Northern Uganda Rehabilitation:

The Committee observed that the framework under which the Minister for Northern Uganda Rehabilitation operates is highly elastic causing the minister to work under very fluid conditions.

The Committee recommends that the Executive should strictly define a legal framework, the scope of operation to the Minister for Northern Rehabilitation.  

Peace initiative:

The Minister for Northern Uganda Rehabilitation reported that, efforts to restore peace in the region have been made. In this regard, she had held workshops with the Acholi cultural leaders and Acholi elders, the Acholi religious leaders, women and youth, the Kachoke Madit and other Ugandans in the Diaspora, the Karimojong leaders and the Amnesty Commission.
  
The recovery programme for Northern Uganda: 

The Committee was informed that the Minister for Northern Uganda has met with key actors, who include the area Members of Parliament and the donor community, to discuss the recovery programme for Northern Uganda, and plans are under way to concretise the steps for implementation of the programme.

The Northern Uganda Cabinet Committee:

The Committee was also informed that government has put in place a Uganda Cabinet committee chaired by His Excellency, the Vice President.  This Committee is charged with responsibility of coordinating interventions in Northern Uganda. The strategy is to make these people economically productive though living in camps. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has come up with the requirements for this plan, and the people have been mobilised -(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I do not intend to interrupt my good friend. She had undertaken to summarise the report, now she is reading the words verbatim. And considering that you have extended for only two days, I am worried again we may not finish. She is reading verbatim when we heard that she would summarise the report and when it is on record that this report forms a record in the Hansard.  

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, I think just touch those other areas and go to the recommendations.  

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. But what I was trying to do was to bring out those main areas, which were highlighted which were seemingly different even from what would have been brought the previous year. And you appreciate that this area of Northern Uganda even yesterday we were under fire in this House. So, I wanted really to bring out that the committee looked critically on it. But I will try my level best.

Restocking was considered; Northern Uganda Youth Rehabilitation Fund was talked about; Karamoja affairs were talked about. Madam Speaker, there is a strategic plan to improve Karamoja and this financial year, 4 million Euros have been sourced for the development of this region and the data centre has published facts on Karamoja. 

The disarmament exercise was reported to be still vulnerable and the exchange rate has gone to one cow one gun, which is worrying.

But the Committee was informed that there was close relationship between Kenya and Uganda in this disarmament exercise, and it recommends that this disarmament exercise be taken on not only between Uganda and Kenya, but also in the greater IGAD region because that is where the small arms really originate from.  Local defence units, which are being trained for the Karamoja region to supplement the UPDF should remain there. I think that is what we were saying now I am having problems.

On the Karamoja Development Agency (KDA) vis-à-vis Local Government Act 1997, that the KDA is non-functional and the Committee recommends that that KDA Statute should be repealed.

Luweero Triangle:

Its mission is there on page 30 and we were informed that the department has changed focus and now the focus is mainly on rehabilitation, and feasibility study has been done on Tomato Paste project, and we were told that this study can also be used to start up any other agro-based industry.  But, honourable members, were very - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the tomatoes are not made by the chairperson, you please listen.

MRS ZZIWA: I am reporting, Madam Speaker. The Committee observed that nothing very significant has been done in this jurisdiction. Actually, there are feelings that maybe this ministry or sector should be scrapped. But the Committee recommends that it will first hold interactions with all the stakeholders on the effectiveness of the ministry and it would advise the authorities and the House accordingly after a careful study.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs:

Madam Speaker, on this note, allow me to mention that the Minister in charge of International Cooperation and is also the acting Minister of the Foreign Affairs, led his team and our committee extended our condolences to the ministry over the loss of their minister and the Ambassador of Uganda to Rome and his wife. Also, the committee congratulated the Ministry of Foreign Affairs upon acquiring a new home under the bilateral arrangement with Chinese Government and we shall visit this building and be able to inform the House accordingly.

The Committee had observations on international and regional conferences held in Kampala. They were very successful, mainly the African Development Bank (ADB) and the COMESA. This was a noting that the conferences were successful and we commended the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

On budgetary allocation to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Madam Speaker, it was observed that the ministry has suffered budgetary cuts in the recent past. The Committee asserts that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs plays a very crucial role in ensuring the stability of this country because it is the first line defence. Frequent cuts on the ministry’s budget have affected the performance of this ministry adversely. 

The committee recommends that due regard should be given to this ministry considering it as a priority sector thus, budgetary cuts should be as minimal as in other sectors or priority.  

Uganda’s competitiveness in international jobs: The committee’s concern was that many Ugandans do not get access to international jobs, and efforts by government to promote most of them seems invisible.  

The minister informed the committee that some Ugandans have secured good international jobs and he was able even to mention some names. But he mentioned that what really hampers many Ugandans to secure some of those jobs is because mainly they are strictly Anglophone yet being multi-lingual is a basic requirement in most of those international jobs.  

The minister, however, was glad to mention that Swahili has been elevated to a status of African language and the summit in Addis Ababa has been able to affirm this. 

The Committee recommends that government should support the teaching of Swahili language in all schools and all other stakeholders should support this.

African Union organs:

There was an observation that East Africa has not really seemed to benefit. But, the minister informed the Committee that these organs have been distributed to cover the whole continent on a regional basis, with Pan African Parliament being hosted in South Africa, the African Central Bank in Northern Africa, African Investment Bank in West Africa and African Monetary Bank in Central Africa and African Court of Justice and Court for People’s Rights in Eastern Africa. The countries in the different regions will decide on the actual location.  
 
CHOGM, 2007:

The Committee congratulated government for its successes in winning the bid to have CHOGM hosted here and it salutes the preparation so far done, but it wished to know the plans.  

The Committee was informed that a Cabinet sub-committee has been appointed to plan for the event and two papers on the event have been already discussed. This task force is currently charged with the responsibility of drawing the budget for the event.

Protocol at security points:

This was also an issue and it was recommended that funds be expeditiously availed to procure security equipment like magnetometers and X-rays because as we are hosting the CHOGM in 2007 we may be even embarrassed. All government ministries and departments should be sensitised on matters of protocol.  

On matters of the East African Community, the Committee observed that the Members of East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) had not transacted business for a long time because of absence of ministers to table bills. Members of East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) had proposed to governments of the three East African countries to appoint ministers, particularly to handle the East African Community affairs. 

The minister informed the committee that Kenya has already done so and Tanzania and maybe Uganda have not yet responded. 

The Committee recommends that His Excellency, the President understudies the recommendation in view of the summit’s resolution and act accordingly.

Ratification of protocols: The Committee observed that there are so many protocols ratified but not yet domesticated into laws. The minister pledged to expeditiously deal with this matter and to have the laws presented to the House.

Vote 107 Uganda AIDS Commission:

The mandate of Uganda AIDS Commission is there listed and the committee on page 37 met with the Chairman of the Uganda AIDS Commission, and the Director General. The committee commended Uganda AIDS Commission for the consistency in its policies and coherency in following up its activities that include the maintenance of an up-to-date data bank on HIV/AIDS prevalence and infection -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, can you go out with your telephone? Your telephone has been ringing, now you are engaging people in discussion there.  

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, on HIV/AIDS conference, which took place in Bangkok, the committee wish to be clarified about the negative press reports from Bangkok. 

The Committee was assured that Uganda was a shining star at the AIDS conference in Bangkok. Over 200 Ugandans presented abstracts and papers, and nearly 300 Ugandans attended the conference, some of whom chaired sessions. His Excellency, the President in a moving speech said that Uganda has emphasized the ABC model (Abstinence, Being Faithful and Condoms) as a fight against AIDS. He noted that the condom is not the ultimate weapon because it has also challenges. 

Uganda had the only exhibition stall from Africa and it opened from 12th - 16th July. There were concerns about that stall also.  

The Committee recommends that Uganda AIDS Commission should involve the Ministry of Foreign Affairs when conducting events that involve the international community and His Excellency, the President for that matter.  

The Bush Fund:

The Committee was informed that the American Government has set aside US$90 million for the fight against AIDS in selected countries. Uganda is one of these countries and is likely to get the biggest allocation because of the registered success in the fight against AIDS. The American Congress has drawn up a structure for the implementation of the fund, and Uganda AIDS Commission will work with the American Ambassador to draw up the implementation of this. 

The committee recommends that Uganda AIDS Commission, through its infrastructure, sensitises the relevant agencies and organs on how to access the funding. 

On training of AIDS counsellors and I think a medical personnel, the Committee observed that the tuition fees for courses of HIV/AIDS counselling are very exorbitant, yet it is a prerequisite to administering Anti Retroviral Treatment (ARVs).

The Committee recommends that given the high demand for HIV treatment and counselling in the country, Uganda AIDS Commission should take up the training for medical personnel as a component of its capacity building programme.  

Vote 135 Mass Mobilisation:

The Movement Secretariat is the administrative organ of the Movement system of government. Pursuant to Article 70 of the Constitution, the Movement Act, 1997 was enacted and it is under this Act that the authority to create Vote 135 is derived. Its organs are there; its mandates are there on page 40 and on page 41 the Committee had some observations:
 
One of the observations was on the National Leadership Institute (NLI). The Committee was concerned that (NLI) was unable to conduct training programmes for the financial year 2003/04; and there is no clear yardstick to measure the performance of NLI. 

In response, the Committee was informed that insufficient funding led to this inability to conduct training programmes. But it was informed that a section of leaders, including public servants and Members of Parliament, held a programme there. 

Also it has been established that increased training programmes in NLI corresponds to harmony in a society and this is linked to attitudinal change arising from training.

The Committee recommends that: 

• NLI should be given a reasonable portion of the secretariat’s development budget this financial year with view of improving the facilities there.

• The Movement Secretariat’s budget should always be allocated to NLI because it implements the biggest operation of the secretariat’s mandate, which is training, which in turn facilitates mobilisation.  

On Mass mobilisation, the Committee was concerned that it only hears about mobilisation when the voting time is soon coming. The Committee observed that the public is made to believe that mobilisation is only done by the secretariat for electioneering purposes. This negatively impacts on the popularity of government within the sections of society. 

The Committee recommends that the secretariat should become more proactive than reactive by continuously sensitising the public on development issues. 

The Directorate of Research:

The Committee was informed that a lot of data was in their possession, and they can always avail it when requested for and Members of Parliament were encouraged to request for this data. 

The Committee recommends that some basic data should be put on the secretariat’s website for public consumption, which was known maybe not to be very up- to-date.  

Gratuity arrears for staff for the secretariat and mobilisers: The Committee was concerned about the outstanding gratuity arrears owed to both current and former staff of the secretariat and wished to find out the secretariat’s position on the issue.

The Committee was informed that the secretariat issued its staff with new terms and conditions of services in 2001. It entailed a consolidated monthly pay including transport allowance, lunch allowance, medical allowance, contract gratuity, responsibility allowance and housing and utility allowances. However, due to the release of insufficient funds, gratuity payment were stayed for a certain category of staff resulting in an accumulation of gratuity arrears amounting to Shs 240 million. The secretariat assured the Committee that it is greatly concerned with the issue of gratuity arrears owed to its staff, and the matter is being handled at the highest level with a view of getting a solution sooner than later. 

The Committee observed that non-payment of arrears to the Movement Secretariat staff amount to a breach of contract for which the Movement Secretariat can be taken to court. 

Vote 201 -229 Missions Abroad: 

Madam Speaker, these are many in New York, London, Ottawa New Delhi, Cairo, Nairobi, Dar es Salaam, Abuja, Pretoria, Washington, Addis Ababa, Beijing, Kigali, Geneva, Tokyo, Tripoli, Riyadh, Copenhagen, Brussels, Rome, Kinshasa, Paris, Berlin, Tehran, Moscow, Canberra and Juba. These missions have independent votes but for supervisory purposes they fall under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

Our concerns were on the management of properties abroad. The committee was concerned about the dilapidated outlook of most of the Ugandan missions and properties abroad. Most embassies operate in very dilapidated and appalling structures. These include the one in Paris, the one in Ottawa, the one in London, the one in New York and the one in New Delhi among others.

The Committee was informed that the management of the Uganda properties abroad had been changed to Uganda Property Holding Limited a company that was under the Ministry of Finance. The performance of this company left a lot to be desired and after an exhaustive discussion, Cabinet came to the conclusion that the company was not equal to the task. A Cabinet sub-committee was appointed to discuss and make recommendations to the fate of these properties.

The Committee recommends that: 

• A status grantious of appropriation in aid of the revenues generated by some missions be granted to them to improve their outlook.

• The decisions to have missions abroad source for prospective investors to renovate the embassies on a commercial basis should be implemented expeditiously beginning this financial year.

Distribution of Uganda missions abroad:

The Committee observed that Ugandans experience a lot of difficulty in getting consular services in some parts of the world because of the absence of Uganda missions in these areas. The Committee was glad to note that the ministry proposes, within the next few years, to open missions or trade offices in the following capitals in this order: in Havana, in Hague, in Vienna, Dublin, Kuala Lumpur, Senegal, Pakistan, in Zambia and Mozambique.

The Committee recommends that a clear programme for the opening of these missions should be drawn and followed with commitment of funds. At least one mission should be opened per financial year.

Madam Speaker, I come to the budgetary proposals, which I wish to lay before the House.  The committee recommends to Parliament for the approval of the following funds for this financial year.  For the Office of the President – may be before I move, Madam Speaker, I would seek clarification from the Minister of Finance on Vote 107 – Uganda AIDS Commission.  I have been informed by my colleague, the Chairperson of the Social Services Committee, that under Social Services report that vote was catered for under vote 107.  But I can also attest that this budgetary allocation appeared in the Office of the President under vote 107 and now it looks like it is a double representation.  So, I want clarification on that may be before I move, Madam Speaker.

MR RUKUTANA:  It is true it was provided for under the report of Social Services.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So?

MR RUKUTANA: So, that is where it falls.  

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, I am at loss and I think the minister is trying to throw away his responsibility.  When I say his responsibility, he is the one who presented these figures and he had these figures carried within the figures of Office of the President. Now when he says that they fall under the Social Services Committee, I am at loss.  That notwithstanding, I will beg that this figure be deleted from Presidential and Foreign Affairs, and it is carried under the Social Services Committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since it is his motion, let him consult so that we know where to put the money.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on Rule 58.  The hon. minister has persistently disrupted the proceedings of the august House.  Can we apply rule 58 on him?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which minister, hon. Awori? I do not know which minister has disrupted the House.

MR AWORI: Prior to his pretended consultation, he interrupted my hon. Chairperson of the Committee with information, which is not accurate and even prior to that for the previous one hour he has persistently challenged various committee chairpersons with information, which has not been correct.  Can we apply rule 58 on him until further notice?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. members, I think the minister, as the mover of this motion, has to be continuously alert, so he has been consulting various chairpersons and his Officials there.
   
MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, it is true that in the MTEF it is under Ministry of Health.  But the biggest component is under Office of the President.  So, I wish to correct my earlier submission, the figure should remain here, Vote 017 – Office of the President.  I am withdrawing my earlier advice, it should remain where it is now and the report of the Committee on Social Services will be amended.

MR ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  In fact I was perturbed because I did not know how a Committee would pass a vote which it did not even scrutinize.  So, it was superfluous for that matter, but I am happy that he has come up with the correct position.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, can I seek clarification before the Chairperson moves that motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From her or from the minister?

MRS HYUHA: Both.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MRS HYUHA: The minister has just indicated that Vote 107, which is Uganda AIDS Commission, the allocations are reflected under the MTEF of Ministry of Health.  For the past two financial years, we have always come out with a recommendation as Social Services that since Uganda AIDS Commission falls under the Office of the President, its allocations and MTEF should be falling under President’s Office; and persistently the allocations are under the MTEF of Ministry of Health, and now the minister is saying the MTEF is under Ministry of Health and we are going to float it under President’s Office.  How do we reconcile the two?  

Our recommendation, the previous two financial years, was that the allocations be transferred.  Ever since Uganda AIDS Commission was transferred from Ministry of Health to President’s Office, the budget, fall under the MTEF of Ministry of Health. It is true when you look at the budget of Ministry of Health, much of the development of Uganda AIDS Commission funds fall under Ministry of Health.  It is only administration that it has always been allocated under President’s Office.  So, if the MTEF is in Ministry of Health, and now the voting is under the President’s Office, how is that?  Are we going to reduce the MTEF of Ministry of Health?  What does it mean practically?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker and hon. members take my explanation now as an authoritative correction of the situation as it was.  It is true there has been a consistent recommendation that this amount should be voted under the Office of the President and pursuant that recommendation, we have now agreed to have it here.  So, that necessarily means that the figure budgeted for Ministry of Health will be less by this amount.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, are you satisfied?

MR ZZIWA: I am comfortable, Madam Speaker. I had the opportunity to look at their plan and their finances and we approved them.  So, the adjustments will affect the Social Services as may be the minister has suggested.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Earlier this morning we had said that in October we shall sit down and review all the recommendations we have made over the last three financial years so that we rationalize what has happened and where we are going in the future.

MRS HYUHA: But then, Madam Speaker, it means in the Hansard - because I have already pronounced on this Floor the budget ceiling of Ministry of Health; and now what is left is vote by vote.  Even when it comes to allocation or when they are reducing, this vote has perpetually affected the ceiling of Ministry of Health because it must operate within certain ceiling and yet it has to accommodate the interest of Vote 107.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall review those in October.

MRS HYUHA: Will I again pronounce myself on what I pronounced on the ceiling?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When we come to the figures, you can come back to the Floor.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, there is no contradiction.  The ceiling of the Ministry of Health was what it is because of the inclusion of this item.  Now that this item is removed, the balance will be the ceiling of the Ministry of Health and there is no contradiction about that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us not argue in abstract.  Can we hold until we come to the figures because this item has a vote? We shall deal with it when we come to the figures; it has its own vote, let us not go into abstract.  Please conclude.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that Parliament considers the following budgetary allocation:

For Vote 001, Office of the President, recurrent expenditure Shs.32,311,792,000 and development expenditure, Shs.3,100,523,000.

Vote 002, State House, recurrent expenditure Shs.24,105,149,000 and development expenditure, Shs.40,991,529,000.

Vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister, recurrent expenditure, Shs.2,401,611,000 and development expenditure Shs.56,452,050,000.

Vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, recurrent expenditure, Shs.10,633,101,000 and development expenditure Shs.553, 400,000.

Vote 107, Uganda AIDS Commission, recurrent, Shs.1,151,476,000 and development expenditure Shs.28,826,191,000

For mass mobilization, recurrent expenditure, Shs.5,247,355,000 and development expenditure Shs.184,400,000

For mission’s abroad, Madam Speaker, it is an aggregation of all those Votes 201 to 229 and recurrent is Shs.23,999,904,000 and development expenditure, Shs.416,000,000.  Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson of the Committee and your members- (Applause)  I want to confirm that the report was duly signed by at least one third of the members.  It complies with rule 170(1) of our Rules of Procedure and we shall debate it. But before we do that, I want to give notice that in the next 15 minutes, we are going to take vote on the reports, which we have so far handled. So can the minister for Parliamentary Affairs do the needful so that members can come back into the Chamber? Sergeant, can you please ring the bell so that members can come back for voting.

Now hon. members, I would like to announce the presence in the Gallery of councillors from Njeru town council in Buikwe North Constituency. There are up there.  You are welcome to Uganda Parliament (Applause)! So now we can start the debate and at three minutes the microphone will go off automatically.  There are no negotiations.

1.08
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs for the job well done.  I have about three issues to raise.  First, I would like to submit my observation about the challenges that NUSAF programme is facing.  Indeed the committee has come up with some of them, but I wish to report here that the red tape or the technicalities involved in having the programmes or projects approved and the consequential release of funds is so long and yet the project is time bound.  Already some districts have not spent any money and yet the project is about to wind up before it starts.  There is need for us to reconsider having to extend the lifespan of the project to enable all the districts to access the monies. Because as it were, the lifespan may expire when the money is still so much in the pass, and I do not know what the fate of such money would be.

Madam Speaker, even in as far as the types of projects to be undertaken under NUSAF is concerned, I note with great concern and fears that most communities have gone in for projects of infrastructure either under health or under education.  For example, if the local communities have gone for projects to do with building of teachers’ houses, well and good, teacher’s houses are good enough.  But my challenge is that the local communities will not get enough access of income generating funds to at least help them generate monies to fight poverty.  You heard from the report that most of the beneficiary districts have one thing in common; they are the highest at poverty at national level.  I would want to see a situation where most communities access monies for income generating activities to help them fight poverty.  

Now if most of the monies go into infrastructure development, I mean what would then the Ministry of Education do?  I imagine that the local communities would then lose out.

Madam Speaker, I am very uncomfortable with that decision that was taken to transfer Uganda AIDS Commission, which is dealing with a technical matter; transferring it from Ministry of Health to President’s office.  We would not even have had this long debate here with the Minister of Finance in as far as which ceiling is going to be affected.  That is a technical matter and I want it reconsidered. Let the Uganda AIDS Uganda Commission go to the technical ministry to handle it, in my opinion that would be the best way to go.

Madam Speaker, I am worried that the report has disclosed the dilapidated conditions of our missions abroad. You are aware that while in this House, if you are ruled out of order for poor dressing, it impacts back home in your constituency. When our missions abroad are so dilapidated, it portrays a very bad picture on Uganda, and yet in our budget we have allocated a mere UShs 416 million as a development budget for 27 missions abroad, which are in dilapidated condition. We are even proposing to open up nine more soon.  I think there is dire need for us to save face.  The allocation is so appalling in my opinion, and the Ministry of Finance should help the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to save the face of Uganda abroad.

I would like to concur with the committee about personalization of Government programmes.  I think it is incumbent upon all of us to know that any Government programme must be attributed to Governments efforts.  I am aware of some members both from the frontbench and the backbench who say that, “I am the one who brought this programme”.  In fact in certain places in my region people are now asking, “If this was brought by so and so, when will Government deliver?”  

So, Madam Speaker, the issue of partisan tendencies of RDCs is so glaringly clear in all districts –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is up. 

DR EPETAIT: Finally, I would like to sincerely thank hon. Rukutana for consistently appearing here to defend the position of Ministry of Finance.  Since this budget debate started, I am wondering how the internal mechanisms are working out because he has really played the ball of Ministry of Finance without any - I am really wondering, and I think Ministry of Finance should style up and avoid - this is my humble observation. 

1.14
MS JANE ALISEMERA (Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank the committee for the good report.  I want to appreciate in their report the programmes, which they have named especially on the IDP’s and other areas, which have been in conflicts like the northern Uganda reconstruction programme, the Karamoja affairs and other programmes, which have been made in this country when there has been war.  I want to appreciate that these programmes have really helped these areas in terms of helping these people to resettle after conflicts.  

I want to remind this Parliament that in hon. Alaso’s report Rwenzori region was also mentioned but nothing has come out on the issues of resettling these people after the war.  I want to inform the Prime Minister’s Office that the people of Rwenzori have also experienced the problems, which have been experienced by other areas in the north, Luwero Triangle and Karamoja.  They have had this war for the last 45 years like it was in the Luweero Triangle.  But the people of Rwenzori have not received any assistance in terms of resettling them since the war ended.  The people of Rwenzori region are still living under difficult conditions.  We have had orphans; we have had widows –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. members, I hope you people are not going out; the people near the door, I hope you are not going out.  Please come back to your seat because we are about to vote.

MS ALISEMERA: I want to say that the people of Rwenzori region have suffered like other people in other areas where there have been conflicts.  The people of Rwenzori are people still living like animals; they do not have shelter, the children have not accessed any scholarships and the women have not accessed any development programme at all, We wonder why Rwenzori region has not been helped like other areas.  So, I want the Prime Minister’s Office- we are also people who have had those conflicts, we need to be helped.  The women are living under very bad conditions; they are like animals.  Our children; there is no Government scholarships which has been given to the people of Rwenzori, and more especially the people of Bundibugyo; they have not had anything at all to help them.  So, I want to ask the Prime Minister’s Office to come and assist the people of Rwenzori?  They should also have a programme for them to recover from the problems of disaster.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. members, let us defer this debate a bit so that we take a vote on the reports we have already handled, and we shall do it by show of hands.  I would like now to put the question that the report on the Sessional Committee on Social Services presented to this House and debated be adopted. None against, none abstaining and 114 for the report; so, the report of the Committee on Social Services is hereby adopted.

Question put

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The results are as follows, 99 for, 1 against and 1 abstaining.  So, the report is hereby adopted.

Report of the Sessional Committee on Finance and Economic Planning.  

Question put

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 102 members have adopted the report of the Committee on Finance and Economic Planning.  So it is hereby adopted.

Report on the Sessional Committee on natural resources.  

Question put

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. members, 103 have voted for the Committee on Natural Resources; none against and no abstentions.  The report is hereby adopted.

Committee on agriculture, animal industries and fisheries. 

Question put

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 103 honourable members are for the report of the Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, none against but one abstention. The report is hereby adopted. 

The report of the Sessional Committee on Public service and Local Government: 

Question put.

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 104 honourable members have voted for the report on Public Service and Local Government. The report is hereby adopted.  

Thank you, honourable members. So let us now proceed. We go back to the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs.

1.28
MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to welcome members from Njeru town council of Mukono district.  I would also like to thank the members of the committee for the report presented.   I would like to talk about – (Interjection) – can you protect me, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MRS BALEMEZI LYDIA: I would like to talk about Uganda Broadcasting Cooperation.  I think as the Committee has noted this has over delayed because as we talk, we people in Mukono, in the areas of Nyenga, Wakise, Njeru and Najjembe, we are deprived of the national broadcast.  This is because we have these private radios, which have covered these areas, and we are in total blackout on national issues as far as broadcasting is concerned. 

So, Madam Speaker, I was of the opinion that may be Radio Uganda could be privatized so would be UTV because of the pathetic conditions of these institutions. Their offices are lacking in so many equipment and Government may not be in position to reinstate all those equipment. This might take us long to come to where we would like to reach.  Bearing in mind that the world is moving at a supersonic speed, if we wait for these meagre resources that we manage to collect as Government, we might lag behind globally.  So, that is why I would like to add on to the committee’s recommendations that they should consider recommending privatising Radio Uganda and Uganda Television.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to request the committee to look into this broadcasting because many of these radios, especially in Kampala here, they go on overlapping.  As you listen to one radio – these FM radios, you would suddenly get into another radio and this has deprived us from getting systematic information from any particular media.

I would like also to talk about the foreign missions.  Formerly, we learnt that some missions have tried to raise funds to sustain their operations, but then some time I heard over radio some of the heads of missions complaining that our airport - some of the people coming from outside countries come and get their visas.  They fly without getting visas from those respective countries from our missions and on landing at Entebbe airport they pay for the visas.  This is depriving the embassies in those foreign missions of the income, which they might have budgeted for.  So, I do not know how the Presidential and Foreign Affairs –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: The money, which is collected from visas at the embassies are broad is part of the funds that go to the consolidated fund.  It is not an income to those embassies.  Thank you.

MS BALEMEZI: I thank you, Madam Chairperson, but as I said, I heard this over radio and heads of the missions were complaining very bitterly.  I wish this could be explained to them so that the matter is put to rest.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the Office of the Vice President has taken on part of the role of the Ministry of Agriculture, and I do not know how this zoning of the upland rice has been carried out; and Mukono is part of those upcountry areas where we would have expected that Mukono would fall in the areas, which would cater for this upland rice project.  But since it was never mentioned in the report, I wonder how the Vice President’s Office is running this agricultural programme. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 
 
1.34
MR ISAIAH IMUMET (Usuk County, Katakwi District): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the Chairperson for giving a well-done report.  Mine is an observation and consequently a comment regarding the IDP’S.  I have heard in the report that it is recommended that the Members of Parliament, who have IDPs from Lango and Katakwi, should encourage their people to go back to their homes.  But in reality I would think that let these people be given time to assess whether they can go back or not. In my constituency there was a Kony problem, but now there is the problem of Karamoja.  So, instead of trying to work as if we are forcing them to go back, let them be given time to assess the situation, they will go back by themselves.  Otherwise, we shall be unfair to them.  They will think we are actually squeezing them.  That is all I wanted to say.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Salaamu Musumba, you are a member of the Committee; are you not a member any more?  
1.35
MRS MUSUMBA SALAAMU (Bugabula South, Kamuli District):  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to make comments on only four matters.  The first matter is about pornography.  I want to thank the committee for raising the matter on pornography.  But I seek clarification from the committee whether it occurred to them that the same Office of the President promotes pornography to some extent.  I say this because I know one of the people who works as a Presidential aide, Frank Mwebaze, is an Editor or writes in ‘The Red Pepper’ and he is on the payroll of the state, and he is under the same ministry, which the Minister of Information and the Minister of Ethics is.  While they are looking at the rest of the country, what internal mechanism do they have to ensure that pornography is not on their desk where they are busy preaching to the rest of the country about the goodness of morality?  What about this editing they do in the paper called The “Red Pepper”.’  I would like some clarification on that from the Committee because we have set up another Select Committee to deal with pornography, and yet there are people paid by the state that are practitioners of the same.  

I would like to move on to the votes.  In the Office of the President we had made a recommendation last year that a different Vote be availed to the Vice President because it is so difficult to evaluate his work and his input.  How far have we gone in making a specific provision of finances for his job so that we are able to evaluate him and the entire office for which the resources cannot be separated? 

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, I want to talk about another Vote in the Ministry of – forgive me, I still remember the other department of Information.  There is a repetition that we pointed out last year to which nothing has been done.  There is Vote 001 - Office of the President, but there are two departments there; Department of information, then there is the Department of monitoring and inspection, then Department of monitoring and evaluation, all under the same directorate.  This is to me more of repetition of the votes that you cannot even work out who is doing this; and yet for the Office of the Vice President, it is not indicated anywhere.  

Likewise, there is another vote on Cabinet secretariat.  The Cabinet secretariat is a constitutional provision.  But when you go into the ceilings, it also gets affected and therefore the efficiency and the effectiveness of the Government is undermined because the Cabinet secretariat is not given the amount of resources required for it to service Government and therefore ensure an efficient and effective Government. There is a contradiction between Cabinet secretariat and the office of the Prime Minister because it is envisaged in the Constitution that it will be the Cabinet Secretariat to coordinate all these things.  But we now have resources being split between the office of the Prime Minister and the Secretariat and we have been saying in the past three years that these should be harmonized so that we have a better product.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the Movement Secretariat.  One of the things that was brought to my attention in that committee was the fact that the mobilisers of the Movement Secretariat have not received what is due to them, and it is more of an issue of mismanagement of the resources at the Secretariat than availability of the resources.  We have asked in the past to be availed with the certificate that shows that actually this is a public debt and there is no such a certificate, which means the money was released but the money never reached the mobilisers.  I would like to know what more has been done by the committee to ensure that the Movement Government pays the Movement mobilisers because to me it is a big contradiction that the cadres of a system are the ones that have not received what is due to them.  So, I would like to see what has been provided because it is not a public debt, there is no certificate to that record and who has been held accountable for this inadequacy and for this inability to live to what it is constitutionally provided for.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.42
MR JOHNSON MALINGA  (Kapelabyong County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Article 108 of our Constitution states that, “There shall be a Vice President of Uganda”.  When you read from the media and you listen to the radios you will hear the Vice President was in Kakiri, he was in Wakiso, he was in Masaka, he was in Mukono and I think the report has also highlighted that there is a problem in the Vice President’s office.  This prompted one child to ask me that the President of Uganda comes here then the Vice President seems to be limited within Buganda. What is the problem?  Is it the money, if there is no money our Vice President should be facilitated so that he gets out of here and visits Uganda?  The Vice President has indicated a lot of interest in agriculture and our people are complaining of hunger.  I think he could be given that portfolio like the first Vice President so that he has more work to do because this committee is saying the Vice President has little work. 

Madam Speaker, I want to say something about Presidential pledges.  Our colleagues of the front bench have made the President look like a national liar No.1 Iam going to quote you one example. Some time around September 2001, His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda was in Katakwi and the people of Katakwi asked the President to provide electricity and we were blessed that the Minister of Energy was also present.  So His Excellency asked the minister, when will the Katakwi line be started?  The minister said that the work on the line would start on the 1 January 2002, and 1 January 2002 past the line is not there.  1 January 2003 past nothing has started, 1 January 2004 has gone nothing is done.  Now we are waiting for 1 January 2005. You members of the frontbench what is the problem?  May be, Madam Speaker, I would propose that there should be a minister of Presidential pledges otherwise our President will become a public liar.

I would like to say something about the IDP’s.  We are very willing to go home.  I am in an internally displaced camp myself. Madam Speaker, the IDP still needs the support of Government on the basic life requirements and we need to empower them to produce so that they do not become perennial beggars.  We would like to encourage the NGOs to continue with emergency but now they can start on development programmes.

Finally, I want to say something about NUSAF, may be before I say this; I would like hon. Rukutana to take this very seriously.  You have voted UShs.29 billion for the Ministry of Health and UShs29 billion for the same activity of Uganda Aids Commission in the President’s office.  When you off load this money from one budget to the other one, what happens to the gap, which is created in the other ministry?  If you off load it from Ministry of Health and take it to President’s office, how will Ministry of Health cover the cap of 29 billion?

Finally, I would like to thank- (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA:  Madam Speaker, if I may clarify.  When you shift the UShs.29 billion from health to the office of the President, there is no gap that is created because that money is targeted for particular activities of the Uganda Aids Commission.  Those activities will be carried out with the same money albeit in a different place so there is no gap whatsoever.  

MR JOHNSON MALINGA:  Madam Speaker, I did simple arithmetic in primary schools, if we are going to total the monies that we are going to pass, we have now a total amount of money for Ministry of Health, we have for President’s office and we have Ministry of Finance.  If we totalled that money, I am very sure that we shall have totalled Shs29 billion twice.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Why do you not wait until we deal with the figures?   
  
MR RUKUTANA:  Madam speaker, monies are appropriated for specific programmes.  Those Specific programmes that were supposed to be catered for by that Shs29 billion will still be catered for by the same money but under a different vote.  So there will be no gap whatsoever.

MRS ZZIWA:  Madam Speaker, I think the concern of hon. Mallinga is pertinent.  It is pertinent because, in the committee of Social Services, there was a vote, which catered for Uganda Aids Commission amounting to UShs29 million. In Presidential and Foreign Affairs there was a vote catering for Uganda Aids Commission amounting to the same amount which means there was a double voting for one item.  So for that matter I think he may make an undertaking that either one which appeared in social services since you have already asserted that this one will remain here, it will be moved for something else and that is may be what you mean.  But it has already been- (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, if there was a double entry, then that means it was erroneous and the error will be corrected.

MR BERNARD MULENGANI: Madam Speaker, I am rising up on this issue of double entry. The information I wish to give is that we pronounced ourselves on the Social Services Committee figures, implying that the Shs 29 billion is already catered for -(Interjection)- Protect me, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Allow the hon. Member to make his presentation. 

MR MULENGANI: It is also true that if we pronounce ourselves on this report including the Shs 29 billion, we shall have passed Shs 58 billion.  I am therefore proposing that if we pass the current committee report, let us pass it less the Shs 29 billion and then we shall allow the Minister of Finance to transfer the other one from Social Services to Presidential and Foreign Affairs.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, why don’t you  conclusively deal with this matter so that Members do not keep on raising it?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I thought I had done so, but maybe it is because I do not have better words to explain myself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do it a bit slowly.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, let my words be a correction of the record initially passed. I said that the figure of Shs 28,826,191,000 that was initially adopted under the Committee of Social Services be now adopted under the President’s Office. Well, we are debating; we have not yet gone to the figures.  

Having made that correction when we come to the figures, I will rise again and make a similar correction on the figures. I am also confirming that it is the same amount of money for the same programme for the same activities. So, I do not see anything wrong with that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have generally adopted the reports, but the actual figures we are going to do Vote by Vote. Why don’t you wait until we go to the figures Vote by Vote and then address this issue?

MR MALINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I was winding up, but now that my time has been taken, maybe I will put one more point.  The NRM first programme had 10 points, now it has been expanded to 15. Of the 10, we had the Karamoja question; I am raising it again that something has to be done.  

Finally, I would like to thank Government and Parliament for passing NUSAF funds for Northern Uganda. However, these funds, at least where I come from, are like a very well-cooked dish for the children, but you tell the child, “I want you to fetch 30 jerricans of water before you eat my food”. The child keeps running up and down as you say, “Oh, not yet, you have not filled this jerrican.” The conditions are too hard for us; maybe it is easier to get a masters degree in Kawempe than get the NUSAF money. We would like you please, Madam Speaker, to ask the people in charge of NUSAF to reconsider the conditions and let our people access the money.  I thank you.

1.53
MRS MARAGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons With Disabilities): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the NUSAF money, and I will start with the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme (NURP). We started this programme since 1992 under the NURP I. The aim was to improve the status of people from the Northern region. The status of the people of Northern region remained the same. They changed it to NURP II, but the poverty level increased. Now they have introduced NUSAF, which they claim is bottom–up; we must start from the people. You tell them to write a proposal, while they do not know what a proposal is; and even they do not know what type of projects to identify. They come up with production of rabbits, poultry, potatoes, which will not bring money for the people of the North. Now, you are talking about Northern region recovery. Surely, are you fooling the people of the North? Are you getting money in the name of people of the North, and yet the money goes to develop other districts?

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Baba Diri for giving way. I want to give you information about the NUSAF funds. On Saturday last week, I was in Pallisa in the constituency of hon. Opange - I do not know whether he is here.  Citizens there in Pallisa were praising Government unreservedly for putting in place the NUSAF Fund.  They utilized the funds so efficiently, they were actually able to show me some of the projects and activities they have done. They were really talking very highly of the Fund.  

If hon. Baba Diri or hon. Malinga’s place has a problem, the problem is not to do with the Fund; the problem may be to do with the local people.  But I saw with my own eyes programmes that have been accomplished by NUSAF. I heard the people praising the project, and I was very happy. Actually the people there promised me a third term (Laughter)  

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Minister, maybe –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  NUSAF is a community-based programme, in other words, it is a bottom–up arrangement where people must identify what they want. But you realize that some people may not have the capacity to choose what is best for them. So, there is also an element of training them, giving them the capacity to choose what is appropriate. When they choose it, they own the programme and this was a different approach from the one initially adopted, where it was top-bottom.  So, I do not understand the cause for alarm. 

In fact, also when I was visiting Gulu, people were very appreciative. They only emphasized the need to be assisted to identify a project which could be marketed, and that matter is being addressed to the facilitator at the sub-county. So, what is the problem?  I do not see the problem –(Interruption)

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Baba Diri has raised a very serious issue regarding empowering the people of the North and she has a point. I remember when NUSAF was just starting, because we borrow this money to help people from the North, there were some seminars. But it was unfortunate that the seminar was moved from the Northern region to a hotel in Jinja instead of having to empower the hoteliers from the Northern region. You do not need to bring the people to Kampala or Jinja, we need to empower the business community in the North; they should have the seminar there. Why have the seminar this end instead of having it in the North? That is the issue hon. Baba Diri is raising here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us leave hon. Baba Diri to develop her points; she is going to lose them. You will respond - You want to talk about this workshop?

MRS BABA DIRI: Okay, let me just wind up.  Madam Speaker, I think everybody knows that the people of the North are the poorest. This money has been in the North but it has not improved our poverty level; that is why I am talking about it.  

If the Prime Minister says people are dancing, he said they are happy, of course, what can you do? If they say we give you this little money, you will do everything to please the bosses while actually you are suffering. I am saying this because I have been in the constituency. They say, “Write a proposal”, but the people do not know how to write a proposal, the proposal is thrown back to them. 

For example people with disabilities, nobody has ever reached them. They are not even receiving the money because they are not writing proper proposals. Now where is the training you are talking about when my constituency is not receiving that money?  

Generally people in the North have not seen any benefit from this money, which is being poured there, I will still repeat. May be, at the end of the year or at the end of the programme, we shall compare the poverty level and see whether it would have dropped or not, time will tell. 

I would like to comment about pornography. This pornography actually is very ashaming and I have observed very carefully those photographs –(Laughter)- They are mainly of women. If you see in the papers everywhere, Televisions there are women whose private parts are exposed but the men are very careful.  So, I am calling upon the women not to give themselves for this pornography. Definitely if we all refuse there would be nothing for people to enjoy to see.  So, I also call upon those who are really interested - I have learnt that those who perpetuate pornography are those who had bad up-bringing especially during the genital phase. You have to pass that stage, but so there are some people who are fixated wrongly. So, for those few or the majority of those who are interested in pornography let us have a policy where papers are not exposed. You can go to pick and see them in your bedroom or elsewhere rather than having them spread everywhere bringing immorality to our children and the nation.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to just add my voice to hon. Baba Diri. She has consistently complained that her constituency is not catered for. I listen to these reports and I do not see any special programme for persons with disabilities. Is the Government going to say something about this?

2.02
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you Madam Speaker and honourable Members. I would not have intervened at this time but I beg your indulgence to do so partly because I am actually immediate in charge of Northern Uganda. Hon. Grace Akello is now in Northern Uganda and she had to go because there are consultative meetings taking place in Gulu now on NUSAF.  

Two, Madam Speaker, NUSAF was developed after very thorough consultations with every stakeholder taking into account the mistakes that were made under the previous programmes. Everybody participated and everybody had an opportunity to make an input on how to design and develop this programme. That is why it was Government’s considered position that the people of Northern Uganda, in order to own the project, had to maximally participate. It is not true Madam Speaker, that the people themselves actually write the projects. The people bring the ideas; they sit down with these people and unless they themselves think about the thing, discuss it and do what, even the implementation may not come; it may not be correct. 

Finally, at just this short intervention, hon. Baba Diri I do not know how she gets the information she has, but the truth is that we have vulnerable groups taken care of. Therefore, if she has any specific groups that have not been taken care of Madam Speaker, Government is only too prepared to reach out these. In fact, if I get the information from her, I will wire it to Northern Uganda to hon. Grace Akello to reach out to these people. We have a resident Minister –(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: Madam Speaker, is the Minister in order - I am a Member of Parliament representing Persons with Disability and I have my constituency of 12 districts in Northern Region and I have been visiting them and sensitizing them about this NUSAF money. Recently I have been to Adjumani and Moyo. Is, he in order to ask as to where I get my information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member for persons with disabilities, Northern Uganda, has a very big network. She has structures through which she works so she really has good sources of information. So, the Minister, please trust to what she, she knows how she gets her information and it is very reliable; she has got the structures. So, you are out of order to say she does not know how she gets herself –(Laughter)

PROF. KAGONYERA MONDO GEORGE: Madam Speaker, I want to express Government’s gratitude to hon. Baba Diri’s vigilance; this is what we want of all Members of Parliament. What I was saying is that this information she is able to get -(Interjection)- When do we participate in this debate?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. You have ably ruled on a point of order, which was moved by hon. Baba Diri. Is the hon. Minister in charge of General Duties in order to pursue the same matter after your pronouncement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Minister was saying that he now understands how hon. Baba Diri gets the information, and wants other Members to provide.  That is what he was saying.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: But he should not pursue the matter after your pronouncement.

2.07
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to debate on this very important report. I want to thank the committee for a well-written report. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the issue of roads in Northern Uganda. The committee mentioned the issue of roads causing difficulties in distributing services and goods to the IDPs and the other places in Northern Uganda. Madam Speaker, this should not be limited only to those feeder roads and security roads. There are a number of Central Government roads that are in terrible conditions. I was not able to contribute to the report on Works, Housing and Communications. But I wish to urge the ministry to take note of this and ensure that all the roads, including the trunk roads, are worked on properly.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of NUSAF, I am sorry I have to go back to this briefly, but I think we need a lot more mobilization. This should not only be left to the Members of Parliament, but I want to appreciate the fact that the Minister for Northern Uganda is doing a lot of work there. And, Madam speaker, I wish to suggest that if possible, this Minister should not be an elected Member of Parliament, so that s/he concentrates on the issues in Northern Uganda. We cannot have a person who is representing his or her constituency in Parliament, and also has to concentrate on the issues in Northern Uganda. We all know the poverty indices of this country, and especially in Northern Uganda –(Interruption)    

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Member for giving way. I think the job of the Minister of mobilizing Northern Uganda is simply impossible.  So, she must be assisted by all of us; the Members of Parliament, the district leadership, the sub-county leaders; district offices for mobilization must be really assisted by everybody.  So, the hon. Member on the Floor really should apportion an instrumental role to the Minister, but the actual practical role is to the local leadership because if the district leaders do not see NUSAF as something to grab and utilize for the area, the Minister can hardly do anything.

MS ERIYO: Thank you for your information, Mr Minister, we are actually saying the same thing.  But what I am trying to emphasize here - you even know very well that, that Minister does not have enough funds to run the whole place; and to understand the real issues you need someone who has enough time to coordinate with all the stakeholders in the whole region. It is not a simple thing; and taking the problems that we have had in that region because of insecurity, I think we are really talking about the same thing.

Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate what the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees has done following the problems of insecurity and displacements that we have had in the region. We know very well that this ministry has very limited funds, but what they have helped the people to solve the problems they are facing. 

The issues of food, health and so many other problems in the region, especially in the IDP camps, but also in the hard-to-reach areas, where you find that these ministers travel with constraint resources to go to the rural parts of Northern Uganda; I really appreciate these. 

On that note, I request all the other ministers to take interest in visiting the Northern Region. In most cases, ministries do not plan appropriately for the Northern Region because they have not been there.  There are many Ministers, who have not been to the North. I request that the ministers visit these places. 

I want to follow up what my colleague, hon. Malinga has said, that many ministers remain within Kampala, and there are many people who do not even know how some ministers look like. I do not want to embarrass my friends here, but I would like to challenge that they all visit these areas so that they appreciate the problems of the region and are able to allocate resources appropriately so that we can also plan for the development of the Northern Region.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I wants to say briefly that to the best of my knowledge there is not a single Minister, who has not been to the Northern Uganda. We have had more than four Cabinet meetings in the Northern Uganda.

MS ERIYO: Madam Speaker, I am disappointed in that statement because if I have to list the ministers who have reached my district, they are less than 10.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, I think the interest of the Members is to see - you know like you went to Pallisa the other day, I think the hon. Member of Adjumani would like you to reach those places of hers in Adjumani. 

Honourable members, I want to suspend the House for one hour so that we can have lunch. So, let us reconvene at 3.15p.m. 

(The House was suspended at 2.16 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 3.25 p.m._)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have two small piece of information. One is that our colleague, hon. Charles Angiro lost his brother, Mr Paul Opio, yesterday. So he has gone to Erute to organize a burial. I thought that I should let you know that he will require some support during the course of the burial, and may the soul of Mr. Opio rest in eternal peace.

Secondly, I would like you to join me in welcoming our citizens from Busiki Constituency; they are up there in the visitor’s gallery. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda (Applause) I think their visit must have been arranged by their Member of Parliament. Yes, it has been a long time since we had seen the Basiki here, but we are happy to see them.  

I said we are going to be very strict, three minutes and when you over speak, I cut you off.  

3.28
MR OKUPA ELIJAH (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the NPC regarding Mass Mobilization Section. I have been wondering why the NRM Secretariat Printery has not been reflected yet we know it is supposed to be making money, doing work for the Secretariat, and we could be able to have the appropriation-in-aid. We have learnt that this printery in Kawempe is being personalized now, and some of the assets have been vandalized. So can we hear from the NPC why this has never been reflected? I remember in the 6th Parliament this issue used to feature so much.

Two, the NRM Secretariat got a donation of cement sometime back, but it is unfortunate that it has been vandalized. What remains now in Communications House basement is just the one, which has got spoilt. So who has taken the cement, which was meant for the NRM Secretariat?  

Finally, yesterday, under allocation of resources, we asked for a comparative analysis on the amount of monies, which go into different regions, especially, East and North, which our statistics show that is lagging behind because of poverty. The poverty levels are so high in these regions. We asked the Minister in charge of Northern Region, in charge of NUSAF, because there has been talk that you have NUSAF, but if you look at the terms of comparative analysis and if you use the time trend analysis, you will realize that not much has moved to this area if we are ready to lift them out of poverty. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.30
MS MARGARET ATENG (Woman Representative, Lira):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is mainly points of clarification. The committee in its report stated that they were informed that the sovereignty and security of any country is greatly hinged on its public sector and broadcasters, and here they only mention Radio Uganda and Uganda Television. We know very well that there are private broadcasters as well. What does the committee have to say about them? We know that they are being charged license fee. I would like to know; how are these people being helped? We know very well that radio stations, TVs and others can cause insecurity. We have heard instances where some radio stations have been closed. How is the ministry helping out rather than going to close eventually?

Secondly, I would like to thank the President very much for his initiative of bringing in people from outside the country, bringing guests, investors, high-ranking dignitaries. But my worry is about those who come to attend workshops and seminars in Uganda, the situation is very appalling. I attended the ADB and COMESA meetings that were held in Kampala this year. For one to get in there, the security people had to check in your back in a way that was not pleasant. The situation was even worse for the white people, whom you of course know keep their bags very privately, no one is supposed to look inside. So what is this sector doing in order to improve on this situation?

Some of us have boycotted going for functions where the President is because of the way we are treated. So I hope it will be handled. I thank you very much.

3.33
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the work done by –(Interjections)

MR PATAKI AMASI: Madam Speaker, I thought your eyes focussed on me and I am to follow, not my colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My eyes may have focused on you, but my mouth did not (Laughter). Okay, let him speak first.

MR PATAKI: Okay.  Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs for the work they have done. Madam Speaker, I have two or three issues to point out. One, allow me, Madam Speaker, to extend my inner most gratitude to the Presidential Guard Brigade (PGB).  Madam Speaker, the reason why I am extending my appreciation to them, you remember very well that on 6th this month, Al-Hajji Nasser Ntege Sebaggala came back from his studies in London.  

Madam Speaker, on the way from Entebbe to Kampala the President was on his way to Botanical Beach to meet our distinguished leaders of Africa, but the way the PGB handled our procession deserves a token of thanks. Sincerely speaking, Madam Speaker, it was really a very good gesture. Given the fact that there were so many people, PGB played a very big role to ensure that the President proceeds to where he was supposed to go and Al Hajji Nasser Sebaggala also takes his route to Kisaasi. Madam Speaker, we appreciated as one of the members who was on the organizing committee, for the way the PGB behaved.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, some time back I visited our Mission in London. In my conversation with Ambassador Cissy Kiryapawo, he informed me about the problems they were facing, which has also been indicated in the report, that our Mission needs a face-lift. Definitely, I was taken around to see the urgency of this kind of face-lift. It is my humble request that, that one is put into serious consideration.  

He also went on to inform me that they are charging 25 pounds for a visa. Unfortunately that money does not tally with the money being charged from Ugandans seeking visas for United Kingdom because 25 pounds is about Uganda Shs 70,000, yet here they charge over and above that. Madam Speaker, I was happy when the Ambassador informed me that on average they are giving out 100 visas to people who want to visit our country and that is very good money, that is 2500 pounds everyday, especially during peak season –(Interruption)

MR ANTHONY YIGA: Madam Speaker, our colleague had an opportunity to discuss with one of our Ambassadors about the requirement for renovation, and I can see in the Budget here we are about to appropriate only Shs 416 million, could we hear from him whether he had the opportunity also to get the impression of how much is required to renovate that embassy of ours so that we could compare what is provided here with the requirement? Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you for that information. He also informed me that during the last financial year, our Mission in the United Kingdom managed to contribute 400,000 pounds. That means that for them it would be better if the Government allows these Missions to use some of this money, which is being collected through visas and passports, so that they can use it directly instead of first limiting it to Uganda and then going back to their Missions. This is a very long process and in so doing there are so many Missions, which are badly in need of facelift.

Madam Speaker, finally it is my humble request that when our colleagues in United Kingdom are seeking for visas to come to our country, there is no restriction. Unfortunately, Ugandans who would like to travel to other countries present a land title, present family ties, a, b, c, d and even letters from lawyers. Madam Speaker, I request the Government to intervene, otherwise so many of our colleagues are denied visas to go to other countries basically because they do not possess land titles and other requirements, which requirements are not requested for when people are seeking to come to Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister will prepare to answer, but there are some issues, which have come from the Committee on Local Government, which this report, so I will allow the chairperson to answer.

3.40
MR PATAKI AMASI (Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Committee for the report. When I perused the report, I did not come across a recommendation on how refugees or internally displaced people are to be resettled.  Many times when Government talks or the United Nations (UN) agencies talk of resettling refugees, I am seeing in this country it is the refugees who resettle themselves, but Government or UN agencies provide only food or some materials. The refugees are left to resettle themselves using local materials around, causing deforestation. 

The environment is destroyed by the refugees through resettling themselves. You do not see any tent in the camps; in fact all camps whether of displaced persons or refugees from Congo or Sudan, are made of local materials available destroying the environment in those areas.  Government should put in place a policy of how to resettle refugees or internally displaced persons so that our environment is protected. They should not only provide food or some materials, but a resettlement package should be taken into consideration. In other countries a camp of refugees looks like a city of tents. This also protects the refugees in case of fire; like in Pabbo or any other refugee camps if a grass-thatched hut gets fire, the rest will go in a few hours.  But suppose those refugees are resettled using tents, I think the burning takes time and fire can easily be put off at a certain time.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, refugee hosting areas whether in Adjumani, in Paloria, my constituency in Kyangwali, Nakivale should be given equal treatment in terms of development, either by Government or refugee UN agencies like UNHCR. For instance, in appreciation for hosting refugees, if those areas are to be provided with other developments like opening up roads, putting up maternity wards - a maternity ward put in Kyangwali should be the same as the one in my constituency, or in other refugee hosting areas. You do not need to put only a hall and you call it a maternity ward when in other areas it is really a maternity ward. This should be taken into consideration.  

I have seen that people in my place are cheated; we are hosting over 30,000 refugees but you find that the services provided by Government or UNHCR are inadequate. We are being cheated; I saw other refugee hosting areas like in – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mrs Christine Aporu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Pataki Amasi for giving way. First of all, he should make a distinction between the refugees and the internally displaced people. When Government resettles refugees every household is given a tent. When you visit the refugee settlements you find that most of their housing have got tents labeled UNHCR. 

When it comes to the IDPs it is a little bit different because not all IDPs have tents but Government and humanitarian partners have tried to put a mechanism of availing tarpaulins and tents to them so that we minimize destroying the environment.  

On the issue of sharing resources with the refugees, host districts in West Nile region specifically, have a Self Reliance Strategy programme. This programme is to encourage all the districts to integrate in their plans of action all refugee activities, so that the hosting districts benefit equally from the resources and the infrastructure that is going to be put down for the refugees.  

So, I think hon. Amasi Pataki, you should come and join us when the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs will be visiting camps. You will see actually how we work in partnership to make sure that what is meant for the refugees is shared also for the nationals, because when these people get repatriated the infrastructure should fall back to benefit the host communities in that area. I welcome you to join us in the tour in Parolinya, Rhino Camp, Madi-Okollo and the rest of those camps.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR PATAKI: Thank you Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for that piece of information. But since she has invited me to be visiting those camps with her, I am very happy and waiting – (Laughter) - to see that she should show me those tents.  When you find a few isolated tents you do not call it a provision of tents to this camps. Like in Parolinga in Adjumani these are Sudanese refugees and you do not see any of those tents around. I thank you Madam Speaker.  

3.48
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale county, Kamwenge): Thank you Madam Speaker, I am raising two or three issues. One, on page 13 of the report, the committee is recommending that Government should structure pledges and streamline them in respective sectors.  

Madam Speaker, this recommendation is going to disorganize various sectors. I think as Parliament we should recommend that Government should raise money, give the President’s office to pay the debts other than disorganizing programmes of various ministries. Because when you restructure these pledges and put them in various ministries, they will distort the figures and the Ministry of Finance will thank it has given them a lot money and it will disorganize them in budgeting.

Secondly, on office accommodation, we would like the Minister in charge of the Presidency, since office accommodation is handled under the President’s office, to tell us how they intend to handle the issue of office accommodation, because it was our observation as a committee that rent on Government offices is very high. I gave you an example of Local Government and the Local Government Finance Commission who pay Shs 1 billion every year. We would like, within this financial year or at least by the next budget, to get a cost benefit analysis and we see whether it is really feasible for us to continue renting than building our own offices. What happened to the BOT programme? Is it still working? Can’t we see how to use it?

Finally, Madam Speaker, I got a petition from the mobilizers from the Movement Secretariat those who have not been paid their funds. The Secretariat is saying it is seeing how to handle them. I was expecting a serious recommendation from the Presidential and Foreign Affairs that we reallocate within the budget of the Secretariat and we pay these mobilizers their due funds because we are violating their rights. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this morning we agreed that we shall deal with two reports and because this is one of the biggest areas we have gone on up to almost four O’clock.  But at least 12 Members of Parliament have contributed.  Now, I would like to ask the minister to start responding and if there is something really burning then the Members can seek clarification from the ministers. I want to ask the office of the President to begin responding. I hope you do not take too long. 

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Mr Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, let me preface my remarks by saying how appreciative I am to the chairperson of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee and of course, Members of the committee and my colleagues in the House, and to you Madam Speaker for the discussions we have had since morning. I will deal with all the points raised as briefly as I can – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought you were interested in the responses, otherwise if you are not we end the matter.  

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I will deal with all the points raised in a general way, but specific at the same time so that I am able to hopefully satisfy Members’ concerns and questions that were raised.  

May I start with the Resident District Commissioners, (RDCs)Madam Speaker. The concern that Members have raised is one that we too have had for quite sometime. Recently there was a workshop in Kampala to which Resident District Commissioners were invited and told in no uncertain terms that they must desist from partisan politics, and that their general behavior must be impeccable and take into account the diversity of people they are working with. We also did warn them that they must conduct themselves in a way that does not expose them, or even the Presidency, to ridicule and to the kind of accusations that we hear from time to time. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of –(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, the Office of the President is the fountain of honour for this country and we would wish it to remain that way. The RDCs in many districts of Uganda have almost made this office become a fountain of dishonour. If you, without discussing details, mention the issue of the RDC of Bugiri recently, of Kabale, of Ntungamo I recently read in the papers that he had ordered for the office of UJCC to be closed because the clergy is opposed to the third term. This is what was reported yesterday. 

I want to ask the minister, what action have they taken against these RDCs who have been indulging in illegalities, to ensure that really this sort of thing does not continue happening? If you just – you have been talking and in fact, Madam Speaker, they have been warning these RDCs; but what has happened? Recently in Apac the RDC wrote a letter allowing herdsmen from Masindi to cross into Apac with cattle, which have diseases – thousands of them! This was against the resolution of the council not to allow them to come in without proper documentation from the veterinary authorities. What have you done? In fact they went with guns; it is true.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe you move too quickly. The minister had just started explaining that he held a workshop, and then you jumped on him - I do not know. Let him enumerate what he has done and then you say –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister has firmly stated that government has restrained RDCs from indulging in partisan politics. If that is so, how come that recently I went to Masaka at the invitation of the residents of Masaka, and with the permission of the Police but I was refused permission to talk about the federo system indoors? Let him explain –(Interjections)- by the RDC of Masaka; it is on record.  

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I think your ruling is very wise indeed. Members should give me time to say what I have to say because I do believe that what they are raising is not only what has already been discussed or raised by colleagues, but I also intend to address those concerns. 

I was about to say that not only have we held a workshop and gone through the kind of things we would want to see RDCs do that would bring dignity to the Office of the President, but we have also in the case of for example the RDC of Bugiri, instructed the Police to undertake investigations; those are underway. You may wish to know, Madam Speaker, that we had reshuffles recently. Also, of course from time to time we have written circulars, reminding them that they have the responsibility to the people of Uganda as a whole, not to particular sections of people at the expense of others. So, it is a matter of concern to us that the conduct of RDCs must be impeccable and must be non-partisan. I urge you honourable members that in the event you find some of them not behaving the way they are expected to, please let us know.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of qualifications, which has been raised from time to time, the qualifications of RDCs, their experiences and duties will be rationalized and clarified in the Constitutional Review report, which will be submitted to Parliament shortly. So, I am expecting that my colleagues’ input will be quite strong and will be taken seriously.

On the question of pornography, I want to agree that this country is facing a new pandemic; a pandemic that threatens the moral foundation of our country. I am calling for a robust response from all of us so that we nip this pandemic, which is beginning to rear its ugly head on the face of our land, in the bud. I was rather surprised when hon. Musumba did say what she said. Only yesterday she was the Chairperson of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee, and she must be in the know about the kind of things we are trying to do in order to stem this tide that we are beginning to witness every other day in our land. 

It is not fair for hon. Musumba to say that a gentleman called Frank Tumwebaze - who happens to be the Presidential Assistant for Research and Information and actually writes not only in that paper she mentioned but also the Monitor and the New Vision - and he writes in his personal capacity and not as a Presidential Assistant for Research and Information. It is wrong, therefore, for hon. Musumba to say that the Presidency is promoting pornography when we are in the frontline of efforts to stem the tide so that our country is free of pornography. 

Let me point out, Madam Speaker, that it is actually true –(Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I have listened to the minister trying to categorize an honourable member for her statement and to condemn her in that respect. It is very rare to distinguish between a person acting in official capacity and in private capacity and it is very clear - really I do not know how the minister perceives this! This is not only about one writing in a pornographic tabloid, but look across the country in respect to the office he is talking about. We have demeaned the Office of the President and State House in very respective manners. The officials of State House do not regard their stature and basically some of them, like the one he is mentioning, are civil servants. 

Most of them – you count them. For instance Moses Byaruhanga presides over political functions where he is not supposed to be and yet he is a civil servant. Madam Speaker, look at the spectrum around you: you have the President having several principal private secretaries; we do not know who is the substantive one in that capacity. Look at it. At one time it is Fox Odoi writing as PPS; then it is Hussein Kashilingi directing the DPP on a matter; and when we look again, we know it is Joan Magezi. As you know, the position of the PPS is that of a civil service job but that person, we are not told who is substantively holding it after Joan Magezi holding it for more than two years or three years now. 

I want to point it out to the minister that he should check his own wardrobe and instead of really writing in tabloids - the other day I was reading a highly regarded magazine, the New African magazine of August-September 2004, 432nd edition; it is highly regarded. Instead of the State House officials promoting the image of the President, he is lowly regarded to the point of being No. 42 among the greatest Africans, yet we held him in high esteem. Close to him is former President Obote in No. 46, and he is taken as the founder of the nation. 

Can State House project itself in portraying a positive image to the President other than in engaging in mudslinging, writing in pornographic tabloids and such kind of mess that degrades the Presidency and State House? I rest my case, Madam Speaker.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify to me, because he singled out just one personality, from all officials of President’s Office and State House. But I wonder whether we are not institutionalizing pornography because on various occasions beauty pageants have been organized and ministers, and the Vice-President, have officiated at these occasions. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether you have had chance to watch whatever is going on in these contests, but it is the highest provocative occasion where people - actually it is nudity. The highest nature of nudity is exercised and our high-ranking officials are there. I want to get a clarification on whether we are not institutionalizing pornography.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want my neighbour, the honourable member on the Floor, to clarify to me what is pornographic of a well-organized decent beauty pageant?

MR LULE MAWIYA: Madam Speaker, I think it was yesterday in the papers, in a bid to find who is going to be queen or Miss Uganda, when actually a girl stripped naked on the catwalk. It was in the papers yesterday, you can read the papers.  

CAPT. MATOVU: Madam Speaker, I want your indulgence and guidance on this debate on pornography. I understand we have a sub-committee probing pornography. Are we not pre-empting that report; since we are even time bound in discussing the Budget? Why can we not solve that, wait for the committee and now discuss and really have a way forward on pornography? I beg to suggest.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I know that that report will be brought to this House, the committee  also talked about it. The difficulty I have, hon. Minister of Information, is that on a number of occasions in this House the Government has been accused of owning the Red Pepper, but this has been denied many times. Today an honourable member has said somebody who works in the President’s Office is a regular contributor to this paper. So, can you please tell us where we stand? Where does government stand on this matter of the Red Pepper?

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, the contributions by my colleagues do confirm the need for us to have a policy on pornography. The definition of what pornography is, is one that is causing a bit of difficulty particularly in courts of law and the Police. Right now there is a committee, which I have established, to prepare a policy on pornography and that will bring out all issues concerned with not only definition but what really constitutes pornography and what does not. The point I was making is –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, we should respect this House because it is an honourable House. An elaborate question has been put to the Government to explain whether they own a paper that is practicing pornography, and we need an elaborate answer without deviations. Is it in order for the minister to come here and meander over a straightforward question instead of giving us an elaborate answer? (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, what is the position?

MR NSABA BUTURO: Well, Madam Speaker, with due respect to my colleagues, it does appear that some of my colleagues are determined that I do not make any contribution at all because each time I stand up -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. You see, honourable minister these matters come up so many times. Can you tell us where the Government stands on the issue of the Red Pepper and we get that out of the way and then you can do your policy?  

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I will be direct with that question. The truth is that government has nothing to do whatsoever with what goes on at the Red Pepper. I know it has been said over and over again that government uses the Red Pepper to undermine or discredit some of its opponents, and that is not true. We have no intention of walking that route. It is also not true that government can stop an individual who wishes to publish in whichever media there is.  

Certainly, I make this clear to honourable members that we do not as government, take pride in the direction that our country is taking, namely that pornography, homosexuality and all those immoral actions should blind our land. The determination we have -(Interjections)- the determination we have is to have a law that adequately deals with pornography. As I was about to say to honourable members, a policy is underway and once that policy is finalized, I intend to present to Cabinet a paper on pornography. That paper will find its way to this House and I am looking forward to it so that we have this matter made very clear indeed.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, can I get clarification? The hon. Minister of information, who was dropped in the reshuffle by the Red Pepper, is not really telling us the truth. How does he differentiate; where do the boundaries of officers working in President’s Office end and where do they start in  being correspondents of the Red Pepper? He should be very specific because these are officers of government and their correspondence to the Red Pepper, where does it end, and where does it start?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Further to what my honourable colleague has just asked, I would like to know from the minister who by coincidence is a substantive Minister for Information and therefore, he should know the following: before you print a daily paper in this country, the directors, the owners, the capital, the place of printing must be known to the Government. Over and above that, a paper, which is acquiring some high level of notoriety in terms of pornography, should be known to the honourable minister.  

Third tier of my question, Madam Speaker, the minister while appearing before the committee, which has produced the report we are debating, at one time assured us - I am a member of that committee – he assured us that he is going to take disciplinary measure against errant officers in State House that we have just mentioned. Is he in order -(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, since this morning we have been heading for a crisis in terms of time and the whole nation is anxious to get this business out of the way. It is a pity that hon. Aggrey Awori, who has clearly heard the Minister of State for Information say he has nothing whatsoever to do with the stupid paper - is he in order to continuously make this House go back to the issue of the Red Pepper when the Minister in charge of Information has clearly said that he really has nothing to do with it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori was reporting on proceedings of a committee, which I did not attend. I do not know what they discussed in their committee. He says they were in a committee meeting and the minister undertook to punish people. I was not there in the committee so I do not know what they discussed.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague interrupted me but I do not think he was following what I was talking about. (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You talked about a committee meeting, is it not?

MR AWORI: Yes, I was telling him and I was telling the august House that what transpired in our committee and the prior questions, were legitimate. The honourable minister must tell this august House, in his official capacity he is supposed to be armed with information regarding registration of the paper: who are the directors, the ownership, editorial and so forth? For that matter, a paper to which a member of State House subscribes and writes for is definitely a matter of concern. These people are on public resources and we as custodians of the morals of the nation. We have a right to seek for this information from the Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please tie up these loose ends and give us an answer, and we move on to other –(Interruption)

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I want to assure honourable members that the concern they are expressing is the same that government has. Certainly, we have no intention whatsoever to first of all use the Red Pepper to undermine our opponents.

Secondly, we do not approve of the pornography that is found in the Red Pepper. As I did say, we have found that the existing laws are totally inadequate. Each time we take the measures halfway, the courts of law say, “Look, there is no sufficient provision for us to deal adequately with allegations that you are making concerning pornography”. Can I assure honourable members that given time, when this policy does come before the House and we are working together we are going to deal decisively against those who are trading in pornography, those who are promoting homosexuality and those other ills that members are not happy with?

As regards the ownership and so on of the Red Pepper, I can give that information at a later stage. I did not come with it. But, Madam Speaker, there should be no doubt that government does not approve of it whatsoever. We are concerned, as a matter of fact that some interests are beginning to blight the face of our country through immorality, pornography and homosexuality.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you my colleague. I think what should worry this House is the reception of the Red Pepper. It was a weekly, it has now become a daily; and it means that it is selling. This is what you should be worried about more than anything else. Is our society receiving this junk so easily and so profusely? That should be the worry. If you are telling government to stop it, yes, that I can understand. But I am also worried about the reception of the paper.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Given what hon. Kabwegyere has said, is it true that government is subsidizing or funding the paper?

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, if honourable members could be patient, I really want to promise that when the paper we are putting together does come before the House, we will receive their co-operation and together I am sure we will deal decisively with those who are promoting pornography.  

Can I now move on to the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity? Let me point out first of all that the loopholes, which members have pointed out that are found in the Leadership Code, do emanate from the Constitution itself. Government plans to harmonize the amendments to the Constitution and the law to answer the concerns of the Constitutional Court and other gaps that are existing. Therefore, I beg the indulgence of honourable members, as well as patience, so that when those amendments are brought before the House, certainly the support of the House would be very valuable. We are aware, as much as honourable members are, that gaps do exist but an opportunity is coming when the White Paper and the Constitutional Review Commission report, which is in the custody of members, are discussed in a few weeks’ time.  

On the strategy of publicizing the Ethics and Integrity Directorate, I wish to inform you that this financial year we will start the exercise of publicizing the activities of the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity. There are a number of areas there that as I have mentioned need amendment, and these will be shortly presented before the House.  

There was a point raised that we should consider publicizing government achievements in the fight against corruption. This is a welcome suggestion and I want to assure honourable members that we will be keen to do that. But we should caution members that the task of fighting against corruption should not be left to government alone. It is the responsibility of all of us and I am proud to note that some of our colleagues are particularly keen on seeing that corruption disappears. I do hope that collectively we shall win the battle against corruption.  

Madam Speaker, comments were made on our security organs: Presidential Guard Brigade (PGB), ISO and ESO. I want to say that they were positive comments, which I certainly welcome and again I appreciate the work of the committee and honourable members who have made their views known. 

The issue of training is one that I could not agree with more. Certainly, training in the area of intelligence gathering and in the area of discipline, these are matters that are already being addressed. The last time the committee met with my ministry we did extensively deal with those issues. Since then efforts are now underway to make sure that the level of discipline, the level of intelligence, all these are adequately addressed.  

Can I observe, Madam Speaker, that hon. Sebaggala’s comments on the Presidential Guard Brigade are welcome and I wish to commend him for those comments because that is the direction we are taking, that is, to have a professional security force that is second to none in performance. I, therefore, welcome the concerns that members have expressed. 

There was an issue on how we treat VIPs and the need for more equipment, the need for more vehicles for the President and so on and so forth. Certainly these are our concerns as well but I am glad to report to you that the ministry is attending to these and next time we I am sure the situation will have greatly improved. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of civil servants who flout civil service regulations, again this is one issue we are taking seriously. We do not approve of the abuse that may happen from time to time. As a matter of fact we have already talked to those officers as being referred to, and we believe the situation would be much better. I again appeal to my colleagues to continue pointing out areas they think are unsatisfactory and we shall always oblige.  

On the issue of the pledges, Madam Speaker, I wish to observe that we have three types of pledges: those that have to go to individuals, institutions, as well as group pledges. There is a committee right now set up in the Presidency to work out ways of retiring these pledges. The concern honourable members have is one that we do have as well and we are progressively encouraging reduction in the number of pledges that remain unpaid.  

There was a suggestion that there should be a cash fund but I do not believe this is particularly a good idea. The President has proper items in the Budget from which donations can be made. So, we are doing well. There is a lot of discipline, Madam Speaker, on the issue of how much the President should pledge and that discipline is contributing to the kind of reduction that is encouraging and we believe next time we meet here the issue will not be as big as it is now. 

On the Uganda AIDS Commission, a number of concerns were raised and I just want to remind members in a general way that if you look at the Hansards of 2003, this House did discuss extensively the issue of the location of the Uganda AIDS Commission. The decision then in this House was that the Uganda AIDS Commission was located in the right place. I wish to remind members that the Uganda AIDS Commission or the nature of HIV/AIDS is that it is no longer what we used to think it was in those days when the country was beginning to experience this pandemic. 

Progressively we have come to recognize that HIV/AIDS is a matter that concerns all sectors. Therefore, it was not proper that it should be within the Ministry of Health but it should be in the Presidency that co-ordinates, that has that road picture of government programmes across the country. So, the decision of this House and the decision of government was that it should continue being in the Office of the President.  

The matter of housing the Uganda AIDS Commission again was thoroughly discussed by this Parliament and so I just wish to remind honourable members that it is not a new issue. Funds have been allocated, they are not enough funds but work is going on. I am glad to say, Madam Speaker, that those funds that were allocated are doing a commendable job. We shall need more but as resources certainly allow, we will be coming to you when they are finished. 

An honourable member did say that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be involved in the work of the Uganda AIDS Commission wherever possible. The example of that involvement is that the Foreign Affairs Ministry was actually involved in the preparation of the Bangkok Conference and officials from the ministry did accompany His Excellency the President to Bangkok.  

Madam Speaker, there was concern about training of the AIDS counselors and I wish to report now that this matter is being taken up with the Ministry of Health, who are responsible for human health manpower development.  

Finally, on the issue of Uganda AIDS Commission, there is what we know as the Bush Fund. The matter of providing information as to how to access these funds was discussed in the President’s fund to fight AIDS. There is now an advisory committee chaired by the Rt hon. Kintu Musoke and we are preparing a press release to inform Ugandans on how these funds can be accessed.  

The issue of the Vice-President’s official residence, this is a policy matter under Public Service. All I can say now is that Public Service is going ahead to address this matter that is important and concerning His Excellency the Vice-President. 

On the operationalisation of the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, on a number of occasions I have discussed this matter with the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee. Let me make this categorically clear that government has no intention whatsoever of privatising this public service broadcaster. There is no country in the world that privatises its public service broadcaster. If Uganda were to be the first I think we would have a lot of explaining to do because such a move would have considerable, negative impact on our own security as a nation. Our national interests cannot be properly defended if we were to privatise this public service broadcaster. So, I want to assure honourable members that we have no intention whatsoever of privatising the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, when it comes into being. 

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the minister because he says we cannot privatise broadcasting in Uganda yet that is already what is happening in practice. The FM radio stations of private companies are the ones on air. As I told you, in the northern part of Mukono that is Wakisi, Nyenga, Najembe and Njeru, we neither receive Radio Uganda nor these other radio stations, but it is just the FM stations of Busoga like NBS, Kiira Radio; and these are private companies. We do not get any communication from the national radios. So, it would be better if they privatised these radios so that it can also be empowered like the other private radios and then we get the information from the center. 

Otherwise, much as we are in Buganda/Central region, all our children are now learning the anthem of Busoga, they just listen to Busoga news and Busoga information; we are not linked to the Central region. So, why maintain this Radio Uganda, which cannot reach some of our areas? I would like to get that clarification as to whether the minister is aware that some of our regions cannot access the information from the Central region.
 
MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Perhaps the minister can clarify to us, most of the vehicles, about 90 percent of them, their maximum frequency modulation is 90. So, you can imagine all the taxi drivers, all their conductors, all their passengers during daytime, plus those who are redundant near vehicles, cannot get any information from government because the frequent modulation for the Government radio stations is above 90. So, I want him to clarify on that.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. During last year and this year, Radio Uganda has had programmes to which they invite the chairpersons of committees and we have interacted with the public. We have received calls from all over Uganda during these programmes. I hope my colleagues are also here, who have gone to be guests during these programmes. People call in from all over Uganda. I just wanted to give this information that as much as some people do not listen to it - and in my car I only have AM stations, I listen to Radio Uganda AM 909. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought you were going to help the debate or help the minister or the wanainchi.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wanted to mention to my colleagues that all these concerns were effectively aired to the Directorate of Information and it was agreed that the solution to this problem would be if the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation were established. Then we shall be able to have all the funding and capitation to be able to solve the problems of Kenya Television being heard in Tororo, the waves of Busoga being in Mukono, and so on and so forth.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And you have recommended as such?

MRS ZZIWA: I want to assure honourable members that that is what we demanded for, and I want to repeat it to the minister that let this Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Bill be brought before the House. It is now about three to four years since he started promising to bring this Bill here. It is what has delayed the whole process, otherwise all these problems will not end if we do not have that Bill in place.

And to add to that, the sector has been liberalized. It has not been privatised but liberalised and the Uganda Broadcasting Agency is the organization, which is going to regularize that sector in terms of who should do what and who does it properly or erroneously. I just wanted to give that information to honourable members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the chairperson has given guidance because they have already made a very strong recommendation about the solution to the children of Mukono speaking Lusoga - which is okay, because we are neighbours - and people getting stuck to the 90 FM. The chairperson has given us guidance. When did you say you would be bringing that Bill, Mr Minister?

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, the problem now is that I am being preempted so much. The example is the chairperson who has said what I was going to say next.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has assisted you actually.

MR NSABA BUTURO: I cannot agree with her more that all these concerns members have will be addressed as soon as the corporation is in place; and the draft Bill is ready. My concern is whether this honourable House will have time to study the Bill. Otherwise, it is about to come to the House and once the corporation is in place, Madam Speaker, I want to assure this House that all these problems members are concerned about will end. 

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, just before my honourable colleague winds up, I am beginning to wonder whether the lacking factor is capital per say, or the formation of the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. From time to time for the last one year I have been expressing concern that this august House, Parliament, is part and parcel of the holistic state. Our deliberations here are very important; people must know what is going on. We are entering a stage when we are going to be discussing serious matters of constitutional nature. I have been asking my honourable colleague in the committee, when do you start broadcasting Parliamentary proceedings live? It is very simple technology. I can help you at less than US $40,000. When can you do it?  

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, all I can say on the issue raised by hon. Awori is that on information to the effect that honourable members would want to see the proceedings of this House aired, Parliament itself did write to us saying that it would purchase its own equipment and my ministry would be responsible for helping in installing that equipment. That is the official response I can give. Parliament did say that they would purchase the equipment and then we can come in to install it. We are waiting for Parliament –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that is not the position. You are supposed to provide the vans to come here and do the transmission from here. You are supposed to provide the vans. We have got the rest of the equipment here.

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, that is not the information I have. The information I have was that the Clerk to Parliament would purchase Parliament’s equipment and –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am the Speaker and I am telling you what the position is. 

MR NSABA BUTURO: What I can do, Madam Speaker, on that one is go back and liaise with the office so that we move quickly on that matter.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, once again any Parliamentarian should be cognizant of the fact that once the Speaker is on the Floor, nobody else stands up to interrupt him or her. The Rt hon. Speaker was telling you the position of Parliament on a matter of live broadcasting and you interrupted her. Is it in order for any person in this august House, minister or backbencher, to interrupt the Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, our rules are clear. When the Speaker is speaking nobody else should speak. Proceed.  

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I have no intention of disabusing the law and instructions, so I oblige. Can I proceed as I wind up, by giving an assurance to honourable members yet again that when the Bill does finally come to this House hopefully shortly, the support will be forthcoming. Once the corporation is in place, all these concerns members do have will be addressed. 

What is happening right now is that really there is a problem and engineers are everyday improvising in all sorts of things, and it is not the right way the public service broadcaster should be treated. So, the transmitter equipment at Kololo for example, has been down for the last few days, and many parts of the country have not been receiving any news at all.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. The matter related to the coverage of the deliberations of this House is of national concern because a number of people we represent can use that opportunity to interact with what we do here. Noting that information today is a third generation fundamental right, people have a right to access knowledge and information. And following the research I have done, several television stations, including WBS, have already expressed interest in covering live sessions of Parliament. Is the honourable minister in order to publicly confuse us and deceive us that there are no interested parties in taking up the challenge? I have my research data.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I do not think he said there are no interested parties. He said he is going to continue with consultations.

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. That is really what I said. Can I move on quickly to private radio stations? Really, the fact that we have the Uganda Broadcasting Policy in place, which is designed to clean up the confusion that has existed within the broadcasting industry for a number of years; the private radio stations are actually using government facilities. It is not that we do not regard them positively, we certainly do. We are working together everyday and the policy statement, which will be coming here, is intended to give them additional support so they can be more efficient as well as effective.  

There is also a structure for the planning exercise, which is about to be completed. It is intended to bring harmony within the industry so that the private radio stations that we have can function much better. We have categorized private radio stations into three: community radio stations, commercial radio stations and the public service broadcaster. We intend to make sure that there is fair treatment within the industry, which will not affect the public service broadcaster at the expense of the private radio stations.  

We have the Uganda Broadcasting Council, which is working hand in hand the with Uganda Communications Commission to overcome the interferences that some members are –(Interruptions)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is about Kioga Veritas Radio station in Soroti. Last year I remember very well this radio station was closed, it is a private station, owned by the Catholic Church. The equipment was taken from this radio station and in this House the minister promised to bring a report about that. But up to today the report has not come.

Two, the equipment, which was taken from this radio station, has never been returned to the radio station. Can we get it from you when this will be done?

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I am learning of this for the first time and I thought that matter was resolved months ago. But if the honourable member has information that could be useful, I welcome it. Our intention is not to interfere in the work of the private radio stations. We think they are doing a great deal towards good governance in our country and as I did say, we are actually working together and very well too. So, the honourable member can give that information and I will quickly address the issue.  

I was about to say, Madam Speaker, that the kind of interferences that members have reported are being addressed by the Uganda Broadcasting Council and the Uganda Communications Commission working together to ensure that those interferences do not take place.  

Under the normal circumstances, I want to observe, these two councils need to be one. The work that the Uganda Communications Commission does ordinarily should be the work of the Uganda Broadcasting Council. But as it is, we have two laws and maybe time will come when we will harmonize this so that we have one body dealing with all issues of frequency allocation and licensing.

Madam Speaker, what hon. Musumba did say, I was again surprised because not so long ago hon. Musumba was the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs and she should know or she knows more than many of us know that there is no duplication at all as she explained. The department of monitoring and evaluation is under the Directorate of Economic Monitoring, and hon. Omwony Ojok heads it. We have a department there, which deals with monitoring and evaluation but within the Directorate of Information we also have a department, which deals with monitoring and inspection. So, these are two separate departments dealing with different issues and there is no duplication whatsoever.

The Cabinet Secretariat, Madam Speaker, again the hon. Musumba knows more that many of us do that the secretariat is responsible for preparation of policy issues, which are put on government agenda; whereas the Office of the Prime Minister is responsible for co-ordination of government programmes. So, there is no duplication there as well. These are well-understood functions that the Cabinet Secretariat and the Office of the Prime Minister do undertake.

If I may finish, Madam Speaker, on the question of His Excellency the Vice-President’s official residence, my ministry and that of Works, Housing and Communications are preparing a Cabinet paper, which will shortly be submitted to Cabinet. So I can inform honourable members that we are giving options for operationalizing the programme of government departments having their own accommodation for ministries.

After the Cabinet, the Government will give direction and the House will be informed accordingly. Madam Speaker, those were many of the issues –(Interruptions)

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, there is one point before he winds up, which was raised in the appendix. As you can see, the Office of the President got a total of around Shs 35 billion compared to the Shs 37 billion of last year. I am raising this matter to look at it in comparison with State House, which has in this financial year got Shs 65 billion as compared to last year’s Shs 44 billion. The point I want to draw the attention of the minister to is that we are increasingly marginalising the Office of the President yet this is supposed to be operational.

And we are well aware that we have ISO, ESO, RDCs, presidential advisors, political assistants and all that. Madam Speaker, why are we marginalising the Office of the President at the expense of State House? Could the Minister of Finance here in conjunction with the responsible minister try to allay fears of this House on why this trend is moving in this direction? I can assure you that for most of the year utilities at the Office of the President have been cut off, say telephones for most of the officers concerned, and this is increasing despite their increasing responsibilities. As we speak now we cannot settle the arrears of the ISO officers and they are now in court; they are not being catered for here. These are the results of the budgetary inadequacies, which the minister could address before we proceed to any other matter.  

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has just told us that on the issue of the Vice-President’s residence, a Cabinet paper is being prepared. I do not remember which financial year it was but there was money that was included in the Budget for the construction of the Vice-President’s residence. Was that money put in the Budget without the Cabinet paper the minister is referring to? Is this something new? I want that clarification; or is he just trying to use words to confuse this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The small difficulty I have with the hon. Member for Lwemiyanga’s contribution is that the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs has examined these budgets and made recommendations to the effect that we do the needful. Could the chairperson explain to us the perspective of hon. Ssekikubo’s question?

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The committee also, if you can look at page 14 under the general observations, has a feeling - in fact it was not a feeling but an expression by the Budget Committee in this House that State House continues to be the greatest consumer of the Budget. One of the reasons, which were stated, I think in the expression of discipline within the Budget, is that we should as a committee look at ways of improving on the expenditure within that sector. 

Like I mentioned on page 15, we had an opportunity to discuss at length with the State House comptroller why his budget is seen as ever increasing contrary to the wishes of the other sectors. If I could put it this way, he asserted that his sector is actually not really increasing but that the recurrent budget has even been decreasing. I apologize that I had wanted to extract figures for the last three financial years but I was only able to get the previous year’s, and that is appendix 1. He mentioned that what has been showing the growth within that sector is the capital expenditure, mainly because of State House re-development.

Another very big item is the helicopter purchase. We have recommended that let those items be in their domicile, or put where they should be. Let the re-development of State House be taken to the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications in order to give a true picture of this sector. Otherwise, if you look at their recurrent expenditure, last year’s was even bigger than this year’s provision. Last year it was Shs 27,398,087,000; this year it is Shs 24,105,104,900 and it reflects a growth decrease of negative 12 percent. So, I want to bring that forth to the House that this concern has been shared by the committee and the recommendation we have carried needs to be studied by the Ministry of Finance to ensure that this concern - because I know State House falls within the public administration sector, which is always criticized as being a very big consumer of the Budget. In order to have a true reflection, let this one go to its domicile. I wanted to give that information, Madam Speaker. 

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, there is an issue he raised - the Minister who answered on behalf of the Presidency - on the housing of the Vice-President. We are getting different signals from the Government. The Ministry of Public Service tells us they have Makindye State Lodge, only that money for preliminary works has not been provided. But the Minister in Charge of the Presidency is talking of some Cabinet paper. What is all this confusion? What should this Parliament take? Should we take the position of the Ministry of Public Service, should we take the position of the Minister in charge of the Presidency, what should we take as Parliament?  

4.54
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to dispel the impression that government is not concerned about housing the Vice-President. 

Secondly, I would like the honourable members who are talking about the renovation of Makindye State Lodge to take a few minutes, go to Makindye and tell us which buildings you want us to renovate. If anybody tells you he wants to renovate Makindye State Lodge, he is telling you half-truths -(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, the statement that has just been made by the Chairman of the Committee for Local Government and Public Service was given to us by none other than the Minister for Public Service. No Member of Parliament is arguing for the renovation of Makindye State Lodge. It is government, through the Minister of Current Affairs, who stated to us that the Government was ready to renovate Makindye State Lodge for usage of the Vice-President. Is the honourable minister is order to attribute that statement to any Member of Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Public Service told us this week, I think yesterday, that he is looking at Makindye State Lodge with a view of preparing it for the Vice-President.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, the Office of the Prime Minister coordinates what happens in government and I happen to be the minister who was charged with that. Therefore, if anybody told you he was going to renovate Makindye, I can suggest that he must have been mean on the truth because – (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) – can I be allowed to finish what I am saying. I physically went to Makindye, by the way honourable members, I had never been to Makindye. I was so shocked – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of order.

PROF. KAGONYERA: But how often do we have points of order from, hon. Lukyamuzi, who does not want others to participate in debating? How does he expect me, every time I stand up, to be out of order? No, Madam Speaker, you must protect government.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. The statement which has been quoted by hon. Ben Wacha attributed to the Minister of Public Service is also a statement of the deputy Prime Minister. So, what is the honourable Minister in charge of General Duties saying? Does he not know that the hon. Kajura is a Third Deputy Prime Minister and if he does not, should he continue being in government? Is he in order to make such allegations, which he does not understand?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, a very senior Member of Cabinet, when I asked yesterday said that he is looking at Makindye. He is a Minister responsible for Public Service. He was here yesterday. Now, how can I understand the workings of government to know that actually there are other ministers who are coordinating? Prime ministers, what is the position on the question of the House of the Vice President? Is it Makindye or are you still thinking? Give us your final position for the Hansard.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Ordinarily the ministry mandated to handle this matter is Public Service but as you know, I coordinate these ministries. Honourable Prof. Kagonyera helps me a lot to harmonize different positions of the ministries. What I would like to promise here is that, this matter will be harmonized. (Laughter) Further, we shall institutionalise harmonisation of this matter, but there is no cause for alarm because this has been an outstanding matter and it involves security and many other considerations. So, these different groups try to tackle it including security. I shall continue harmonising.

MR WACHA: Am I to take it, Madam Speaker, that the Prime Minister is telling us that the Minister in charge of General Duties in his Office has told this House nothing?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I did not say that. (Laughter).

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, for the benefit of this House, I wanted to mention that last year – I have last year’s report here – the issue of housing for the Vice President was so crucial and it was highly discussed.  At that level it was a concern that His Excellency, the Vice President operates in his personal residence both in terms of doing his official duties and other duties. It was at that juncture that a recommendation was made that official residence should be found, and I want to mention that that time there was a wish that money should be found to do some of those houses or state lodges, which are seen as Government’s but not properly utilised for purposes of housing the Vice President. 

The Committee had actually recommended then that this accommodation of the Vice President should be moved from Public Service. Matters related to the funding of the Vice President’s official residence must be provided for by the State House Vote and not the Ministry of Public Service. It was under that discussion that the minister undertook on this Floor of the House – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which minister?

MRS ZZIWA: The Minister in charge of the Presidency. That this issue will be discussed by Cabinet or a Cabinet sub-committee to have a proper report on it. In fact, when we were discussing the issues concerning the Vice President, we did not report on it because he said they were not yet ready. So, we said let us give it some time until it gets ready.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are you really saying that the Minister of Public Service had no authority to say what he said here concerning that house?

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, I am saying maybe he is the one now authorised in the Cabinet. I do not know that could have been the sub-committee.

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Zziwa for giving way. When hon. Sekikubo raised the issue of the budget of State House, hon. Zziwa stood up and said that a lot of money that is budgeted for goes for capital development and that some of these things should go to the respective ministries. But at the same time you are saying that it should leave Public Service and then come to State House. I am failing to understand this.  

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, this was last year’s report; this is what it had recommended. The minister finally decided that let this matter be taken to Cabinet and be dealt with at that Cabinet level. So, that is what transpired. I was giving this information in view of what has been said because definitely the issue of Makindye state lodge was mentioned in the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs. I remember hon. Aggrey Awori, proposing very strongly that instead of the Vice President operating in Kakiri or his place let that premise be renovated. It was mentioned but later on it was proposed that the Cabinet undertakes this responsibility and reports accordingly.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us conclude this matter this way. Since no provision has been made by anybody, no one has provided for the Vice President neither Public Service nor Presidency it is just in limbo. So, let us leave this matter of the Vice President’s house until October.

In the morning I did direct that the Committee on Government Assurances should peruse all the resolutions, the undertakings, the recommendations and in October we shall have two days to discuss with the Government on what has been done and not been done and why. When you say that this is a recommendation of last year, it is not; it is a recommendation from the Sixth Parliament. So, we are going to evaluate all those and then I think we shall find a solution for next financial year because now nobody has the money for the Vice President’s house.  

MS AKWERO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Some remarks were made about ten minutes ago about you protecting Government. I do not know, because I have sat here in fear and dismay because as you preside over this debate, at what point do you protect Government? At what point do we protect the so-called opposition in court? Madam Speaker, allay my fears lest I run away from this House.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can you substantiate?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, in fact we have been wondering because when hon. Ken Lukyamuzi raised a point of order, hon. Kagonyera, did shout to the top of his voice that, “ Madam Speaker, you must defend the Government” as if you are not impartial in this House. So, we do not want to leave this unchallenged. In fact he must withdraw.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I understand the minister was feeling overwhelmed by the points of order coming from hon. Lukyamuzi directed at him. I think that was his problem. But you see, when I am here I am a Speaker for everybody for the Government, for the backbench and for the people of Uganda.  (Applause)

Now, there was a matter you were jumping over, that is the question of office accommodation. The question of office accommodation did not come out; the question of rent vis-à-vis ownership of Government accommodation.  

MR OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for your guidance and how the session is going on. I am just rising on a point of procedure because I have been made to understand that after the Budget, Parliament might go for recess even if it is right or not. I rise on the point of honourable Minister Mike Mukula. Madam Speaker, such issues have not given even freedom to the minister to be at large in the House. I do not know if the report could be fastened so that we can know his fate because those who have been involved in fraudulent activities like Kasulu are in Luzira. So, what message would we pass to the peasants if two people doing the same thing are in different places? I beg for your guidance on his papers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we agreed and the Minister of Education undertook that on or about the 15th October, he will come here with the report concerning our colleague. So, I do not want to pre-empt it. Can you wound up on office accommodation, rent vis-à-vis ownership?

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your ruling. I am sure by October we will be having a very clear position on the subject of His Excellency, the Vice President’s residence.  

On office accommodation, Madam Speaker, I had said that the Office of the President in conjunction with that of the Minister for Works, Housing and Communications is preparing a Cabinet paper, which will soon be submitted to Cabinet next month. And Cabinet is giving options of operationalising a BOOT (Build Own and Operate and Transfer) project.  After Cabinet, Government will give direction on how to operationalise this project. Finally –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, suffer me the indulgence of interrupting my honourable colleague on the matter of office accommodation. Yesterday, I vigorously expressed concern on the matter of accommodation for His Excellency, the President and the Vice President in this North Wing of Parliament Buildings. I would like again to convey the same concern to the Leader of Government Business that in terms of security, it is very unsafe, very insecure of the President, the Vice President and then twenty metres away, number three the Speaker, and then ten metres away the Deputy Speaker to be in the same building. It is not wise at all, and I would like to tell them right now that President should cease coming to this building while the Vice President is using it as his office.  

MR NSABA BUTURO: Well, Madam Speaker, those concerns raised by hon. Aggrey Awori are welcome, and we are giving the matter due attention.

Finally, let me make one correction, Madam Speaker, which is the impression created in the report by the chairperson that the Vice President is relatively idle. On the contrary, the Vice President is very busy; his performance and schedule and activities are well articulated on page 67 to 72 of the policy statement. Let me thank you, Madam Speaker, for the time you have allowed us to discuss.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This afternoon, His Excellency, the President wanted to consult me on a different matter and by coincidence, His Excellency, the Vice President was there. So, I raised this matter. I said that some Members of Parliament are concerned that you are not giving sufficient work to your deputy. So, we discussed this matter and I would like to answer this question as follows:

One; under Article 112 of our Constitution, the Vice President chairs Cabinet in the absence of the President, and of course in the absence of the Vice President I do. And in many cases the Vice President chairs Cabinet and that is a very major job. So, for those of you who thought that he merely deputizes generally under Article 108, you must be aware of Article 112. May I also add that the Vice President does not feel redundant at all and if you think so, you should also consult him. He does not feel redundant because he has been assigned a lot of jobs by His Excellency, the President. 

Furthermore, he could even decide, if necessary, to make him also a minister say of Agriculture - that is up to him. So, your concern was raised to the affected groups and I want to assure you that they are having a harmonious relationship and that there is no cause for alarm. I thank you.

MR NSABA BUTURO:  Madam Speaker, I wanted to end on a note of appreciation to the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs for the wonderful work and for a fact that they have been working with my ministry in a very constructive way. I also want to thank honourable members for the time they have spent discussing the budget. And to you, Madam Speaker, thank you for your time we just want to promise that next time round, we will be able to report positively on those areas we may not have had time to attend to. I thank you.

5.16
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members of the House.  Instead of thanking you at the end, I will really thank you right from the beginning that we are very appreciative of the manner in which you have conducted business of this House. Also we want to thank the Members for even at times appearing to go a little bit too far because as a former teacher, if you do not go far you do not get the truth out.  So, when we have these exchanges, they are absolutely necessary for us to do our job and as far as we are concerned there is absolutely no hard feelings. So, I thank the Members.  I also want to thank the Chairperson of the Committee and her committee for doing an excellent job. The report they wrote is really a good synopsis of what transpired when we met the committee. It makes easy reading and I think it is a good document.  

Now, I want to make a few comments because everything is straightforward. I can see there is an honourable Member shaking his head; it is his business. Now, I want to thank the committee for one recommendation in particular, and that is the formalisation of questions in the name of Prime Minister’s question time because, very often, we may not be able to satisfy Members’ requirements in form of information when there are too many impromptu questions raised. If really these questions will be answered properly to the satisfaction, not only of the Member who asks the question but every Member of Parliament and even our country at large, We would want to have proper time for us to answer these questions. So, it is a very good recommendation, which I am sure we will receive with both hands. Madam Speaker, can I be protected against hon. Aggrey Awori?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You are protected.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Now, the Office of the Prime Minister handles coordination and monitoring of Government policies and projects and programmes.  Now, it is a very difficult job and hon. Awori does not know it I am sure.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to make his explanation.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, honourable members, this is a former presidential candidate. So, we are trying to develop it to the extent as I said last time – no, I was telling Cabinet that, what we are aiming at doing is to be able to develop documentation both in print like this and also electronically so that even Members of Parliament whenever they have something they would like to know about project X, Y and Z, programme (B) and so forth, you just go to your computer terminal and call these files and be able to read for yourself what is happening in the Government. That is what we are trying to do. We want to computerize the Government as much as we possibly can so that Members have ready and easy access to what goes on in the Government, to the extent that you might not even need to ask questions because the information is there for you to pick and I am laying these documents on this Table. 

We will be attempting to print this book so that every Member of the House gets a copy of it, and this is a document about the same subject called, “The National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy” and we will attempt to answer questions how value added, why, what and so forth. And I am putting this one also on the Table and we will be attempting to provide Members with as much information about this coordination as we possibly can.

Now, Madam Speaker, I know the job of handling Northern Uganda is of concern to Members not only in this House, but also to the rest of the country because that part of Uganda has had a very unfortunate history and, therefore, everybody is concerned about it. But I would like to thank the committee and the House in advance for appreciating the fact that the Minister in charge of Northern Uganda, hon. Grace Akello, has done everything possible to do a good job to the extent that, even today she is not in the House to respond to some of the questions raised because she had programmed a meeting of many stakeholders in Gulu. We agreed that it would not be wise for us to disappoint those people, therefore, she went and that is why I am responding to some of these issues on her behalf. If, however, there will be any questions that are not satisfactorily answered, there will be a time for her to be able to explain these questions. We welcome every possible criticism, information, that will improve our performance with regard to Northern Uganda.

Honourable members know that NUSAF is a component of the activities in Northern Uganda. In fact, it is a World Bank project and it is only a part of the job of the Minister in charge of Northern Uganda.

Now there are few questions that some Members raised. One of them, and I am not going to respond very comprehensively because of time. Now, some Members and probably even in the document, it is suggested that we leave the choice of projects totally to the communities. Now, this one is not quite correct. 

As I had said earlier on, Madam Speaker, communities are encouraged to generate ideas. After these ideas are generated then our facilitators work with them to develop reasonable projects. And as I had said, part of this project is to develop people’s minds and knowledge, and that is why we even insist it is educational. We say you bring the ideas, we sit down think about them and then we help write the project. So, that is what happens.  But if anybody knows where our staff have, by commission or omission, left to the people themselves to do this, then we would like to know and we will deal with them harshly.  

Now, I had forgotten to apologise to my sister, hon. Baba Diri. What I was saying had nothing to do with pornography. I was talking about these projects up there, and I was saying that since she has very efficient way of identifying those problems, we obviously will want to benefit from that and we work together to be able to correct the anomalies. Perhaps suffice it to say, Madam Speaker, that – Hon. Aggrey Awori, I want to assure you that I still have a bit of grey matter in my top.  

Now, I have a document which is called, “Status of Funding Sub-projects” in that region, and I wanted to say that there are vulnerable groups support projects, which are mainly income-generating that have been dealt with, and these ones total to 423 projects. These projects are largely connected to income-generating activities. We have dealt with 1,057 community development initiative based projects -(Interruption)

MRS OKOT SANTA: Thank you very much, honourable Minister, for giving way. I want to get a clarification on the issue of the vulnerable groups because as far as NUSAF is concerned, and I believe the concern of hon. Baba Diri is correct, is that the vulnerable groups the youth, the women, the widows, the orphans and the aged are supposed to make their proposals and pass them through an organisation in order to make them acquire these funds. So, I want to find out, why is it that they should take that long stretched instead of requesting for the money directly, whether it is an income-generating or not? And that is why the people with disabilities are left out because some of these NGOs are doing their projects in the different districts. So, why should they go through organisations to do the implementation for them?  That is what I want to get the clarification on.

PROF. KAGONYERA: I hope that honourable members will appreciate that it becomes unwieldy for us to deal with organisations that are really not organised. So, the challenge is on all of us to make sure that whether people are women, youth and other groups, we really must organise them.  

First of all, there will always be the need for accountability. As I told Members before, we had problems with previous projects, Madam Speaker, and we were very disappointed when in fact people who were supposed to take care of the interest of the people, they are the ones who abused them. At one time, I was in charge of restocking and I went to a certain place and I saw runts purportedly of the bovine species that were being bought for Shs 300,000 plus. And this thing is given to a helpless lady, she wastes all her time trying to feed it and it can never grow up. Certainly it will never produce! And it is these experiences that make us sometimes appear to be too rigid in an effort to protect our people. So, this rigidity is not out of fun, it is because we want to do everything we can to protect our people. And all the intentions are that this money must reach the end users.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, the problem of Hon. Baba Diri is that in your planning you deal with the able-bodied people and then everybody forgets that there are women who cannot see, men and women who cannot walk. So, you get carried away with the able-bodied. So, do you have an officer specifically in charge of the vulnerable groups?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable Members for raising these issues. What I can promise this House on my honour, I am going to charge my officers who are in charge of monitoring to go after this information, and within about one month we will report back to this House on specific cases that the honourable members are talking about. As of now, there is no way I can speak for what is happening in the field. But since we have got this information, we are going to investigate and this is the purpose of debating, bringing out anomalies. We will investigate and as I have said, where things have gone wrong we will correct them.

MRS BABA DIRI: I disagree with what the minister is saying. First of all, people with disabilities are well organised right from the national level to the district level. They have their organisations there and they can also form their own committee to access this money. Then also he is alleging that all the money, which has been misused or misdirected, was by people with disabilities, which is wrong. There are able-bodied people who have been misusing this money. We have never accessed this money for your information, Mr Minister.  

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I just want to agree with the Prime Minister by giving my experience with the Youth Entandikwa Scheme (YES). This programme was put in place and many of the youth that accessed this money could not bring it back and it failed. At the beginning, it were the youth to identify the people to train and get this money, but afterwards, Government came in and they said we want intermediaries. Now, this is where we got also another problem. 

That is why I want to inform the Prime Minister because the intermediaries that were put there for them their purpose is to get profits. At that time a youth was supposed to pay Shs 50,000 in order to access the training that was a prerequisite for getting this money. Some intermediaries trained over 400 youth; actually in the whole country it is 4000 plus that were trained, but only 1700 youth accessed this money all the other 4000 paid and never got this money.  

Secondly, some of these intermediaries were identified at district levels and some of them are brief case organisations. They are left in the hands of the districts to identify and they have never - actually, in many districts of the central region the recover rate is so low. So, as the Prime Minister designs mechanisms of using organisations, the organisations must be authentic and they must not exploit the intended beneficiaries. I thank you so much.

MRS BALEMEZI: I would also like to inform the Office of the Prime Minister that in some cases there are some people who work in the President’s Officer or Vice President’s Officer who are given money to go and just identify their own people without getting in touch with the leadership of the area. They hand pick on a few people saying they are empowering them to get them out of poverty, and there is no monitoring no feedback to find out how this money is spent, and then you find people crowding around few people whom they imagine have some links or connections to those officers. I would like to be informed by the Prime Minister, how they even identify these people who have to handout money to those identified people in our areas without even informing us as people who have to come and give a feedback in the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the minister can now respond.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Just a small matter, Madam Speaker, but I think it is very important. On top of what my honourable sister has raised, it is true that the procedure put up by NUSAF is quite complicated but I think it is also expensive. These facilitators you are talking about, these other people not NUSAF facilitators - you know, if I want to run a programme with my people we have to look for somebody to help us run a programme, we pay some money for it. Now, this money is not available on the ground and it is quite expensive and you are not sure whether you are going to be approved or not. This is the question really as she has pointed out. So, many people are unwilling to get somebody who can help them to write this project properly. 

I think we have to look at this, Madam Speaker. You are actually right; I think the Prime Minister has not put his mind on the issue of the vulnerable group. I was in the office of NUSAF in Kampala yesterday, I was asking for what they call interest form. This is the form to express your interest to do whatever you want to do. Now, I was given the general interest form for other people able-bodied people like us, but there was no interest form for the vulnerable groups. This tells you that in fact this is not an important group because if they thought so I thought this would be the first group to have the forms because they are the most vulnerable of our society. So, I think it is true, honourable Minister, you have to re-focus your mind on these matters if this thing could be corrected.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I am happy that the minister says that he is going to investigate and come back to this House with some specific answers.  But I want to tell you, honourable Minister, through you, Madam Speaker, that the problem with NUSAF is that the local people might fail to access the money because of the technicalities involved.  The whole of last week I was in one of my sub-counties doing nothing expect NUSAF work. But, I was so shocked with the sort of things that they required of a local person. For example, how do you expect those local people there to sit down and write minutes of a meeting? They are required to write minutes of a meeting of elections; some of them can hardly write. How do you expect a local person there to look around for a lady who can write in order to be a treasurer? In one village we looked around, but we could not find one lady who could write and, therefore, we ended up without a treasurer.  

Madam Speaker, these are very serious matters because without that, you cannot access the money and there are so many small details that you are required to fill. Look! I had to spend my own money, about one million, in order to get these people to fill these things because, I was moving around with the officers and without that you are wasting your time honourable Minister.

MS ERIYO: Madam Speaker, I know that the matters of NUSAF are very serious and indeed it is very difficult for the local communities in certain instances to meet the requirements of NUSAF; but there are free to use the facilitators who have been trained. In each sub-county there are at least two facilitators who have been trained. Where they cannot write they are free to use the services of these facilitators. So, I want to give this information to my colleagues.

MR WACHA: I am very happy that madam has given me that information; I was not going to say this if she had not raised it. The problem with those facilitators is that they are getting money from these local people to write the project. It is very serious they are actually getting rich on expense of these local people and you are saying they are facilitators? What sort of rubbish!

MS AKWERO: Madam Speaker, I too was in the constituency last week with hon. Hillary Onek and I should say hon. Onek on his own photocopied about 400 sets of forms to be given on his own. And as of now, I am supposed to produce over 1000 other sets of forms to be filled by these applicants. It is true general enthusiasm has been created in the population, but even accessing these forms you need money for photocopying these forms. 

We know that there are sub-county facilitators but they are only two. Sometimes it is difficult because they do not access money immediately or payment immediately they have to depend on the one per cent payment. Given the fact that the project has to be approved until the group gets money so even the facilitators are not motivated. The NUSAF project itself is so good everybody is excited but then the procedure is a drawback. I wish something could be done. 

On the issue of forms, I had thought I should not really spend my personal money even the President had advised us that something to do with development, which is being done by Government, we do not spend a penny. So, I will not photocopy these papers I will just take a pick-up to the NUSAF office and I get the forms.

MRS AMONGIN APORU: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the colleagues for all the concerns that they have raised. But, I want to say that the Minister of State for Northern Uganda organised a workshop for all the Members of Parliament hailing from the 18 districts under the NUSAF region, and if all the Members of Parliament had come, we would not be raising these issues on the Floor of the House. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know, I did not attend that meeting. Let her inform us House what happened in that meeting.  

MRS APORU: Madam Speaker, all the Members of Parliament from the 18 districts were invited to that meeting. Out of the 78, I remember we were I think 27 who attended. The minister laboured to explain to us the Members of Parliament who hail from this region. Every district has got a NUSAF officer, who has been trained, and the minister went ahead to say, “Whenever you are in a district and you want to work in your constituency on issues of NUSAF, to mobilize for NUSAF, do not go on your own. Remember to contact the NUSAF officer, go with him down to your constituency.” 

Madam Speaker, there is a lot of information, posters, the eleven steps that are supposed to be followed. You do not need to be educated, you do not need to write there is just a form. These forms are in thousands in the districts and they are supposed to be free of charge, they are from the Office of the Prime Minister. Secondly, the minister requested –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I am very aware that of all the 18 districts, the honourable minister comes from Kumi district, and as we speak now, not even a single person has accessed NUSAF money in Kumi District. Is it in order for the minister to come and lecture to us what has not happened in her own home?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I am not able to rule on that point because I do not know whether Kumi has not received NUSAF money.  Chairperson, can you tell us where the money is?

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, I am not going to inform you where the money is, the Prime Minister is here he will let you know. But I want to tell you and to inform the honourable members that the minister actually, before the policy statement was laid before the committee, specifically requested for particular time with the committee and with Members who come from that region, and we had a very lengthy discussion and many of these issues – (Interjection)- yes, of course they were not so many. I think they were about eight or 12, if I remember my observation very well. It meant that Members had not yet picked a lot of interest in this issue. 

What we may have to demand is that, now that Members have made further observations, they have gone to their constituencies and they have realised that maybe some of these areas of concern need redress, we may request the honourable Minister to again organize another meeting. It may not necessarily be a workshop because it may be expensive, but maybe a meeting and these issues expressed here and maybe anywhere else are addressed. I am just requesting because I think it is important. The red tape has been expressed that it is so long, and some of those other issues. I do not think that we have the capacity in here to shorten the red tape. It can only shorten within the policy arrangement, within the framework of the ministry. 

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, I am very sorry, but I am quite disappointed with the comments of the minister. It is true we had a meeting, I was one of those who attended the meeting – and let me inform you that in that meeting these issues, which are being raised now and observed were actually raised by us. We talked about the funds not being enough, we talked about so many things. We were still talking about the same thing and the minister gave the impression that these issues have never been raised by us; we have raised them. In fact for me the issue is not calling another meeting or workshop here, for us Members of Parliament we know what the problems are and they know we know the problems. The issue is the ministry concerned taking steps to address those problems, make forms available, make all these things done.  

I was in my constituency; before I left I was told every sub-county had 5000 entrance forms. When I went I was told that there was only one and everybody who was interested would go with money and photostat.  So, it is wrong to come and give us here a wrong impression that we have not told you about the problems. I hope the minister is going to take this thing very seriously and work and make sure it is sorted out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, have you yourself examined the form? What do you say about its bureaucracy its complexity? Have you actually examined these forms?

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, we met with the minister we did not have the opportunity to look at those forms except that she came with a few of the visual aids like posters and all that. But at that juncture we were just interested in understanding the procedures in detail, and I think that is what she did at that meeting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, is what you have to say going to be different, is yours successful?

MR YEKKO: Yes, it is a very important issue. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am getting worried because if some of the original districts have not yet started getting funds, I do not know when Kapchorwa and Sironko, which have joined this year, will ever get funds. So, I need that clarification. Should we chase for it or we just sit until maybe Kumi gets it. Thank you very much.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. If I can start with the honourable Member from Kapchorwa’s concern, really it does not matter when you start, what is important is the rate at which we implement the project. So, you can be sure if the people are ready to work and they comply, within a very short time you will have access to this money. There will be absolutely no problem.   

Now, Madam Speaker and honourable members, there was an opportunity I had to traverse most of Northern Uganda. There are probably very few constituencies in this region that I have not visited in regard to finance. I went to the remotest areas and people were benefiting from borrowing micro-finance money. In other words, it is not quite correct to say that you will go to an area and it is impossible for people to comply with a few requirements. 

The honourable members and this country have a choice to make. Either we attempt to modernize or we have a serious problem. There is no way we are going to allow money to be expended in a manner that it cannot be accounted for, and for me I would like to know from my colleagues anybody who has been selling these forms, we shall go through the proper procedures to have them dismissed. What we do not like, Madam Speaker, are allegations. It will not be fair for people to lose their jobs on rumours, but if they are facts, they will lose their jobs. 

Now, Madam Speaker, you know we have to have systems that operate. First of all, the communities are the ones who say we want to work with the organization X, Y and Z and we will vet these organizations, as you know they are so many of them in this country that are totally unreliable and we have dealt with them under the micro-finance projects that we had. So many of them took money and never returned it. Therefore, we have to be strict. We have no change, Madam Speaker, in this country money is a perishable commodity and if we do not account for it, I can guarantee there will be no growth in this country.  People will take it, drink and you name it. So, we would like this money to be used in a recoverable manner, which in itself is a sign of growth. So, we would like to appeal to all Members of this House to join us in making sure that we are accountable. As people you cannot go on in a laissez faire manner and expect to develop. 

Now, these community based organisations NGOs, if anybody knows that they have misbehaved, we shall deal with them. I am sure everybody knows how resolute the Prime Minister is in dealing with people who –(Interruptions)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the Minister in charge of General Duties, Prime Minister’s Office, I would like to be clarified on two issues: One, the persons who have been given as technical advisors to the people are not paid salary and they get money on a certain percentage on the project that has succeeded. Given that in some constituencies, no project has succeeded, I would like to get clarified, will those people be motivated to work any more? If there is only one project that has succeeded, will the person be motivated to work?  

Two, we have been informed that the NUSAF money is not like Entandikwa. With Entandikwa, it was supposed to be refunded, and we have been informed that NUSAF is a kind of grant and the Prime Minister is informing us that this money should be recovered. I would like to get clarified, is NUSAF a loan or a grant?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, NUSAF has got many components. Some of them, if we were developing say, putting up a classroom, that money will not be recovered. But if you have a project for making money, then that money it is common practice, you pay back so that the money can revolve and reach many people and also that you are accountable. So, some of the money is grant money, some of it is revolving fund that must be recovered. 

But let me finish this by saying this, Madam Speaker. Since these honourable members have raised concerns, we are going to arrange once again for a meeting, and we shall call Members of Parliament so that you all come, we sit even if it is for the whole weekend, we thrush out these contradictions so that by the end of that everybody is satisfied that we are all on board and we are going to work together. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, there is no way we are going to respond to each and every concern in the limited time you have at your disposal.

MS AKWERO: Thank you, honourable Minister for giving way. I am of the view that even if you are calling Members of Parliament for this meeting, the district officials and even others who are implementing, we should not hold the meeting here in Kampala, let us take the meeting in the region and you get to know what is happening.

Secondly, there is a misconception as if we do not know the value of NUSAF. Let me just assure this House that NUSAF as a project, has been wholly embraced by the people, and I should commend the Minister of State in charge of Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme. She went round, generated interest in the people and I should say now that there is overwhelming interest. That is why we cry for these forms, that is why people have to pick these forms and photocopy them using their own money. But there are times when these old women, disadvantaged groups do not even have a coin to photocopy these papers. So, when we raise concerns about these forms, it is not that we are really in a way despising or not commending what the NUSAF ministry or Prime Minister’s Office is doing.  

At least in your response, you could have said, “Honourable members of Parliament, as a short term measure, our office will avail you forms and you take home before you meet us.”  First avail us the forms, we run with them to the constituencies tomorrow and then after wards arrange the meeting with the district leadership.

MR MAWIYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I have liked the way hon. Professor has taken charge especially to the matters to do with accountability. Madam Speaker, Luweero Triangle Fund is related to NUSAF. Yes, because the committee observed here strongly that the Luweero Triangle has not done anything significant in areas under its jurisdiction. So, as the minister takes to meet everybody and discuss this, the Luweero issue also must be handled. I thank you.

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable Minister for giving way. I see he is winding up and I was the first to speak about the Rwenzori region. What efforts is Government putting in place to ensure that the Rwenzori region also benefits the same way other people have benefited who have been in areas, which are have had those problems.  They call us Luwero Triangle, but I do not want us to be called Luwero Triangle because we have not seen what Luwero Triangle has made in our region.  So, I want Rwenzori Region programme whereby our people will benefit like other people have been facilitated by these programmes.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I can see the debate is once again becoming more and more interesting.  Are these not some of the issues for which, Madam Speaker, you undertook to set aside, is it a day or two, for the general debate so that members can satisfy themselves instead of bringing them here in the middle of debating the budget?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I undertook to provide additional days to deal with these matters, but if the minister has an immediate answer –(Interruption)

MS OKOT SANTA: I wanted the Minister to give us a clarification because you have talked about so many components in NUSAF, which are going to bring more worries to the people, because at home there majority of the people there know it as a grant.  The community has sat down, for instance, and they have written a proposal for a water point; they have put there a borehole.  Who is going to pay back this money?

Now, he has also talked about income generating activities.  We want to know how much fund is in NUSAF, which is for a loan and then another one, which is for a grant?  This must be clarified so that we go and tell our people that the money is a loan so that either we take it or we do not take it because some of us may fail to pay the loan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, how quickly can you organize this meeting?

 PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, I think this debate has generated a lot of interest, and I am of the view that we can only get to the bottom of all the information that members need at a subsequent meeting to this.  But if I can respond to a few of these issues, my colleague there, I had just exactly said that some of the projects will attract grants, others will be loans depending on the nature of these projects.  The project sponsors will get the – the hon. member should be listening, hon. Santa, is the one who raised this, she is the one I am answering -(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, what the Minister is stating is so fundamental in this project that if it is not carefully handled, it will jeopardize the whole operation of the project.  We were told in no uncertain terms that this project was grounded.  If the minister is not sure, please let him leave it there until such a time that we are given correct information. Let him not jeopardize the project, please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, that is why I asked the Minister how quickly he can organize this meeting so that you all sit down together, the 78 of you, and he explains the components and you understand them.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, I can only communicate this information to hon. Grace Akello with her staff.  They will arrange for this meeting and she will get back to the House.  If I can go on, I have finished with that one -(Interruption)

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much, Professor, for giving way.  I just want to re-echo what hon. Ben Wacha has said.  We have the experience of the Entandikwa Scheme because it was poorly conceived and poorly implemented.  I think they have been able to correct only 30 per cent of the money that was loaned.  In Luweero, UShs 200 million is still with the people.  Now they are saying they are going to be evicted; they are going to be reprimanded because they have failed to pay.  

The same applied to the Non- performing assets programme, that one also it was because it was badly conceived.  So, what experiences or lessons have you learnt from the Entandikwa Scheme, which can be used so that we do not repeat the same mistake.  Otherwise, you are creating a bottomless pit, where money in the Luweero project was sank; we are going to repeat it in the northern region, take it to Budibungyo and it will be an endless problem of just throwing out money without making proper preparations.  Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Have we learnt a lesson from Entandikwa and other projects?  The answer is, yes, because PAP, which came after Entandikwa and it became a micro finance support project, is performing very well.  It is performing very well, if anybody has any doubt about it, move around the country and see what it is doing.  So, yes, the people have learnt a lesson and we can only move forward.

Therefore, we are going to arrange for all stakeholders in NUSAF to get together. I would like to request my Colleagues who have particular expertise in micro finance and social action projects, to even develop papers they are going to present at this meeting.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, hon. Professor for giving way.  Madam Speaker, I am just seeking guidance from the Chair, whether the hon. Minister or the Prime Minister’s Office can organize this meeting for all Members of Parliament because the Prime Minister’s Office is coordinating a number of projects that not only concern the districts in NUSAF, but even Luweero Triangle, the Rwenzori region and then there is also a very serious problem with the micro finance operations and the Entandikwa; all these things.  I am seeking clarification whether the Prime Minister can organize a general meeting for all Members of Parliament such that all these things can come out, other than organizing for only the NUSAF group yet all these other issues are there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A series of meetings?

PROF. KAGONYERA: You have spoken, Madam Speaker, a series of meetings.  I think we must stratify in order to avoid too much confusion; we must avoid ekitobeero by organizing separate meetings.  I am very pleased with the interest members have got in this. By the way, hon. member for youth, that is again part of what we are developing in monitoring activities of Government.  We shall be from time to time inviting you to sit down, we make presentations and then you make inputs so that we can improve on the manner in which we are doing our business. I thank you, Madam Speaker -(Interjection)- I have finished-  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he has finished.  Thank you.

6.09
The FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASRTER PREPAREDNESS & REFUGEES (Rtd Lt Gen Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I stand here to respond to issues raised on disaster.  First, issues were raised by members from the Rwenzori region about the settlement of IDP’s and this had already taken place two years ago.  But there are some ex-combatants who need settlement and these are handled by Ministry of Defence.  On IDP’s elsewhere, we have been attending to them as Government and through NGOs as much as we can.

People of Manjiya had a problem before the two districts were separated. Sironko was separated from Mbale district and land was given to those people under Mbale district.  When Sironko district was created that land again fell in Mbale and the Mbale people were a bit reluctant to part with the land.  That is why the problem has cropped up again.  Otherwise, many people had been settled and they had been given all necessary requirements; without land now we could not do much.

On issue of Government not attending to IDP’s as a result of natural disaster. This is not true.  Because, Madam Speaker, in most of the districts we have district disaster management committee attending to all sorts of disaster and then report to the centre where they handle many other ministries which are involved.  So, we are not choosing what type of disaster to handle, whatever disaster happens we handle them together.  

The concern on IDP policy, I am saying Cabinet had already passed the IDP policy last Wednesday and we are in the process of printing more copies. We shall lay it on the Floor for members to access this information.

On the survey of Nakibale and Orukinga refugee camps in Mbarara district, we are soon starting the process of surveying, but we have to evict some people who had had also fraudulently got some titles before we start.  This also is in process and it involves many people in Government especially the LCs who should be protecting this land were the first to encroach on it.  We will make sure they face the law of the land. 

It has already been reported that Government has created a committee under the Vice President to make the IDP’s productive.  So, those lands surrounding the IDP’s will be ploughed; they will be used to produce and the Vice President’s committee will supervise it.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, we have received a final report on – (Interruption)

MS ALISEMERA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I just wanted to be clarified. The people of Rwenzori region received hoes, pangas, a few jerricans and mugs to go and settle.  Many of these women who are elderly, those who lost their dear ones, the orphans, have failed to continue with school.  I hear in some areas they give them bursary schemes and these young people have managed to continue with education.  Are we going to look at jerricans, saucepans and seeds for a few people and not the whole district of the Rwenzori region?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. minister, what plans have you got for the Rwenzori region?

RTD LT GEN MOSES ALI: I would like to challenge the member from Bundibugyo that this matter of scholarships for districts started long time ago.  I believe it should have been one of your responsibilities to go round and follow what is happening with you in Bundibugyo instead of raising it now when we are talking about resettlement. So, it is not too late- Madam Speaker, I am saying that we shall help the honourable member to follow it up and ensure that Bundibugyo people also benefit from this programme.  

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, in the report of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee, when you go to page 31, there are serious statements, which have been made by the Committee.  It would be prudent for the Prime Minister to comment on them.  For example – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Yiga, I am in charge of who is to speak.  The Prime Minister will speak; let me finish with the other junior ministers.  Let me do my work.

6.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Maj. Tom Butime): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.   I thank you very much for the opportunity to respond to very few issues which were raised by members and in the report.  First of all, it is good to see you in that Chair presiding over this very important committee’s reports having been a minister in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs before you came to that Chair.  

Madam Speaker, on the question of face-lift to properties outside our country, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs plus Cabinet are working together to find a solution at Cabinet level of properties outside Uganda. When the Cabinet has pronounced itself on this matter, Parliament will be informed.  

On the question of visas, countries charging more than what Uganda charges, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is working on this project and we are trying to harmonize visa fees throughout our mission. We are using the principle of reciprocity.  But you will remember that we were charging less because we had wanted to attract investors.  The situation now has changed and this will be studied, but we shall have to use the principle of reciprocity.

On the question of jobs, it is true that Ugandans have lost out on jobs in United Nations system, Africa Union and OAU before Africa Union. Cabinet did direct the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to produce a list of all Ugandans who are holding international positions and international jobs, how they got them and their contribution to national development.  This was a standing instruction to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs by Cabinet. When that paper is produced there will be modalities of how other Ugandans can now be assisted to get international positions.  

We can now pride ourselves for having Mrs Florence Mugasha as Deputy Secretary General of the Commonwealth.  We hope in two or three days time, we might have Prof. Omaswa being Regional Director of World Health Organization in Brazzaville, but the whole team is there campaigning to have Prof. Omaswa elected to that position.  We are also working for Dr Rwendeire, who is a Managing Director now in United Nation Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), and next year we shall be campaigning for him to become the Executive Director of UNIDO, and the campaign has started.  But you also know that the hon. Winnie Byanyima is now Director of Gender and Social Services for Africa Union; and George Mugumya, who is also a Ugandan, is a Director for peace and security for Africa Union. So, we are moving slowly but systematically. We also have Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Dr Kisamba Mugerwa, who has just left for Addis Ababa and Washington to take up a very important position.

Madam Speaker, on the question of protocols, yes, we are working on all protocols which were ratified by Cabinet, but are needed to be brought here for domestication and very soon will be here.

On the question of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs being marginalized and not receiving enough resources, we are intending to go to Cabinet because all indications are that definitely the Ministry of Foreign Affairs does cause resources to flow into this country. Therefore, it should not be looked at and kept in the public administration sector, but that it should move to the economic services sector. Cabinet will decide – we are preparing a Cabinet paper and we hope that the Rt hon. Prime Minister will help us when we are in Cabinet to make sure that this Ministry of Foreign Affairs gets -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether you are not jumping the protocol. Is handling the international agreements.  Is that what you want to address?

MR MUGAMBE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  He talked of domesticating some international protocols, but I thought we would hear more about the customs union treaty ratification besides the domestication.  When we talked to the Minister of Trade, he informed us that it is the responsibility of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to handle this ratification, which we were told is overdue; and recently we were told the Presidents are working towards a federation.  Thank you.

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, the Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs hinted that there is a Cabinet paper directing the Ministry to look for sweet postings jobs abroad and Kyeyo.  I would like him to come out clearly. Dose he mean he has no policy of marketing Ugandans for job opportunities abroad, including international organizations. Is he saying he has no policy and it is the Cabinet paper, which actually is showing him the way forward?  Is he saying he is not intentionally using his position as a Minister of Foreign Affairs to see that actually we get postings worldwide as a matter of policy?  Could I get clarified about what exactly he was saying? Was he saying that he has no policy and actually depends on the Cabinet memo?  I did not quite understand it, Madam Speaker.  

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to be clarified by the minister.  Is he looking for some of these international jobs left to individuals?  If I spot a job, can I come and lobby the Minister of Foreign Affairs for support, or is there a mechanism in the ministry or a desk to keep monitoring in the world to see if there is a job; and do we have any bio data on Ugandans so that when a job has been cited we look around our data and find out whether we have a person who can compete for that job?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. members, those gadgets are not working – that whole row is not working.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, further clarification.  It is on record that recently Uganda along with other sister nations in East Africa signed the Eastern African Customs Union Charter.  It is also on record that the Government of Uganda gave us an excuse namely, that they were in a hurry and they could not brief the representatives of the people here in Parliament.  Noting that the Charter which was signed greatly impacts on the taxation process in Uganda, including our budgetary system, when is Government giving us an official brief so that we come on board with customs union properly? I am surprised that it is a backbencher requesting the Government to give this explanation. If Government was serious about these issues they would have given an explanation.  I do not know what they are doing.

MR WADRI:  Madam Speaker, when we lost our senior colleague, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, then the Late Wapakabulo, a day when we were giving eulogies, it was resolved by this Parliament that the main entrants to the National Assembly will be re-named in honour of the late Wapakhabulo.  Can we also hear from the minister how far they have gone with that arrangement?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, talking about the duty and other treaties. We have a very experienced negotiator in the name of Ambassador Nathan Irumba.  This diplomat of Ugandan origin and birth at one time was about to be appointed to a senior position in the WTO system but because he had advocated for our interests, the Americans found he was pushing for our interests inimical to their interests and they made it a point to antagonise the rest of the community within WTO not to have him appointed.  To the extent that they even influenced some of our senior colleagues in the Cabinet to down play his grading, they did not even want to see him.  What is the fate of Ambassador Nathan Irumba, the most experienced negotiator on this Continent acknowledged by all African members of WTO? What is happening to Nathan Irumba?  

Two, lately- and I am glad the hon. minister has said we are pushing the candidature of one of our own for the position of Director General of WHO African region.  Madam speaker, last week, our brothers and sisters of SADAC also put up a candidate Dr Samba for the same position. What is the position, can we not talk to Tanzania a prominent member of SADAC, can we not talk to South Africa our brother nation that they drop their candidate and support our candidate.

Last but not least, Madam Speaker, this is a matter pertaining to the appointments Committee of this august House. Six months ago, there was a nomination by the appointing authority for somebody to be appointed an Ambassador. In the wisdom of the committee, we could not pass the name. The name was eventually withdrawn on technical reasons among others; this gentleman still carries a British passport.  Now, Madam Speaker, two days ago, to my horror, I see that the gentleman has been appointed a Deputy Ambassador in charge of AU, among others, and also to negotiate with Kony and other rebels. Today, he is meeting with some of our senior officers in the Government in Nairobi to talk with so-called rebels.  What is going on in Foreign Affairs, in State House and in Parliament?

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think let the minister respond to those questions.  But honourable members, just before the minister speaks, do you know sometimes I get confused because a number of times members here have said, “let people who are not Ugandans get involved in the negotiations”. I have heard that on this Floor, that we want foreigners to get involved in the negotiations. What do we want?  Would we want a solution to the war, are our people going to help us? Anyway minister you answer but you know I am confused about what we want. 
 
MS  MUGERWA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I just want to find out from the minister or from Government whether really Government is supporting the export of our trained personnel from Uganda? Because, like about two weeks ago, there have been reports in newspapers that Uganda has negotiated to export nurses from here to Britain.  I want to find out whether that is a true reporting and why Government has not brought the matter to the House.  I am interested in this because of what is happening in our hospitals.  I have a referral hospital in Masaka, which is catering for about four districts and this referral hospital does not have nurses.  I have my real sister who is a nurse but she is working 24 hours without any relief.  I am trying to find out whether there is a shortage, and if there is shortage in that area, why are we now exporting or trying to export nurses to developed countries.  

Secondly, I would like to report that actually most developed countries have got a lot of our Ugandans, very qualified Ugandans who are under paid, who are not respected because our Government here has not negotiated agreements with those Governments to regularize them so that they are recognised and even their tax comes back here in a formal way.  These people are suffering a lot, but they are very, very well trained, now why are we actually agitating about people here in Uganda instead of caring first for those ones who are already abroad and ensure that actually they have good treatment from the countries that are employing them.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.     

MAJ. BUTIME: Madam Speaker, if a Ugandan gets a job on his own, we support him. Many other Ugandans have got jobs on their own by applying and winning an interview and we support those particular individual. What Government wants to do now is to take specific interest in helping Ugandans acquire or get international jobs. As part of Government, Ministry of Foreign Affairs together with gender have a responsibility to help Ugandans access jobs in the UNC.

About Ambassador Ochwet, this particular individual has not reported to our mission in Addis Ababa.  He is not there and that subject is closed.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The Minister of Foreign Affairs has stated that it is this Government, which is beginning the initiative of encouraging Ugandans in the medical field to go outside and work.  Other Governments did not encourage the process.  Yes, they do not encourage the process because they could not come out in the open to encourage brain drain.  We need the medical resources here; most hospitals do not have medical staff, why should we encourage them to go outside?

MAJ. BUTIME: If I can continue, on the question of –(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, if I heard the minister correctly, but if I did not he should pardon me.  The issue, which was raised by hon. Awori, is an issue which relates to Article 122(1), which reads:” The President may, with the approval of Parliament appoint Ambassadors and Heads of Diplomatic Missions”.  This particular person appeared before us as members of the appointments committee and he was rejected for the reasons, which he has already stated.  I think what we want to know from the minister is, is he an ambassador or not?  

I think this is a simple question, because if he is, this means Government is going behind this House to appoint people who have already been rejected by a committee of this House charged with the responsibility of vetting; and if it is the case, I will request this House not to pass this budget because this is a very serious affront on the authorities and responsibilities of Parliament.  I request the minister to be categorical and tell us that this person has been appointed or not, Madam Speaker.  

MS MUGERWA: Further clarification, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the same matter?

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, I need two clarifications from the minister.  First of all, about the brain drain, the point I raised -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. member, why do you not allow the minister to complete.  He has not even answered; you are now again asking for clarification.  Why do you not let him answer and if he has not answered satisfactorily you can get back?

MS MUGERWA: Because, Madam Speaker, he had already concluded my point.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

MS MUGERWA: He did.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please proceed.

MAJ. BUTIME: Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to supplement the question about ambassadors.  There are people I graduated with, they joined the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as career diplomats, and some of them have never even had an opportunity to head a mission.  In fact, a number of them I know are now deputy heads of mission under political appointees.  Can I know the policy of the ministry with regard to making the ministry and career opportunities for foreign service Officers professional?  

MR AWORI: Further information before the hon. minister clarifies. I want to be specific.  We have one ambassador, Harold Achema, a highly qualified, probably the most experienced career person.  He has been in that ministry for the last 28 years. Why is he still a deputy ambassador to people who cannot speak any foreign language, people who do not know the courtesies of foreign affairs?  Why does he have to be subjected to such bureaucratic cruelty?

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, last year in the report, which we made from the Committee, we had recommended a number of political ambassadors -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee?

MS MUGERWA: I was there last year, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not a member now.

MS MUGERWA: No, I am not.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MS MUGERWA: So, last year we had recommended a number of political and professional ambassadors, and the ministry promised to implement our recommendation.  I am trying to find out whether that was done. I have not seen it coming out in the report.  I wanted also to find out- again following up my concern about the brain drain- whether the ministry is trying to exploit our experts here, because the brain drain aspect is very important in terms of developing countries.  If the minister can take this as a recommendation from Masaka, that Uganda Government should try to make an agreement with the countries that are hosting our nationals so that they are treated properly at their employment and may be a percentage of their taxes can be brought to Uganda formally; and if not, also those ones who are being exported, if they are given a good salary, if they are given good working conditions, I do not think they would opt to go abroad.  They are going out because of the poor conditions that are prevailing, and probably we are just sending them off because of the prevailing conditions.

MAJ. BUTIME: There are some Ugandans, nurses, teachers, who would like to get employment outside the country.  They are free to get that employment; there are very many others in countries like Nigeria, Taiwan, India, and Egypt.  They travel all over the world to get employed, work for five years, get good salaries and they go back to their countries.  Ugandans would also wish to take that advantage, and they have every right to take that advantage.  The question of nurses who were kind of recruited, that matter was handled by an office, and I cannot at this particular time- I do not have sufficient information about that exercise of recruitment of Ugandan nurses to the United Kingdom.

Mr Ochwet is not an ambassador, he is not in Addis Ababa and that is the end of that matter.  Ambassador Irumba, the story about American pressure on the Uganda Government –(Interjection)- exactly, it was concocted; it is not true.  Ambassador Irumba remained in Geneva at his station, his duty has ended; he is back in Uganda pending retirement –(Interjection)- Yes, when you clock 60 years, you retire unless you are on a special appointment.  

The question of the former Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs having this section of the road coming to Parliament, that matter is between Parliament and Ministry of Foreign Affairs and we are pursuing it.  

Dr Samba competing with Prof. Omaswa, Tanzania is supporting Prof. Omaswa and the whole of East Africa is supporting Prof. Omaswa. Although, Dr Samba comes from SADAC part of the regional arrangement, Tanzania a member of SADAC is supporting Prof. Omaswa and campaigning vigorously for him together with Kenya, Uganda and many other friendly African countries. We hope and pray that Prof. Omaswa will be the Regional Director of WHO. 

About the East African Community protocol on the establishment of the Customs Union, cabinet ratified that protocol.  What is pending now is to bring it here for domestication. This is in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and very soon we shall be here for that. Recent instructions are even more strict and urgent and therefore, we are going to move very urgent to bring that East African Community Customs Union protocol here for domestication.  I have answered all the questions. I have a point in –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. members, you know we gave three minutes to each of the members who are contributing now. You want to open the debate.  Please, let us put an end to this matter.

MAJ. BUTIME: Can I finalize, Madam Speaker, I only have two points.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MAJ. BUTIME: On the question of protocol, this was very, very, prominent in the report of the committee –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: let him finish on the protocol of members- protocol of VIPs that is what he is addressing now.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Preciously, in the report of the committee –(Interruption)

MS ERIYO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, I am really perturbed in this House by interruptions coming from members raising points of order or points of clarifications and switching on the microphone even before they are given a chance.  Madam Speaker, is hon. Lukyamuzi in order to interrupt the minister consistently?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I did address you sometime back on the question of the damage you cause to these microphones when you switch off simultaneously. In fact that is why the last floor is dead, we could not use it yesterday and we cannot use it today.  So, you stand up, I will see you, do not switch on the microphone, stand up, I will see everybody. Yes, if I do not see you then I have not seen you –(Laughter).  Now, can you address the question of protocol of the VIPs because my members are inconvenienced? I want to hear about their protocol.

MAJ. BUTIME: Madam Speaker, we have noted that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been doing one part of protocol, the diplomatic protocol. Diplomatic protocol mean, here under the Chief of protocol, a marshal of the diplomatic Corps dealing with appointments, privileges, humanities, appointments between the Presidents and foreign ministers, ambassadors- we have not noted the following, there must be state protocol. In other words, State House itself must have a department with a very senior officer at ambassadorial level, if possible, to be in charge of State House protocol.  Once that is streamlined, State House protocol and the rest will follow easily.  Then we shall come to diplomatic protocol and eventually national protocol.  

National protocol is to create a culture of order, discipline state functions, state funerals, official funerals, national flags, national anthem and order of speeches. You know, you find people fighting over who should speak last and who should speak first? So, really there must be that kind of- it must go down to the sub county level so that even at the sub county level people know when to talk and after who and the sitting arrangement. That is what we are trying to do, Madam speaker. There is no doubt –(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. minister, I have observed my Members of Parliament being rejected from cars one mile away from the function and the people who know them namely; the protocol of Parliament are no where to be seen.  They are just confronted by people who have never seen them and who do not understand protocol. Someone says, “I am an MP,” the fellow has never heard what an MP means. I do not want to encourage my members not to go to such functions.  So, how does the protocol of Parliament fit into your protocol arrangement for the purposes comforting our members?

MAJ. BUTIME: First of all, Madam Speaker, there is order of precedence that one is known and it is clear. Once there is a State function, State House protocol department headed by a senior officer, an ambassador, will work together with- we shall recommend that that kind of person be brought into existence.  State House will have to work together with diplomatic protocol under the Chief of protocol plus the national protocol.  These three people should work together including security of State House because security of State House must listen to the Senior Protocol Chief of State House.  Once that one is clear everything will follow. There is no way a Deputy Speaker can arrive at a function and her bag is subject to checking. All that will be carried out once these three have been harmonised.  These three institutions are non existent today, when they are in existence that kind of problem will end; it will ceases that is what we are trying to do, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, the minister has said he does not yet have the machinery. 

MRS ZZIWA: This is just additional information that this concern was equally shared by the committee when they went to meet His Excellency, the President who was also equally concerned about the mess in which the protocol in this country is.  In fact, I could just bring out one example that he mentioned specifically that it is the presidential convoy which should light that yellow sign. 

On one or two occasions within State House there was a convoy, which is not for the President, which lit the yellow light, and I think he was coming from another direction and he said, “Who is this other one now?”  He ended up by saying that the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should make a vigorous programme to really re-train most of our Officers who really deal directly with all these official programmes and arrangements.  I just wanted to re-echo it; it is a very big concern and I think it should be brought nearer to the priority areas of the ministry.

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, not only are your members - last year at the Heroes’ day celebrations in Kibiito in western Uganda, the full Speaker of this House was made to line up, shoved back, forced into a line until when he finally accessed his place.  Madam Speaker, it is not only happening to you members, but also the third highest-ranking Officer in this country.  You can see how grave the matter is. It was in public view, and people were allowed to stand up in the sunshine for quite long, including the Speaker.  Madam Speaker, it was quite despicable.  

But not only that, I have also seen ministers trembling in the presence of small State House Officials. Your ministers here, Madam Speaker, give Moses Byaruhanga to preside over functions and they stand to his attention and receive him. Ministers! -(Laughter).  Ministers and state ministers speak before him and they stand to his attention as they receive him.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I heard with grief that the minister is trying to streamline the order of protocol. I wondered whether the state machinery has collapsed.  Madam Speaker, since independence we know the protocol, the rules are there; we know who is greater, we know what takes precedent.  But what has been lacking, Madam Speaker, is the mantle of those responsible offices to inseminate information to whoever is concerned because in some cases it is sheer deliberate to belittle a particular group.  I have seen it at rallies - sometimes these days, if you take note, when the President is available, Members of Parliament shy away.  We have been in our districts, Members of Parliament sit behind and the District Chairmen sits with the President. He is the governor; and yet you know that Parliament takes precedence.  So, I want to hear from the minister, is he trying to review this arrangement, which has been there since independence? It is defective?  What is happening?

Madam Speaker, there are two other things that are very disturbing.  I understand that Permanent Secretaries and Under Secretaries have diplomatic passports and their wives. I hear.  Madam Speaker, I also know that on Government missions Members of Parliament have been flying economy when civil servants on the same Government programme are flying in the business class. 

MR OGOLA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I think the interlocutions so far received here concern ordinary operational protocol.  What I would like to add on is actually international relations protocol as well.  In this country, it is very strange that matters that concern relations between two states- statements can emanate from any ministry or from any individual in Government; it is extremely troubling.  

It is true, Madam Speaker, many times we have heard statements being issued by a military spokesperson relating to activities between Uganda, Sudan or Congo. These are matters of State importance.  In most countries where protocol is observed strictly, only the Ministry of Foreign Affairs can make a statement regarding a relationship between one country and another.  

As a matter of fact, in a country like United States, there are only two people who can talk on foreign policy - the United States President and the Secretary of State; all these other ministers cannot.  Indeed even in international negotiations, even if it concerns agriculture, normally the officers who go for negotiation, and certainly the minister who go to those countries are ministers of Foreign Affairs. But here it appears even domestic relations; every Ambassador here walks in any ministry and can come out with an agreement. Where is the protocol in this?  Nothing!  So, the whole thing has been shattered.  

Actually, the responsibility is not even of the junior Officers, the very senior Officer of state has left the issue rampant. Unless this is corrected from the top, whatever it is that we are discussing here is only a concern that will remain here.  We really pray that the State House, the President personally, must call to order some of these things happening in this country. Thank you very much, hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have had now enough about the protocols –(Interjection)- no, but somebody asked about the career diplomats. I hope he is going to answer –(Interjection)- protocol inside Parliament?  

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I happened to be in the Swedish Parliament and in the United Kingdom Parliament for a courtesy. If you look back home, the manner in which protocol is handled within Parliament is also so miserable.  Personally, I have complained several times, but I think it is good if it goes on record.  This concerns the Policemen in this particular Parliament.  There are times when you find people in Parliament lost; yet they have already reached Uganda Parliament.  They even ask you from inside Parliament that, “Where is Parliament?”  It is because the kind of business handled at the entry points is not in any way giving a symbolic image to this particular institution.  

I give a case in point. I came a little late this afternoon and I was hurrying for the sitting. The policemen who were to do their job were still busy counting money among themselves. I do not know if it is a policy for Parliament to domesticate all policemen that they are now used to their work.  Their work is now customized, if it is a Minister, they know they need to give the kind of attention and symbolism he deserves; it is even very cheap to reshuffle the entire system.  

Madam Speaker, the protocol in this institution as far as the Police and the “ministry” under the Sergeant-at-Arms is concerned, if I may call it that; is so miserable. I complained to the chairperson of the Commission, hon. Zziwa, and they said the Sergeant-At-Arms should even be taken for a refresher course to see how activities are handled in other parliaments. 

In Westminster, Madam Speaker, -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let him tell us what happens in Westminster, because some of us have not been there.

MR ODONGA OTTO: When you arrive at Westminster, you know you have gone to a Parliament. Let me just make a simple description. First of all, there is a very big horse almost my height with policemen in white tunics, symbolizing the culture of the country. Each and every legislator entering the Parliament is saluted to remind you that you are going for serious business (Laughter). They make the institution symbolic. But here, we are just walking kwara, kwara, kwara. I think if the attention they give to MPs starts changing right from the gate, even the quality of the debate will change.  

Some people walk as if they are visiting their gardens, the Police are seated, some are reading the Red Pepper, the MP is passing, they do not even stand up for courtesy! I think we should really take concern. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I think that last one is my responsibility with the Parliamentary Commission; we shall handle it.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION (Maj. Tom Butime): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have internalized all the concerns of the hon. Members of this House. The ministry is working on a National Protocol Guideline to govern all aspects of protocol. The draft will be ready in 30 days from today. Aspects of these guidelines will be brought to Parliament; that is point No.1.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that is a government assurance; one month.

MAJ. BUTIME: Yes, that is an assurance.  Point No.2, if you are a minister and you are not sure whether you are a minister or not, really that is your own problem, isn’t it?  If you are a minister, Byaruhanga arrives and you stand up, you will continue standing up, that is your own problem (Laughter). I cannot answer that one, and if you are a Member of Parliament and Byaruhanga arrives and you stand up, that is up to you. 

Actually in the Army, Madam Speaker, if a soldier of a lower rank than you, in uniform, passes by you and you detect that he does not want to salute you, you stop him and tell that “I am a Major, you are a Captain, please salute me”.  If he does not, that is an act of indiscipline, and he will be punished for that. If you are going to stand up because somebody has entered, that is your own - As I have said, we shall streamline protocol and if the decorum has broken down since independence, then we have to revive it, Madam Speaker.  

Diplomatic passports: Madam Speaker, this matter is being –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is burning, hon. Member?  

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is burning because it is very related to protocol and what hon. Otto has just said. In the morning when I was coming here I was shocked, I a very senior staff from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs at the entrance to Parliament with a book waiting for a diplomat to arrive. It gets very crowded at that junction. If the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has requested its staff to wait there, it is going to bring chaos, and it is very embarrassing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where were they waiting?

MS MUGERWA: At the entrance; where the road starts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They were coming here?

MS MUGERWA: I think they were going to the President’s office. A senior staff was waiting at the junction as if she was going to the bank. She was standing there with a book, and she said that she was waiting for visitors. But if we are going to wait for our visitors, it is a one-way road, it gets so crowded, our Police have gone out of compound to outside the parliamentary fence. I felt embarrassed and this is why I am trying to stand up so that maybe we bring out staff back inside. It is gets very crowded and one of the diplomatic vehicles may even get crashed there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not understood; were they coming to Parliament or they were going somewhere else? I have no control over City Council.

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, I am speaking on behalf of Uganda, I am not speaking on behalf of Masaka.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have not understood how that person came to be on which road.  Can you tell us which road and what it was all about? I have not understood.

MS. MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, this morning hon. Awori was telling us that the President, the Vice President, every body is in this building.  Probably this morning the President was here and his protocol was at the Parliamentary road there, waiting for visitors to come in, to go through our Police check.  I felt embarrassed.  If the ministry wants the protocol to wait for the visitors, probably they could agree and they wait from within, but not at the main road there.  I think it is a bit out of the ordinary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can you explain what your staff were doing at the gate?

MAJ. BUTIME: I just want to inform the hon. Member that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has shifted from Embassy House and –(Interruptions)

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, I am speaking on behalf of Uganda and I want us to have a proper image. I am saying that I found a protocol officer with a book waiting for a diplomatic visitor –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Namaggwa, let the Minister explain who was at the gate according to him.  Please, Minister, who was at the gate?

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. Do we honestly expect the Minister to in charge of Foreign Affairs or any other Minister to know where their officers are standing at any point of the day, hon. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Member said that the people said they were going to see the President and they are Foreign Service officers. So the Minister should know who visited the President, what were they doing outside this gate.

MAJ. BUTIME:  I do not know.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information. Previously, people going to President’s office were not being checked. So you Members of Parliament here complained until these people extended downwards such that everybody is subjected to checking. So, if my hon. colleague complains that she was embarrassed, I think anything to do with checking, there is no embarrassment.

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, whatever I am saying is for the good of this country. I am not blaming the ministry, I am just requesting the Minister to ensure that protocol officers waiting on behalf of State House do not wait at the main gate because it is very crowded. I found your staff, hon. Minister, talking to the policemen and she was holding a book, and she told me she was waiting for a vehicle to –(Interjection)- I wish my colleagues could appreciate my experience in Ministry of Foreign Affairs because –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Complete your experience.

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, the ministry usually has gets visiting diplomats and this staff member was waiting where the policemen are. She told me she was waiting for a visitor going to State House and I know she works in State House. What I am saying is, that spot is open for our visitors to stop there. Maybe we could agree so that they wait somewhere inside; it is not secure. They could be searched there. The staff could be inside here, instead of waiting outside at the main road. I think it is too much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, you said you do not have a system; can you incorporate that problem into the system and solve it?

MAJ. BUTIME: Madam Speaker, I have understood it, I apologize for that Officer having been outside there standing with the book; and she is not going to continue standing there. A vehicle will pick those Officers from the ministry and take them directly to that place. So, I appreciate that point.

Madam Speaker, on diplomatic passports, that matter is being reviewed. There are many people carrying diplomatic passports but do not qualify. The matter is being studied and an answer will be found.  People who travel in first class, second class or economy; all I know is that Cabinet decided we should travel by first class, club class, economy.  Ministers are supposed to travel and we do travel club class. The Prime Minister and other people above him travel by first class - Permanent Secretaries and others all have their categories and that is elaborate, everybody knows by what class she or he is supposed to travel. But if a Member of Parliament has got his own dollars and would like to travel by first class, well and good; you cannot be blamed for traveling that way.

Statements about Sudan and other countries: Yes I agree, and we shall improve to make sure that statements being made are made by the appropriate authority. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not the only day you have to deal with this matter. It is not a matter of life and death, please.  Let us ask the NPC to be brief on mass mobilization, and then the Prime Minister will wind up.

7.24
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There were a few points raised and I am going to respond to them directly.

The first point, Madam Speaker, was about what hon. Elijah Okupa called NRM printery, and his concern was whether the money raised from that printery was assisting the Secretariat. Madam Speaker, the Secretariat as organized today has no connection in terms of ownership to any printer in this country.  What is true is that, before the Constitution of 1995 was put in place, the NRM Secretariat then was donated a printery by a friendly political organization abroad and they ran this printery until the new Constitution came in place. Since then the printery was surrendered back to Government in form of a company limited and I have just exchanged some discussion with my colleague, Minister of State for Finance, that now falls under the Ministry of Finance or the Ministry of Trade.  So, there is no way the Secretariat could get money from that source.

The second concern was about claims for payment by some Members of staff at the Secretariat, in specific terms, the mobilisers. The claim, Madam Speaker, amounts to Shs 4.0 billion and I would like to specify to Members of Parliament what these claims relate to.

1 Gratuity: There was a proposal by the National Executive Committee (NEC) that people who work for the Secretariat, whether directors, whether NPC or mobilisers, should get 40 percent as gratuity of their basic salary. NEC could not conclude this matter because it was a financial matter and it was necessary that the Secretariat and the Ministry of Public Service be involved before this matter could be concluded. So, a committee was set up under the Chair of hon. Muruli Mukasa, went through this issue and they recommended that directors upward get gratuity of 40 percent, but other officers get a gratuity of 25 percent. There was an omission in terms of communication, this decision was not formally communicated to the mobilisers, and therefore they kept expecting that their gratuity would be calculated at the rate of 40 percent. So, under this difference they are claiming over Shs 1.0 billion in terms of arrears on gratuity.

2. Medical allowance: The mobilisers were entitled to be given allowances to cover part of their expenses when they are not well.  

3. Transport: The third category was transport when they are appointed, when they move to their stations, when they move on transfer or when they retire. They were also supposed to be assisted with transport to and from the office.

4. The fourth category was what was termed responsibility allowance.

5. Housing.

In regard to medical, transport and housing allowance, there is a contention within the technical people whether these were actually put in the consolidated salary, which they get or they were not put there. In order to clarify this point, the Head of Public Service himself has been chairing meetings attended by the Permanent Secretary at the Secretariat, the Solicitor General and also the Permanent Secretary, Public Service. 

So far they have agreed that these officers are entitled to a housing allowance, a medical allowance as a constant entitlement. Calculations have been made in order to quantify the arrears arising out this conclusion.

However, when it comes to transport and lunch allowance which I did not mention, these have been classified as allowances which are payable on a discretional basis. That is the supervising officer, the PS if in his budget for a particular month or a quarter he has money and he is aware that his officers for example worked over lunch time then he can use his discretion to pay out these payments. But because over the years the item from which these allowances should be paid have not been provided for sufficiently, these allowances have over two years not been paid.  

As far as responsibility allowance is concerned, this has been consolidated into the basic salary and is now being regularly paid. So, where we are Madam Speaker and hon. Members is that the head of the Public Service has now concluded the verification of these claims and there is a figure they have arrived at. The PS at the Secretariat and the Secretary to the Treasury have to agree from where these money will be paid. But as far as discretional allowances are concerned, these are not likely to be paid in arrears.  

There is another category of officers whose salaries were wrongly calculated, these are about 24. They were supposed to be paid at a certain level when consolidation took place but through an error of calculation they were paid less money. This is going to be handled through a regular system of pay change advise from the Secretariat to the Ministry of Public Service.  

There is also a point being raised in some quarters that when a number of cadres were demobilized from the Secretariat that they were not paid their full entitlement. The PS is certain that everybody was paid and he has no evidence that there is anybody who was not paid.

Earlier in the morning hon. Musumba did say that money came from the Ministry of Finance, to pay this allowances and that these money was not passed on. As far as I know, I am not aware of such money, and if it was paid, I am sure that the accounting system and the auditing system will be able to discover that money and whoever may have taken it would have to explain.

The second point raised was the issue of the development budget and the concern that most of this money should be put to NLI at Kyankwanzi.  Precisely, over the years, this has been the practice that whenever we get money for development, we try to improve the facilities at Kyankwanzi. But the honourable members will recall that the year just ended, the budget of the Secretariat was slashed and that part of the budget for development at Kyankwanzi was reallocated - I think - to another sector within the Government.  This year the sector has hardly got Shs 300 million on the side of development. So, the failure to develop Kyankwanzi is because the budget is not enough to make significant developments at Kyankwanzi.  

I also like to inform honourable members that the committee under the chair of hon. Zziwa did raise the same concerns. I did inform the committee that the Committees I have referred to under the chair of the head of Public Service had not yet finalized their job. That when they do, we would be able to report to the chairperson of the committee the conclusion they have reached.  As I have reported this is now over and we intend to write a full report to the Committee for their consideration.  

So, in conclusion I would like to state as follows:

One, that the overall budget of the Secretariat over the two years has been experiencing a reduction. Two years ago the budget was Shs 6.4 billion the current proposal is for Shs 5.4 billion. So in nominal terms, the Secretariat is due to suffer a whole reduction to say nothing about the effect of inflation.  

Two, that the top technical officers of Government and the chair of the head of Public Service have come to the conclusion in verifying the claims of the staff at the Secretariat. They agree that some claims are entitlements but that others can only be paid as and when there is money to do so. As I have said a full report will be going to the committee so that this can form part of their report on the Secretariat. 

Lastly, on mobilization, Madam Speaker, it also goes without saying; it is the money of the viability of budget. Members of Parliament will recall about two years ago we tried to ensure that every constituency gets some little money. With the support of some Members of Parliament we did carry out some Mchakamchaka courses in those constituencies. But subsequent to that, the budget has been getting smaller and smaller and therefore we could not continue with that practice.  

This current year we hope, once this budget is approved, we are going to concentrate on sensitizing the population on the need to open political space, on the need to uphold the recommendation of the National Conference to remove term limit and other resolutions that were passed by the National Conference. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honorable NPC for responding. But I would like him to clarify why this complaint did not come to the attention of the committee through the main channel, if all those steps are being taken to sort out the mobilisers complaint, a standing complaint under his charge? It was a petition from the mobilizers themselves. So, there is a failure internally to process disagreements because for a long time the mobilisers failed to get audience with the NPC. This is why the problem has grown to the point of going to the courts.  

The NPC has given the picture like all is well, and he knows all is not well. Madam Speaker, I have a letter from the unpaid staff stating the opposite of what the NPC is talking about. The lawyers have written to the NPC and the NPC has not responded, which means that he is not paying attention to the issue.  

Meanwhile, the Director for Research, Obiga Kania, has also written to the President pleading that they cannot solve the problem at the Secretariat level. The President should come now and talk to the mobilisers since they are due to have a meeting on 2nd September – the day after tomorrow I think - about this. My concern is really for the Government not to have itself embarrassed because if you cannot pay mobilisers, who are you going to use to mobilize these things you are telling us about? I know the Directors have paid themselves. 

In fact, there is a time they paid themselves in advance. They did! What they have done is actually to share the money amongst Directorates and there is no central control. That is very true, and I have documents to read; I would not have said it if it was not true. 

I want an assurance from the NPC that he is in charge and taking care of this problem; that he is actually solving it, because it did not find itself even in the pre-budget to discussion. It was not there, it came as a petition, and for a long time even the Permanent Secretary failed to meet his commitment when he said he would bring a Certificate from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance, to confirm that this was a public debt; he never brought it at least when I was chairperson.  So, I would like to know from him –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have said that there is a petition. How quickly are you going to conclude that petition so that we can debate that matter here because this is such a specific matter that I do not know how we shall end it.  Who is handling that petition? Where is it?  How can it be in various areas? I want to know; you said there is a petition in this Parliament, can I know which committee has that petition?

MRS MUSUMBA: The petition is with the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs.  

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, the mobilisers did not actually raise a petition, but they were able to talk to Members individually. They had sought to talk to me before we met as a committee with the Movement Secretariat.  Actually, we were able to raise their concerns with the Movement Secretariat and the responses, which were given to us, are properly reflected in the report. We were made to understand that the misunderstanding between the aggregation of what is in the total package of remuneration led to an erroneous calculation of the entitlement, and we were assured that after the process, they will come back to us to give us a report on what has transpired. I think this is what the hon. NPC has re-echoed on this Floor.  

Yesterday, when I was in this Chamber, somebody brought me a petition from Kirembwe. I saw what hon. Salaamu Musumba is talking about, and the main concern in there was that the NPC has not responded to the lawyers who have written to him as per the instructions of their clients. At this juncture I was not willing to take on the NPC on answering the lawyers. I was thinking that at an appropriate time, we would find out why, if he has seen that letter, what is he doing about it? I did not have the intention of bringing it here because I thought he was handling this matter. Even we had wanted him to make an undertaking that within the available amounts when his budget has been approved, that amount can be availed but he said that within Movement Secretariat – Public Service, they would be able to get that money under the special arrangement of gratuity. That is what I can report on this Floor with all sincerity.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, can I appeal to you also to assist my office because now I think those people believe that they have presented a petition, isn’t it?  They believe they have given you a petition and they expect a response. What I am saying is, I think you should guide our citizens on the Rules of Procedure because if there is a petition, I must put it on the Order Paper and ask somebody to move it. But now it is being cited there, I have not seen it.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, there is no petition. I have never seen a petition; I have never been handed a petition. What I have seen is that copy of the letter to the NPC from the lawyers; that is what I have seen.

DR KIYONGA: First, Madam Speaker, I am extremely happy that this time round it is hon. Musumba, who is pleading for the Movement Secretariat; this is extremely good and I thank her.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, our commitment to the Movement will never be in doubt and we are always in the forefront to ensure fair treatment of the people that we supervise. I want to repeat; the words I have said before Parliament are nothing but the truth. 

When it comes to the issue of the letter from the lawyers, I did not think it was necessary to refer to that. It is true that some lawyers wrote to me indicating that they were writing on behalf of some staff in regard to their claims, and they said the intention was to go to court. As usual, the way the lawyers write, they gave me a deadline by which time I should have answered or else they would proceed to court. 

What I did, Madam Speaker, was to write to the Attorney General of the Republic of Uganda, to send to him this document and request him to answer on behalf of the Secretariat.  Subsequent to that, those lawyers wrote back to me and said they would take court action if the mobilisers met us as their supervisors without them, and that according to the law, we could only now talk to our staff as far as this matter is concerned only through them. 

I did not agree with them and I wrote to them. I am surprised that hon. Musumba is so emphatic that we have not replied. When I reply, I do not reply to hon. Musumba. There is a letter I have written to the lawyers under my signature. They wrote to me yesterday, and I replied this morning saying, “I have received your letter. Since according to you, if a client has engaged a lawyer, you can only talk to the lawyer, you now talk to my lawyer, who is the Attorney General” I have certainly answered that letter and I would plead with Members to be modest in your statements. To come here on the Floor of the House in a matter in which you are not directly concerned and you are so emphatic that you have not answered! So if I produce now the evidence that I have answered, what happens?

Madam Speaker, before I can take the information, lastly two points, first, I am aware that the mobilisers have a meeting on the 2nd September and in fact they have invited me to talk to them about this very matter. So that there is a meeting, is no secret.

Lastly, it is true that as I have said, there were some failures for example, as we consolidated payments, the Secretariat was not communicating to the mobilisers about these changes. So they would receive an increased salary and assume that the allowances were still standing by the side and this is what has eventually caused their dissatisfaction. For me, I am satisfied, Madam Speaker, that it is alright for mobilisers to complain, it is also alright for the government to respond appropriately to the head of the Public Service. Mr Mitala himself is chairing the meeting being attended by the Solicitor General, the Permanent Secretary, Public Service, and the Permanent Secretary of the Movement Secretariat. I am therefore, satisfied that we are moving in the right direction and that a resolution will be found.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the Prime Minister -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  

Madam Speaker, I need clarification from the National Political Commissar on two points. One; following the resolutions passed by NEC, at the National Conference Centre, namely that political space be opened, what assurance is the National Political Commissar giving me and the people I represent in Lubaga South that the mass mobilization advocacy will project the conception of political liberalization? 

Two; how does the National Political Commissar allay my fears following the founding of the NRMO political organization that the money we are voting will not be used in development and building of NRMO? I have never seen any mass mobilization of a liberalized nature in Lubaga South. When am I beginning to see it? You must speak in specific terms.

DR KIYONGA: Let me start with that last comment.  Certainly, Madam Speaker, through you, I would like to inform or remind hon. Lukyamuzi that we have been in Lubaga a number of times. I can testify that on one occasion we were with hon. Zziwa who is also a Member of Parliament for that area. So, in terms of reaching out to hon. Lukyamuzi’s area, we have definitely done that.

Now the question of opening political space; this was a resolution of the National Conference, and we are under directive to ensure that this directive is understood. Only this weekend, for example, I was in Arua meeting top political leaders of the districts of Adjuman, Arua, Moyo, Yumbe and Arua itself and Nebbi; and item No.1 on my agenda was to explain this issue of opening political space. We are taking it up very seriously, madam Speaker, because we know that there is resistance in the population. The majority of the population is yet to accept this resolution of opening political space. So, in fact before I went to Arua I was in Mubende meeting leaders in that area, before that I was in Busoga region and I am moving on to other regions to ensure that our people understand the justification for political space. But let me also add for the benefit of hon. Lukyamuzi that the resolutions we are conveying to the people are not only about political space opened, they are also about removing term limit and improving the state of the economy.

Lastly, the point of whether the money being voted by Parliament will not be used for the development of the NRM: I want to assure this House that there is no intention at all for us to act in that manner, and in any case, we remain the supervision of Parliament and the committee concerned. The money will be audited just like any public funds, and if there is any attempt to divert the money, I am sure that punitive action will be taken. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR RUKUTANA: I wish to inform the hon. National Political Commissar that I am a resident of Lubaga south; actually I am a subject of hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, and I have seen mobilization taking place in Lubaga south. Two; that the people of Lubaga south unanimously support the opening of political space.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Point of procedure, Madam Speaker.   

DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what particular area? 
 
MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  On the matter we are debating.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one now?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, we are still in debate because the Prime Minister’s office is responding and I have matters of serious concern.  Madam Speaker, in the report there were some serious matters raised on Luweero Triangle and I have noted with keen interest that the minister concerned has persistently been absent. 

For instance, Madam Speaker, the committee observed that the Ministry for Luweero Triangle has not done anything significant in the areas under its jurisdiction. Madam Speaker, my concern goes to the people who used to camp outside Parliament. The committee, which investigated reported to this House that actually money, which was meant to pay peasants, was paid to some other people who were not originally on the list. 

I am also being made aware that the little money, which we put in the supplementary that was supposed to pay those peasants according to the order, things were changed and the minister is not here to explain. Is it procedurally correct for the minister to continuously be absent when matters of national importance are being raised here on the Floor of Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, I have also noted that that particular Minister is particularly mobile in this Chamber. (Laughter)  What are we going to do with his Sector? Is the Prime Minister going to answer?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was going to speak for an hour, but since you are tired I am going to spend only five minutes. First of all, the Minister should have been here to answer matters concerning Luweero. But as you know, there is always a contingent element, which may not be easy to explain, and natural justice demands that we find out what has occurred to him. 

Indeed, there are many people who should have been here, but who are not here. But he should have been here to explain. What I would like to emphasize here is that he has got a new approach because the focus now is not on Luweero debts, but on developing that area. He has a tomato project, for example, which has been financed. So, I think he is quite imaginative and it is a pity he is not here.  

I take this opportunity to thank all of you for your contribution because you have enhanced good governance.  

Three points; The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is now focusing attention on commercial diplomacy.  Recently, when I was in Japan, I did ask them, “What have you done to promote commercial diplomacy?” They have done a lot because as you know Japan, for example, imports our fish, tobacco and also other things, but they need re-skilling, like all other missions, in order to handle commercial diplomacy efficaciously. They also need requisite resources in order to carry out this very important subject, and I am proud that the missions have done well despite many obstacles they are facing.  

I am very grateful to the chairperson and members of our sessional committee because they have raised excellent points. In particular, I have liked the issue of a Consultative Forum for the Legislature, the Executive and Judiciary because sometimes we do not understand each other, we do not fathom the intricacies concerning our areas of specialization. Some people have been wrongly thinking that if you have to have professional space, then you should not interface with another arm of the state. That is absolutely wrong. In other polities, this kind of forum takes place and it must continue taking place, and I am happy that at least the Executive is part of the Legislature and that interface is continuous.  

Finally, because I am a person of few words, hon. Salaamu Musumba, a great friend of mine, did make a point that public administration should not exceed 15 percent of the total Budget. But she was unhappy and pointed out that many institutions are spending a lot of money on public administration, and she mentioned that the Prime Minister’s Office, I think, spends 60 percent on public administration.  I would like to make a correction. I had written a six-page statement, but I will make it very short.  

It is not true that the Executive Office takes over 60 percent of the ministry’s Budget and leaves only 40 percent for other departments. For example, during the financial year 2003/2004, the Executive Office excluding the provision for the protected items on rent, water, electricity, domestic arrears and telecommunications, the known wage actual expenditure as at 30th June 2004 is a total of Shs 322,585,740 only, and this gives only 30 percent, leaving 70 percent for the rest of the departments. These figures can be verified. 

I wanted also to point out that the 15 percent is not a sacrosanct formula; it can vary depending upon what you would like to achieve. For example, the size of Parliament is large, the size of Cabinet is large, but the purpose is to reduce conflict; and when you reduce conflict, you reduce greater costs, which would incur if you had smaller sizes. So, the percentage of public administration will vary according to the context. 

Let me point out that I am the Chairman of the United Nations Expert on Public Administration, and it is our role to market good management practices.  I thank all of you.

7.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mrs Margaret Zziwa): Thank you very, Madam Speaker. I thank the hon. Members for the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is bothering you, hon. Sekikubo?

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, the gist for insisting on debating this, the committee made a serious recommendation, which they later withdrew, about scraping the Ministry of Luweero; and the very reasons, Madam Speaker, you have just seen them.  The hon. Minister was here and these matters were raised, but he opted to run away. In that respect, Madam Speaker, can we stand over that item?

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I am raising on a point of order. The issue raised by hon. Ssekikubo was addressed before we started reading this report; that it was an omission to recommend that Luwero Triangle should be scrapped.  (Interjection)- It was just an observation by one person.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the issue raised by hon. Rwamirama Bright of –(Interjection)- on page 31; that the Luwero Triangle Ministry has not done anything significant in the areas under its jurisdiction. Madam Speaker, we clarified that it is because of under-funding that this ministry is not performing and it is clear that if this ministry had been given money, all it’s mandate should have been met. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is what the committee observed. The Ministry for Luweero Triangle has not done anything significant in the areas under jurisdiction. The committee recommends that in view of the limited resources envelop the ministry should be scrapped. Now, this was cancelled –(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, when I was presenting the report, I made correction to it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, this is no longer part of the report?

MRS ZZIWA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, I want to repeat it because I read it at the beginning of the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Withdraw what? Do not lobby the chairperson.

MRS ZZIWA: no, no.  Madam Speaker, I mentioned on the Floor of this House that I had corrections on various pages and page 31 was one of those and I think the Hansard will bear me witness. I made a clear –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member –(Interruption)- no, no, honourable members, there are corrections she made at the beginning except they were not on paper; but she said the area she was correcting throughout the report before she presented it. 

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, I even mentioned that those corrections had been carried in another report but by the time we went to the machine, the machine was down we could not have –(Interjection)- Yes, Madam Speaker, I did mention this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the chairperson; she is saying that her report does not contain that recommendation.. 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: But Members have signed.

MRS ZZIWA: And my members even had a discussion on this; hon. Mutuluuza and hon. Kithende are some of them and all the members who signed the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the recommendation is not there, so let us not waste time on it.

MRS ZZIWA:  I read the recommendation, which was carried and I wish to repeat it. That the committee will hold further interactions with stakeholders on the effectiveness of this ministry and will advise the authorities and the House accordingly. That was the recommendation of the committee; the others were observations, and I really stated it.

MR. RWAMIRAMA: The point I raised was the committee observed that the Ministry for Luweero Triangle has not done anything significant in its areas under its jurisdiction. Madam Speaker, is she saying that she has also withdrawn this?

MRS ZZIWA: Can I read it again as a correction? It was also part of the correction. The committee observed that the Ministry of Luweero has not done much in the areas under its jurisdiction. I have it corrected here; you can also print it out in the Hansard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, the fact that it has not done much is something that her committee observed, and it said in this area they have not done anything significant. What I have here is that the Ministry for Luweero Triangle has not done anything significant in the area.  Honourable members, let me adjourn this House to 9.00 O’clock in the morning.

(The House rose at 8.10 p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday, 1 September 2004 at 9 a.m.)

