


PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 5 August 2021

Parliament met at 2.17 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, I informed you that there shall be a short recess to carry out oversight on the Emyooga fund or programme. I will therefore permit a few matters of national importance today so that we concentrate on the items on the Order Paper and finish them before you go for recess. 

In the same vein, I have been requested by hon. Jim Muhwezi to allow him make a personal statement. I will allow him to make a personal statement and then we will go to some matters of national importance. I want to thank you for coming. I know it is not easy to be here daily. 

Members, when you go to monitor the Emyooga programme, I still urge you to do it without fear or favour. That is what will make you come back to this Parliament. Do what is good for your people. Do not let a few people benefit out of the taxpayers’ monies that have been sent down to the ground.

Whoever is culpable must be answerable; nobody is above the law. Let us clean up the people that we are working with. This money should have created an impact but because it has failed, it is you and I to act. I have written to all of you so that nobody asks you in what capacity you are there. I have directed you to go. I want to thank you very much.

2.22
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, before hon. Muhwezi comes to present his personal statement, I would like to take you back down memory lane. 

Hon. Muhwezi undertook to get back to the House with a statement on the attack by rebels on the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) army detach in Zombo. It has taken us quite a bit of time and he has not complied with your directive. The day before yesterday, 14 of the rebels denounced their rebellion against this country and surrendered to UPDF in Zombo. To date, we are still waiting. Before he comes with his personal statement, first things first; he undertook to bring that statement to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muhwezi, do you have that report? 

2.23
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have had this response for the whole week. Hon. Nambeshe must have read; I have been on every Order Paper and I have been prepared to give the response but I had not got the opportunity. 

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I had complied with your directive to give an explanation on the matter raised by hon. Nambeshe. I am trying to find it and deal with it first. Perhaps, since I cannot find it straightaway, could I make my statement as I wait for the statement to be brought here and I make the response, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are they bringing the report?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Yes; here it is. Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, on 22 June – (Interjection)– Yes, it was sent on your iPads. We gave it to the Clerk on 27 July.

Madam Speaker, on 16 July 2021 at around 1530 hrs, a UPDF unit at Zeu in Zombo District repulsed an attempted attack by a group of over 20 criminals who were armed with six AK-47 rifles and machetes, disguising as forest workers. During the attack, UPDF soldiers shot dead six of the attackers, recovered one AK-47 rifle loaded with 11 live ammunitions, bows and arrows, while other suspects escaped to eastern Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) with injuries.

Unfortunately, one UPDF soldier – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the matter that is being raised by the Chief Opposition Whip is not on the Order Paper. Why would we get that report now when it is not on the Order Paper? Can you give us your personal statement?  

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.26
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Much obliged, Madam Speaker. This is a personal statement on the issue of a Russian company called Joint Stock Company Global Security. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to make a statement to this honourable House. 

On a personal level, there have been attempts by some people to drag my name into the procurement of a Russian joint stock company, Global Security. Many people, on social media, have accused me of being behind the company and claiming I had pecuniary interests. 

I have previously been disinclined to engage with sensational assumptions in lieu of truth, research and facts. 

However, given the ubiquitous nature of social media and its ability to spread salacious arguments, I deemed it fit at this time to respond to certain allegations. This is not to evade responsibility but rather to put a halt to the spread of misinformation.

The facts are as follows:

That I had no prior knowledge of this company before I was appointed Minister of Security. In fact, I had no prior knowledge of Government plans to install tracking devices in motor vehicles and motor vehicle number plates beyond what was said by the President on 20 June 2018, after the death of Hon. Lt Col. Ibrahim Abiriga. 

For clarity, the procurement of this company begun four years ago, long before my appointment came in. Government sent a team to conduct due diligence on the aforementioned company in December 2018. 

Over the four years, several meetings were held between the different Government agencies to assess the proposal from the said company. Additionally, several negotiations were held between the Government agencies and the company. 

As a result of these protracted meetings and negotiations, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between Government of Uganda, represented by my predecessor, hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine and the company, on 19 March 2019. 

The attempted assassination on Gen. Katumba Wamala created urgency to have this contract signed so that the motor vehicle tracking system could be installed, which is where I came in. 

Therefore, prior to my swearing in as minister, I received a presidential directive on 13 June 2021 to have the contract which had been pending, signed with haste. 

I wrote to the Permanent Secretary, Office of the President on 24 June 2021 asking him to ensure that all processes are expeditiously finalised –(Interruption) 

MR OSHABE: Madam Speaker, thank you. There is a tendency for ministers to always use the presidential directive as a scapegoat to mistakes they make. The minister has just said that he was working under a presidential directive.

Are we proceeding well when the minister just says it without laying on Table the presidential directive upon which he acted? They are always using it. Can he lay on Table the said presidential directive as it was? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, was the presidential directive verbal or in writing?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Madam Speaker, I do not know how the honourable member would have expected me to lay a directive on Table when I was still submitting. I do not think – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he is making a personal statement.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, while I listened to the minister making a statement, my appreciation was that he is moving under Rule 55 (a) of our Rules of Procedure. To it, a Member may explain a matter of a personal nature but no controversial matter may be brought in the explanation and no debate may arise upon it. 

The honourable minister is purporting to make a statement of personal explanation yet therein he is importing matters relating to a controversial contract. 

I am alive to the fact that there are a number of Members of Parliament, including shadow ministers, who made an attempt to have this matter brought on the Floor of Parliament but it was considered subjudice and, therefore, they were stopped in their tracks. 

The honourable minister is smuggling matters under Rule 55 to try to explain a controversial matter, to which questions are still obtaining with no answers being supplied to that effect. 

Madam Speaker, are we proceeding well when the honourable minister imports matters only privy to him to try and join the House into a controversial decision that we have questions about? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I get to understand from hon. Jim Muhwezi’s presentation is that he is responding to the media attacks on him. The issue of the contract should not be discussed because that would amount to subjudice. There is a case against that contract and so, he can only explain on the attacks to him. 

You will realise that in giving an explanation on the attack, you will not miss the name Russia. He is not defending the contract but giving his personal explanation. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling – (Interruption) 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you. I would like to invite the honourable minister to accept that I am not trying to impeach his right to explain himself. You have that right and I will defend it to the last person. 

The point I am trying to make is that there is no legal bar for the minister to mention Russia but in doing so, he is justifying a matter. That is why he imported in the fact that he was acting under a directive. The directive itself is controversial. 

I would like to invite the honourable member to try and decipher personal explanation and the contractual matters because we deem them controversial; the two must be separated. Otherwise, he is in breach of rule 55 (a).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, give your explanation without talking about the contract because that contract – 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will not refer to any company. In any case, everybody knows what I am talking about. 

I just wanted to explain that contrary to what the media has been awash with, I did not pick this company, like they were talking about, and the country does not stand any loss in any way. I thank you. I have finished. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for the statement. Let us go to matters of national importance. Let us hear from hon. Patrick Nsamba from Kassanda.

2.38
MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am the Member of Parliament representing Kassanda North in Kassanda District and I am the chairperson of the Kassanda Roads Committee.

It is Government policy in this country to procure road equipment for each district. By 2017, many of the old districts received road units. In 2018, 13 new districts were created and they became operational on 1 July 2018 and in 2019, or thereafter, Rukiga District was created to make it 14 new districts.

Madam Speaker, a promise was made by Government that after the creation of the new districts, the Ministry of Works and Transport would provide the new districts with road units. It is now three years since the promise was made but it looks like Government has backtracked on the policy they initiated, especially in regard to the new districts. Money was budgeted in Financial Year 2019/2020. Unfortunately, whereas the Ministry of Works and Transport initiated the procurement process, concluded it and found the best evaluated bidder to supply the road units, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development never provided the money.

In the previous financial year, when hon. Bahati was still in charge of handling matters regarding Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Floor of Parliament, we tasked him to explain the non-committal behaviour of Government. Parliament passes money but they never release it to do what is necessary.

Madam Speaker, we are suffering. As Members of Parliament, we keep putting the engineers and Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) in our new districts to task and ask them why roads are not being worked on. They receive money from the Uganda Road Fund. Unfortunately, every other minute, they do not have the equipment to use. When they write to the Ministry of Works and Transport, they are advised to borrow from the nearby districts. No neighbouring district is willing to lend us their road equipment.

My prayer is for this House to resolve that the next time Government appears here with a supplementary request, let money for procurement of the road units for the 14 new districts be included. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport should also allocate at least a grader for now, as we wait for Government procurement, to cater for road maintenance in these new districts. I know what is happening in Kassanda must be happening in many other districts that are missing road units.

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda bars anyone from treating Ugandans differently. We are a district and we need these road units. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, try to make your matters of national importance short. Minister of Works and Transport, we need action to be taken in those 14 districts.

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know my colleague has been missing me on the Floor. That is probably why he referred to me even when I have gone to another docket. 

However, this matter came on the Floor of the House in the last Parliament. It is true that we had budgeted this money for the road equipment for the new districts, but because of the challenges we were going through then, the money was not realised and we committed ourselves to budget for it in this financial year. Still, everybody knows what we are going through now. The budget even had to be readjusted. 

I think the best option, in my opinion and working as Government, is to budget for this equipment in the next financial year. To say that we can raise money for equipment in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, through a supplementary, will be a big issue to handle. Therefore, let us have a commitment that as Government, we will have this equipment budgeted for in the next financial year. We will work with Parliament to move forward. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, where you find that you cannot get money for all the equipment – because I know there are a number of equipment – you can do it in phases. Like he said, they could have at least a grader first.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we are going to have a discussion with the Ministry of Works and Transport and probably, after the recess, we will come and inform the House on whether there can be a phased manner of providing some relief to the new districts. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, when do we hear from you?

MR BAHATI: After the recess.

MR OSHABE: Madam Speaker, I loved it when hon. Bahati stood up to provide the background information. However, I never expected him to carry a commitment because he is now in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. I wish he made a commitment that he was going to speak to his colleague. However, he speaks as though he is still in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsamba Patrick, that is Government speaking. (Applause) It is not a personal issue. You will find that hon. Bahati knows even more about that equipment than the current minister. For us, we want a response after recess.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we will get a response and that is the reason why I have been convincing hon. Oshabe to join Government. He would probably know how Government works. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oshabe, you will get a response in two weeks’ time.

MS CHRISTINE APOLOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to share with the august House that at district level, there are also challenges in relation to equipment that is shared, especially the excavators and bulldozers. Many times, towards the end of the financial year, releases delay. You find lower local governments and the higher local governments struggling for the same equipment. By so doing, we end up having the money unutilised.

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that if the Ministry of Works and Transport could have a draft of its budget to include acquisition of more of this equipment, so that we do not have the whole of the eastern region sharing one piece of equipment. Otherwise, it causes a lot of delays. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable ministers, you have heard. Hon. Tayebwa, you are chatting on the phone and yet we are speaking to you. We need this issue sorted out. Just like it is happening in Kassanda, another issue has come up from the eastern region.

MR SEKABIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give to the House is that even the said districts that have the machines, their machines broke down three years ago. Therefore, there is no work going on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport should follow up and find out which machines are still working, and then take action. 

2.48
MS ASINANSI NYAKATO (FDC, Woman Representative, Hoima City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring to the attention of this House a matter of national importance. Over 1,000 farmers from Hoima City and the districts of Hoima, Kikuube, Masindi, Kakumiro, Kagadi, Buliisa, Kiryandongo and Kibaale entered into contracts to supply tobacco leaves to Continental Tobacco Uganda and Nimatabac Uganda Limited, and they were to be paid between 2017 and 2019. 

When these companies failed to complete payments to the tobacco farmers in September 2019, during the by-election of the Woman Representative of Hoima District, the President pledged that the Government would pay off the outstanding balance by these companies to the tobacco farmers. 

Indeed, Parliament, in the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.4 and Addenda 1 and 2 to Schedule No.4 for Financial Year 2020/2021 allocated Shs 11 billion, towards repayment of the outstanding balance to the tobacco farmers of Bunyoro subregion. To our disappointment, to date, these farmers have never been paid. 

I pray that the Government gives an explanation to this Parliament why, to date, these farmers have not been paid, despite the fact that the money was allocated by the Tenth Parliament for this activity – (Interruption)

MR WAKABI: I have been following this issue of payment of tobacco farmers since the Tenth Parliament. The farmers have suffered for a long time. In May, this year, a tobacco farmer called Edward Madila committed suicide after waiting for a long time. 

I am not even 40 years old yet but the rate at which my hair is turning grey is because of the pressure from the tobacco farmers. They want their money. (Laughter) It is high time that we considered these farmers this time. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Wakabi. That could be political pressure. (Laughter)

MS NYAKATO: Thank you, hon. Wakabi, for the information. My other prayer is that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should collaborate with the tobacco companies to update and make to the public the credible register of the beneficiaries, following inconsistencies in the current list that the ministry is in possession of. 

Finally, I pray that the Government should provide –(Interruption)

MS ROSE OBIGAH: What my colleagues have just alluded to here is not only happening in Bunyoro subregion. The West Nile districts of Koboko, Arua, Arua City, Terego, Yumbe, Madi-Okollo and Maracha also grow tobacco. I can lay on the Table a document, where the farmers have been trying to ask the Government for compensation. 

Therefore, as we consider the Bunyoro subregion, it is my humble appeal before this House that the West Nile subregion should also be considered for the same. Thank you. 

MS NYAKATO: Finally, I pray that the Government should provide farmers with a payment plan and immediately effect their payment. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Asinansi Nyakato. Can I have hon. David Bahati and hon. Jackson Kafuuzi respond to this issue? 

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank my colleague for raising this important issue. As she said, it is true we appropriated Shs 11 billion in the last financial year to clear the issues of tobacco farmers in the Bunyoro subregion. They had been delayed by the companies and we took a decision as the Government to come in so that after we have paid the farmers, the companies would then refund this money to the Government.

We have been working on this issue and we did the verification of the farmers. In the middle of that – the Attorney-General will add more information to that. Some groups of farmers took the companies to court. 

The verification also took some time and we do want to apologise for that. However, just recently one and a half weeks ago, this matter was resolved. We agreed to pay those who have been cleared. Those who are still in court can come after the court case has been handled either amicably or through the other processes that the Attorney-General will confirm.

We think that in one week or two, the farmers should be able to start receiving their resources. Then, we will wait for the companies to pay back the Government later on. We do not want to allow the farmers to continue suffering, when actually the good Government can clear this. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please report to this House that the said farmers have been paid as promised. 

2.55
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (Industry) has said it all. There is a team of farmers that decided to go to court while the others did not. Our understanding with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is that we should let those who are in court carry forward, as we settle those who have heeded to and are waiting for the Government to fulfil its promise.

However, I must add that this is a pledge the Government made out of goodwill because Ugandans are suffering. The two companies that owe these Ugandans money are private companies. So, we have to have an understanding with them as the Government that they are going to pay back this money. 

As the Government pays the tobacco farmers who are owed money by Continental Tobacco Uganda and Nimatabac Uganda Limited, we have to write a Memorandum of Understanding with those companies to make sure they reimburse this money to the Government because it is a debt they owe Ugandans. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, haven’t you reached an understanding?

MR KAFUUZI: We have not-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a promise that in a week’s time, the money will be paid. If it is going to be paid in one week’s time, my assumption is that you have already reached an understanding.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has gone on the ground. Relying on commercial officers at every district, they collected all the necessary data which they have shared with us, and we are preparing a memorandum of understanding.

First, we have to agree with these companies that the claims found on the ground by the ministry are the amounts they owe Ugandans –(Interruption)-

MR MPUUGA: Thank you. It is exactly the point you are trying to explain that does not have space in any books of law. You are committing to pay, but the person who actually owes the farmers has nothing to do with you and you are saying that you will commit them after payment. Do you want to commit the taxpayers without anything whatsoever, but out of goodwill? We can agree as leaders of our people that we are going to pay. However, what you are explaining has no legal space anywhere.

Are you committing the Government to saying that if they renege on their commitment, we shall say that was “potea”? Is that what you are telling this Parliament, that you even committed to enter into a “potea” arrangement? What we would like is to have our people paid. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, what we would like you, as Government, to do is to commit that Continental and the other companies will pay back the money to the Government once you rescue our people.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, this is what we are doing exactly. Like the honourable minister in charge of trade has said, we intend to begin payments in two weeks’ time, and we believe that by then, the commitments and memoranda of understanding shall be in place and fully signed.

MS ASINANSI NYAKATO: I would like to give information to this House and to the honourable Attorney-General. While the commercial officers were registering the farmers, many of them did not register because the receipts that they had had faded. 

Secondly, the commercial officers referred them to the ministry in charge of trade and the ministry referred the farmers back to the companies which had closed. Therefore, due to frustration and depression, many of them had to give up on the process of registration. As such, the information with Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is not sufficient.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, hon. Nyakato is basically saying that there are farmers who have no evidence of a claim but want to be paid by the Government. If we do that, tomorrow an audit query will come here and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and his people will be in trouble.

MR ABDU KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am surprised that we are having this discussion again. It first came up in the last Parliament and at that time, there was a supplementary budget being raised. We did query that particular aspect because there was no memorandum of understanding between the companies and the Government. We wondered how the Government would pay on somebody’s behalf without an understanding. This was a year ago. Now, we are going through the same discussion.

Personally, I raised the issue with the then Attorney-General, that you cannot pay public monies on behalf of a private company without a memorandum of understanding. What we hear now is that some of those companies have closed. If they have closed, with whom are you going to enter into a memorandum of understanding, if these companies do not exist? We really have a big problem.
 
Madam Speaker, we need to know the legal regime that governs this particular compensation. We need to know it. Is it ex gratia? We need know if it is, so that we know that these private companies have done bad business and we are not paying on their behalf, but we are trying to assist our farmers. We will then know that, that is the relationship. However, if it is a commercial transaction, I have a problem with that, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not commercial; it was a promise that was made.

MR KATUNTU: Was it ex gratia?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what we need to understand from the Attorney-General.

MR KATUNTU: There is a problem. What message are we sending to other private companies? Are we telling them that you can go and do business but when you fail in your business, the Government pays your debts? We need clear Government policy on this issue of compensation. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I would be happy to answer hon. Katuntu’s queries with the memorandum of understanding present. It would then tell you that we know the person who has undertaken to reimburse the Government's money, and it is not ex gratia. 

These companies have not closed shop. We are negotiating with these companies. The major issue that they want to know is if the amount they are going to owe the Government is the actual amount they owe the farmers. I will give you an example of around 565 people who went to court and they claimed around Shs 2 billion. The companies are in court contesting that and we are saying that that is not our area. We are going to clear those that they are not contesting, for now.

Therefore, it is a matter of time, and I ask for patience from this Parliament. We shall present the MoUs when they are ready, and Parliament will know who will have been paid and which company has an obligation to return Government money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, what hon. Katuntu said is that we equally have to be conscious of the taxpayers’ money. In the circumstances where they say the company has closed, whom are we signing a memorandum of understanding with? Who will pay back the money? That is what hon. Katuntu is asking. Under what legal regime are we acting?
 
MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I have responded and said that the companies have not closed. In fact, I can tell you - I do not see hon. Sseggona here - but he represents one of those companies. Those companies have not closed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can we have those memoranda of understanding in this House before payments are done?

MR KAFUUZI: We shall do our best and present them to the House. Most obliged.

MS ASANASI NYAKATO: Is it procedurally right for the Attorney-General to say that they are going to start with those who did not go to court? If it was not for those who went to court, we would not know that even those who did not go to court were demanding payment from these tobacco companies.

Madam Speaker, I pray that the Government or the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives halts these payments till all the farmers are settled, so that they can be paid at once. I also pray that the ministry goes back to the ground and gets the account numbers of those farmers, so that they can wire their monies directly to their accounts, just like the tobacco companies have been doing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Nyakato, we cannot tamper with what is before court. We will pay the people that are not in court and once the other ones have finished or withdrawn their court cases, they then can be cleared. 

3.08
MR JOHN TEIRA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the recently concluded general elections. There was a general outcry from the fishing communities of Uganda on the brutality and torture that had been meted on them by the Marine Protection Unit. This outcry prompted the President to direct a one, General Kyanda, to lead a team and go to these fishing grounds to establish the real havoc that had been caused.

In Bugabula North Constituency, specifically, there was a team led by Brig. Gen. Kisame. They visited the fishing grounds of Kibuye and Kyamatende. The stories that came from those villages were alarming. Subsequently, there was a commitment to compensate of the victims of this torture would be made before the general elections. This included loss of lives and property, specifically the boats that were destroyed, fishing nets and other fishing gear. It is sad to note right now that the compensation has never been done. Be that as it may, there is still continuous torture of the fishing communities by the marine protection unit. 

Article 24 of the Constitution, which we swore to protect and defend, is clearly against cruel inhumane and degrading treatment; Article 44, in particular, makes torture a non-derogable right. 

My prayers are that: 

    1. The compensation that was promised should be made - I am glad the Minister of Finance is here - timelines should be set on when this compensation will take place, and the manner in which they will follow;

    2. This continued violation of our Constitution, when legislators are here, having sworn –(Interruption) 

MR IDDI ISABIRYE: Thank you very much, hon. John Teira. The information that I would like to give to the honourable colleague is that towards elections, the same team, led by Gen. Kyanda, came to my constituency and a meeting was held in Bwondha Town Council. The same commitment was made; His Excellency the President committed that the affected families were going to be compensated. 

Later, a team was still sent to the very communities to go and carry out investigations. However, up to now, no report has been produced and the fate of our people that were tortured is not known. Thank you, honourable, for giving way. 

MR TEIRA: Thank you, hon. Iddi, for the information.

MR MOSES OKOT: Madam Speaker, the information that is being provided by my colleague, Dr Agnes Acibu, may not differ in form and substance so I pray that she allows me to submit on the same. 

I hail from a fishing community in Lake Kyoga and I represent that community. The brutality on Lake Kyoga is worrying. As of today, a lady called Milly Akello was killed by the Fisheries Protection Unit on Lake Kyoga. This is not an isolated situation. A month ago, Patrick Omara was also killed by the same Fisheries Protection Unit. There are about 144 litigants that have sued the Government of Uganda and the matter is pending in Lira High Court; the Government of Uganda is likely to lose monies arising out of the brutality on the lake. 

It is our prayer, as Members of Parliament representing the fishing community that a comprehensive investigation of this matter be referred to the committee or a comprehensive investigation be conducted on the behaviours on the lake. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government, can I have a response to that? It is crosscutting to all the fishing districts.

MR MOSES OKOT: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this document on Table.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What document is that?

MR MOSES OKOT: It is pictorial evidence of persons who have been brutalised, and the list of cases pending in court as a result of the brutality on the lake.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When the minister goes to your constituency and investigates, then you can lay that document on Table. How do we confirm that they are correct documents?

MR MOSES OKOT: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, in your address, you should talk about all the districts that are within the water bodies. 

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to first of all congratulate you because I have not been around, and I had not got the opportunity to use this microphone to congratulate you upon your elevation to that Chair. I would also like to congratulate all the Members who were able to make it to this House. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members who have raised the issue of the Fisheries Protection Unit and I would like to correct the first honourable member that talked of marine soldiers; the Fisheries Protection Unit is different from the marine soldiers.

However, I have just heard from you here that there was a promise to compensate the illegal fishermen whose boats were destroyed. This has not come to my knowledge and we do not have a single day where we agreed to compensate any illegal fisherman. When you illegally fish, you are actually destroying the lake and the fish. 

Therefore, the issue of compensation of the people whose boats were destroyed has not come to my desk. If General Kyanda and the team went and pledged this, let them allow me to consult with the General – (Interruption) 

MR MOSES OKOT: Madam Speaker, with persons lying dead, some on their hospital beds and others losing their economic livelihood, is the minister in order to come out and say that the victims do not have any right to be compensated, and yet persons have lost their people? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Moses Okot, legally, the victims have a right to compensation. However, what the minister is saying is that they did not say that they were going to compensate but they have their legal right.

MS ADOA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you have rightly put it, I was saying that I will find time and consult with Gen. Kyanda, to find out the resolutions they made that time. We are all aware; we have been having hard times for meetings. 

However, colleagues, I promise –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the minister is on the right track. However, in the Tenth Parliament, this matter was nearly handled in detail. I recall that it was sent to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, which was handling the issue of fisheries then, to conduct an investigation. I want to believe that the Chair is here and she is the continuing Chair of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. How I wish we first benefit from the work of that committee. Otherwise, we are trying to again recycle the same thing, which we had at the close of the Tenth Parliament.

Therefore, isn’t it procedurally right that we get to hear what happened to that report, which was authored by that committee to avoid all this? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ADOA: Madam Speaker, I request honourable members to be patient to allow me communicate to you, and when they are not satisfied, then they can still raise it because they are actually raising issues that I want to answer. I am going to handle it with Gen. Kyanda. 

On the issue of the committee that was set up to investigate the Fisheries Protection Unit, the report will be brought. Meanwhile, what the team got on the ground cost some soldiers arrests and they are on trial right now. The issue is about to be concluded and I will bring it to the attention of this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I request that you have a meeting with all the Members of Parliament from those areas. That will help you hear maybe more than what can be spoken here; do that before you report back to this House the conclusions you have come up with and the action you are going to take as a ministry.

MS ADOA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the last term, I was able to call some of the Members. I appreciate the fact that most of the Members right now from fishing communities are new but I promise to call for another meeting. 

However, I wanted you to know that in the last term, I called the Members of Parliament from different fishing communities together with the Fisheries Protection Unit to a meeting and we resolved that I would go to different places.

One of the places I went to was Amolatar, where I had a big meeting with fishermen. I went to different landing sites and I am just learning from the honourable member – and even today, the Fisheries Protection Unit –  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, take the ruling I have given you. Unfortunately, most of the Members of Parliament you met got injuries. Therefore, can you arrange for that meeting and report back to this House?

MS ADOA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are making an order on what? Members, try to make your issues very short.

3.21
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Much as I am very interested in that subject, I am rising on another issue.

I am rising on a matter of national importance. Two weeks ago, the Minister of Health, while on the Floor of this Parliament as the senior minister, informed us that Government had procured a number of ambulances, including three boat ambulances. The three boat ambulances had been distributed to Amolatar, Kalangala and Buvuma.

She went on to inform the House that the boat ambulances were helpful in transporting COVID-19 patients and were doing wonders. 

Madam Speaker, I am rising on this as a matter of national importance because I represent Buvuma and there is no single boat ambulance. As far as I am aware, there is no other boat ambulance that was sent to Kalangala and the same applies to Amolatar.

My issue is that we demand or request the Minister of Health, who did not only make that statement here but also at the media briefing - the demand from our people now is: as our Member of Parliament, where are our boat ambulances? May the minister find time and make this same clarification on the Floor, about where our boat ambulances are because the beneficiaries cannot trace them anywhere.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Health.

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable member for raising that national issue. 

I want to confirm to the House that yes, the senior minister at the Ministry of Health confirmed that the ministry had purchased three boat ambulances. 

Madam Speaker, you directed that this ministry should come up with a comprehensive report and the dates were given. I want to confirm to the colleague that in our detailed report, we shall come and answer questions about the three boat ambulances that were bought, where they are supposed to be or are, and the more boats that we are looking forward to purchase.

As of now, our report is ready and we are waiting to come and present it to the House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, were the ambulances bought and sent to the constituencies because this was a statement from the minister?

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, as I have said, I stand by the minister’s statement but I need to clearly find out whether they have been sent to the areas they were allocated to or – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, can you get us that feedback as to whether the ambulances were bought and have been sent? We need that confirmation in a week’s time.

MS KAWOOYA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

MR KATUNTU: Thank You, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Migadde for raising this matter of national importance. 

The ministry appeared before our committee and did submit that it had procured 38 fully-equipped ambulances: 33 were the basic life support ambulances, which we call “road ambulances”; two were Type C, which is intensive care ambulances, and; three Type C water ambulances. 

They also did submit to us that Government had spent Shs 11 billion to purchase the 38 ambulances, comprising the three water ambulances, two intensive care ambulances and 33 basic life support ambulances.

The ministry further submitted that the ambulances are in use and being managed under the national ambulance system that is regionally coordinated under 14 regions. It also gave a distribution list of those ambulances and one of them was Kalangala and the other two places. 

Therefore, as far as we are concerned, those ambulances are operating. Unless you are sinners and you do not see them –(Laughter)– but the ministry said that they are operating in those three places. This is written. 

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Katuntu for the information. I think we have to devise a new way of getting credible information.

If I am an MP representing Buvuma Islands and I stand on the Floor, it is not for purposes of media coverage. I am giving reliable information that, actually, there is no ambulance as far as Buvuma is concerned. 

In fact, hon. Katuntu has made it worse that they are even fueling these ambulances. This means that the Ministry of Health has more on which to inform this Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to reaffirm that as far as Buvuma is concerned, there is no boat ambulance - even in the whole region because I know Lake Victoria right from Entebbe to Mayuge. There is no such ambulance in operation in the whole Lake Victoria basin.

MS NAKIMULI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the august House that since the 10th Parliament budgeted for the procurement of those boats for the health centres of Kalangala District and all the other districts, all we have seen are boats on a certain port on social media, saying they are on their way. That is all we have seen. Our health department in Kalangala District has not received even an engine. 

Our people on Lake Victoria are dying. The women in Kalangala District die on the lake, in canoes, going to the health centres because they are very far from where their homes are. 

It is my humble prayer that these ambulances are brought to our districts. Thank you. 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I have stood on a point of clarification. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Katuntu, for a very good statement he gave concerning ambulances. 

In Uganda, sometimes 10 is called 100 and 100 is called 10. That is why I rose on a point of clarification. 

Could the minister clarify whether the ambulances she is talking about are the ambulances that were purchased by the ministry of Health or road ambulances that were donated by the people? There is a contradiction there. I need proper clarity between the ambulances that were –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The ambulances were bought at Shs 11 billion - bought, not donated. 

MR MACHO: The reason I am asking for clarification is that after an audit by the internal auditor, you may find that the ambulances that were bought at Shs 11 billion were the ones that were donated by the people.

I was shocked the other day when I read in the media that when UNICEF donated 500 cylinders, the ministry announced 100 cylinders. Nobody, not even the spokesperson of the Ministry of Health, came out to clarify on that matter. 

I would also like to seek clarification on where the ambulance for Busia health port is. All the drivers who are found COVID-19 positive at the Busia border are loaded onto pick-ups. The pick-ups are the ones they call ambulances. Thank you. 

MR MUSHEMEZA: Thank you for your indulgence. My name is Elijah Mushemeza, member of parliament for Sheema County, South. Madam Speaker, you have ruled that the Government Chief Whip should come up with the information on whether these ambulances were purchased. 

Is it procedurally correct to continue debating when you have already ruled?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What hon. Abdu Katuntu did was to give clarification on what the minister was saying. Naturally, after that clarification from the people who have been on ground, the debate should have stopped because I had already given a ruling to that effect. 

Based on that, Government Chief Whip, you have heard all that is being said. It seems the ambulances are not there. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What can help give us clarification on whether the ambulances exist or not is explicit. Every water vessel or motor vehicle - in this case, water vessel - registered in Uganda must have a registration number.

The best thing is for the minister to come and give clarity to this House by producing the registration number of every water vessel in form of an ambulance and where it is attributed to. That will close the debate. That is the only clarification I am seeking. In case she has them, it will lay all our questions to rest. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we need clarification on the ambulances you talked about. As hon. Nsereko has said, they must have registration numbers. You are not going to continue lamenting on the Floor when people are dying in the villages. 

MS KAWOOYA: I would like to give clarification on that, Madam Speaker. I have got information from the ministry and, as I said, there is a report that is ready. I would not want to pre-empt it and debate it now, not until I have been given a chance.

However, about the three boat ambulances, Madam Speaker, I have been told that as of now - and with the guidance that the Government Chief Whip will confirm where they are - they are with the security forces at the marine base in Entebbe. The ministry is in the process of meeting with the district officials, my colleagues from Buvuma and others next week to work out modalities of maintaining them –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kawooya, the report says the ambulances are on the ground; they are in Buvuma. So, why are we giving contradictory statements all the time?

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, that is the report that the hon. Katuntu team gave. We have an explanation in our report, which we have not presented. We have an explanation in our report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have a report on those ambulances? Even if it means hon. Tayebwa going to Buvuma, I need that report.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, much obliged. We shall be coming back to the Floor to make a presentation.

3.38
MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the need by the Inspectorate of Government to provide an alternative method of declaring incomes, assets and liabilities for local leaders and public officers, who are unable to have adequate facilities for the declaration that is provided right now and who do not have the infrastructure to do so.

Article 223 of the Constitution directs Parliament to establish, by law, the Leadership Code of Conduct for persons holding certain offices. Pursuant to this Article, Parliament enacted the Leadership Code Act, which, among others, obligates officers and leaders to declare all their incomes, assets and liabilities to the Inspectorate of Government upon becoming so in those respective offices. For public officers, the declaration is after every five years and for leaders after two years.

The current period for submitting declarations, as outlined by the Inspectorate of Government, is expiring on 7 August 2021 at midnight. We note that whereas the online system is well designed to cater for declaration of the assets, income and liabilities in a fast and efficient way, it does not cater for local leaders who are not in position to have the internet infrastructure and the different internet capacity. They do not have data bundles and they are really incapacitated.

Given this, we are aware that according to the latest World Bank report –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MS NALUYIMA: My prayers are that – 

    a) The Inspectorate of Government provides an alternative method of declaring income, assets and liabilities for the local leaders who are unable to do so. 
    b) They should also be able to extend the period from 7 August at midnight. 
    c) The Government should install high speed internet, especially at local levels.
    d) Government should also ensure that we are able to have the internet in all places in the country at an affordable rate. 

We are aware that at this time, data charges are really high. In my area, Wakiso, a person who lives very far in Bussi Islands is unable to declare at this moment. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Attorney-General, I want to find out what the law says. Is it strict on online declaration or you can have an option of hardcopy declaration?

3.41
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, the people expected to declare are in thousands. The office of the IGG has received a lot of outcries, just like my honourable colleague has said, on system failure and slowdown, especially for our colleagues who are upcountry and are required to declare.

I intend to liaise with the office of the IGG to see if it is possible to extend the period beyond 7 August 2021, so that people have time to look for the right areas with a proper network to fill in the necessary forms for declaration. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the law strict on online declaration or you can do it on hard copy? I am asking you what the law says.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, the law is not strict but the practice has been online declaration; that is what we have all been doing. If we really asked everybody to fill forms –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Counsel, what we are asking is: In the circumstance that these local people are not able to access the portal, why don’t we be flexible to make sure that they fill hardcopies that can be brought to the IGG’s office?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, the best we can do right now is for the office of the IGG to consider extending the time. In this way, a person from an area in Kyegegwa, where I come from, who is unable to get proper internet connection to fill in those forms, can move to a place where he or she can find that connection and fill the forms. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Assuming I declared using a hardcopy and you refuse to capture my data, would you sue me for that?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, regarding what we have now, the system is rigid in such a way that it has to be done on computer. You fill in a form, then you get a code and password. Everything is online. However, adjustments can be made –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the system is made by people. Just imagine somebody deep down in Bukedea, who does not even know anything about a computer, what do you do?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, like I said, I pledge to liaise with the office of the IGG –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Be mindful that the deadline is approaching.

MR KAFUUZI: We shall see what we can do to make it possible for the people to declare as the law requires.

3.44
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter concerning the agreement made between Tropical Leaf Uganda Limited and the people of Kihiihi Subcounty, Nyanga Subcounty and Nyamirama Subcounty on 2 January 2019. They were supposed to grow tobacco and Tropical Leaf Uganda Limited were supposed to procure it and pay the farmers.

I want to thank you for the guidance you gave the Attorney-General, especially in dealing with the farmers who did not go to court. My people did not also go to court, much as they are not in Bunyoro and West Nile, but they are also suffering.

Madam Speaker, I want to seek your indulgence, so that my people are also on the list to be catered in the payments, such that they also enjoy the liberties that they have in the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, include that in your report and handle the people of Kinkizi too.

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.46
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, the tobacco payment exercise arose as a result of a pledge by the President. What we have in our docket are the two companies that were operating in Bunyoro subregion at the time; Continental Tobacco Uganda and Nimatabac Uganda Limited. However, in the event that it is necessary to expand – like hon. Katuntu said, a supplementary budget was brought to the Floor of the Tenth Parliament; and it was specifically, in respect of those companies.

However, if you deem it necessary to expand, it will mean that we are not able to pay those tobacco farmers that we had pledged to start with – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First study the claim of those people. After you have done that, then you come back and report to the House what their claim is about. 

MR KAFUUZI: Most obliged. However, I still think we shall need to consult the origin of the pledge for us to pay. It is because if we are asked to pay two companies –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not telling you to go and pay. We are asking you to go and study the claim. 

MR KAFUUZI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

3.48
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance. There is a general scarcity of Yaka metres, countrywide. In my constituency of Nakaseke South, more than 1,000 people applied for Yaka metres. It has been almost a full year now, and they have not received them.

I have come to know that this problem is not affecting only the people of Nakaseke but it is a general problem countrywide. So many people applied for Yaka metres but they have not got them. So, we would like to know from the relevant organs that are supposed to supply Yaka metres in the country what has gone wrong. 

Government is partly concerned about this issue. I pray that it comes out and explains to Ugandans, especially those whose economic activities do rely on electricity, what has happened to the supply of Yaka metres. Thank you.

MR KATESHUMBWA: I would like to add information to what hon. Luttamaguzi has said. There was a policy on electrical connections and it made it very difficult for people who had wired their houses to get connected to electricity. We understand that the policy was later amended. 

However, I would like to inform this House that very many people – indeed, like my colleague has said – in Sheema and many parts of the country have had to suffer for many months without electricity. The reason we are getting is that there is a consignment that is coming with Yaka metres and they have been under verification by UNBS. This has taken long.

I would like to ask the responsible ministry to tell us when people will be connected to electricity; so that they get out of darkness and start living like citizens of Uganda, who are entitled to light and quality life. Thank you. 

DR BATUWA: The issue of inadequate Yaka metres is so wide and devastating. As I speak, the markets within Jinja - that was recently elevated to city status - do not have the Yaka metres. As a result, Umeme has resorted to bulking these customers in the markets to work under one metre and yet their activities are not anywhere close. As such, they are really burdened. One market particularly has a bill of about Shs 20 million and it is being demanded to clear that bill before it is reconnected. So, this issue should be treated with the urgency it requires. 

3.51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is indeed a very important issue. As Government, we had also already, through the Electricity Regulatory Authority, linked up with Umeme to ensure that the Yaka meters can come quickly. Their issue was the travel and import interruption. 

Luckily enough, the Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development (Energy) is also here. He can come and substantiate so that he makes the explanation clearer. I had not seen him.  He can come in to explain and make it easier.

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Sidronious Okasai): Madam Speaker, I am the Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development (Energy). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, is the minister here?

MR OKASAI: The Government Chief Whip did not realise that I was seated behind him, but I would like to continue from where he ended. Before I do that, I would like to congratulate you for your new position. I also wish to congratulate everybody, including the ministers who are assuming their respective positions. This is my first time to speak in this Parliament.

We are aware of the problem we have in the metering and connectivity of electricity. The Government policy on free connection is still on, and we have received 87,000 Yaka metres, which will facilitate us to connect, following the free connection policy. 

However, the demand for connection is higher than the Yaka metres that we have received. We have actually reviewed the policy, so that those who are able to pay for connectivity go ahead get connected. There is a provision for that. Those who are not able to pay for connectivity will wait for the free connection.

However, there is need for the 87,000 Yaka metres that we have received to conform to our national standards. There is also a need for us to take these Yaka metres through testing and each of them will be tested on individual basis, to avoid faults going to the consumers. The testing will be done by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. The testing of each Yaka metre is costed at Shs 8,000. When you multiply that with the 87,000 Yaka metres, it is quite a substantial amount of money.

The ministry has requested the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to waiver that provision of the testing of the Yaka metres. That is what is delaying the availability of these metres. I wish to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in the Eleventh Parliament, we have agreed to be action-oriented. We need action on what has been raised. Kindly make a follow up. If it means visiting a constituency or district, please do that and clear all those issues.  

MR AOGON: On that matter, the Government helped us to bring power to some places like schools. However, in my constituency, I have more than six schools where the poles have been put up but power has not been connected for almost two years.

We would like the Government to come out on this because it is something that cuts across the country. The Government should tell us clearly what has gone wrong. What is happening? We need to hear about this. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is good you share the same constituency with the minister.

MR ATWIJUKIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For us to start discussing Yaka meters alone is like looking at a small challenge within a bigger problem. In my place, load shedding is expected like you expect to breathe; it happens at any time. People with small businesses cannot run them because of load shedding. 

I think we should carry out a comprehensive study of this sector and its challenges. The ministry says that the testing fee is high, which is why it is taking time, but he is not committing to when they are testing and when we should expect to get the meters.

I beg that we do a comprehensive study of the sector so that we can understand their challenges and weaknesses in order to rectify them. Our gospel of prosperity in the common areas of the villages will then resonate with our policies and we will not look like jokers to the people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Dr Okasai, are you taking notes?

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with the honourable colleague that there is a bigger problem in this sector. Regarding electricity connection, no-pole service costs Shs 720,000; one-pole service is about Shs 2,387,000, which is uninsulated.

I come from an area where we plant eucalyptus trees that are used for electricity poles. We sell a pole between Shs 100,000 to 150,000. I have consulted and learnt that after treatment, a pole costs Shs 600,000. I wonder what the Government has done to push this cost from Shs 600,000 to Shs about 2.3 million. There is something wrong. 

Imagine a farmer sells a pole at Shs 100,000, yet you make this same farmer procure a pole from the Government at Shs 2.3 million. Something is very wrong. I think we must conduct a thorough investigation to find out what is wrong.

Many times, the President has decried high electricity tariffs and he says that he is putting up many dams to address the costs. However, I am talking about electricity poles that have no connection to the generation of electricity. We must do something to help our people that consume this very expensive electricity, which ends up affecting everything, including the cost of the product at the end of it all. I thank you.

MR SIMON PETER OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, I rise on the same matter. The Government needs to change the policy on connectivity. A private company called Umeme is scooping money from people without any investment. You ask the people to connect themselves, buy the pole and continue paying more money, almost on a daily basis, to the same company. What investment is the company doing? There is something wrong. 

I, therefore, request that the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development intensifies on the issue of rural electrification. In my area of birth, many places have been left out, including my own trading centre, where I reside in my constituency. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is information from the minister. Honourable members, we need to conclude with the matters of national importance.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): I would like to thank colleagues for raising this pertinent issue. It is true that as Government, we are aware of the high cost that has been incurred on these electricity poles. 

The information I would like to give is that the Government has taken a position on imported poles. Most of these poles were imported and we have already banned the importation of these poles, which have been costing Ugandans too much money. We are going to embark on using our own poles, which would be cheaper than the ones we are talking about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister was responding to what hon. Aisha Kabanda raised about the cost of electricity poles.

MR BASIL BATANRINGAYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This being my maiden speech, I would like to congratulate you upon assuming the seat of Deputy Speaker. 

The issue being raised about electricity is very important. I would like to talk about two things. One is that the President has, over the years, talked about rural electrification, majorly to save the environment. In my constituency, some lines have been established but they have been there for three years; transformers have been put in place without connection.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What is the name of your constituency?

MR BATARINGAYA: My constituency is Kashari North, in Mbarara District.

Secondly, some villages have been skipped for no reason. Thirdly, there is the issue of people being told to pay for their connection and those installing the power – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Issues of electricity have been heard. The ministry must handle, come back and report to this House on the actions they are taking regarding electricity. 

DR BHOKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to provide extra information on the challenge of access to electricity for Ugandans. 

For the last 35 years, Madam Speaker, the people of Obongi have requested the Government of Uganda and the Parliament for extension of power to Obongi District. 

As I speak, Obongi District is the only district in West Nile that has no access to electricity. Two opportunities came up; one under the electricity connection to refugee hosting districts. All refugee hosting districts have accessed electricity except Obongi. 

The second came under the rural electrification programme. While others are talking about extension of electricity to their villages and trading centres, Obongi District has no electricity. 

I pray that as we comprehensively look into the issue of rural electrification, Obongi is considered. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Okaasai, please look into the issue of Obongi.  

4.07 
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, the problem of electricity in this country needs a thorough and general overhaul.

Parliament appropriated money for REA but the Ministry of Energy has refused to give that money to REA because they think the merger will take place tomorrow. This is what I think is the major problem and it will cause our people to suffer for a very long time. 

At the same time, there is Umeme, which I keep calling a “tick” that is milking the economy of this country. Umeme needs an overhaul and I pray that when their contract ends, it is not renewed. I believe and I would like to agree with my mentor, President Museveni, that Umeme is the biggest problem for the energy sector in this country. 

Umeme came and even paid to open up an office in Busia two years ago and this nearly cost me this election because the people had called me, an NRM candidate, a liar; that we promised them a Umeme office. Imagine the people of Busia, Bugiri and Namayingo have to move to three districts and make payments in Tororo in case there is an issue. 

Madam Speaker, it is good that you are a very capable Speaker; so, I request you to direct the Ministry of Energy to ensure that Busia District gets a Umeme office. 

I do not know where the Minister of Energy is but I would like him to tell Ugandans why there is no electricity in Nsambya and Kibuli Police stations. The police officers are using candles –(Member timed out.) 

MR AFIDRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am grateful for the matter of national importance raised by my colleague on issues of connectivity to electricity. 

Lower Madi, which is Madi-Okollo and West Nile District, similar to the point raised by my colleague from Obongi District, is a district that has never had power since its creation. The good news is that in 2016, His Excellency the President promised that electricity would be connected to Madi-Okollo.

I am glad to share this information that for the last two years, poles have been erected in the district headquarters but power has never been connected to the district headquarters. The reasons are beyond us and the answers lie with the Ministry of Energy. 

My appeal to you, Madam Speaker, is that as a new district, can the Ministry of Energy fasten the connectivity of power to the district headquarters?

I represent a constituency of seven subcounties and none of them has been connected to power. In this august House – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Afidra, we have got your point of information. We are going to ensure that we get communication from the Ministry of Energy in regard to electricity in the whole of Uganda. We would like information on REA since we gave it money and it cannot be received by REA because the Vote has been pushed to the ministry. We need that information. 

4.11
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. For the last two weeks, I have been very keen on the noble issues that the honourable colleague is bringing here on the Floor; they speak to a particular issue. There is a very serious information gap between the Government and the leaders of our people; the Members of Parliament. 

My sense is that some of this information is variously available. I would like to indulge the comrades on the Front Bench, at the right of the Speaker, to find a way of easing our methods of work; namely, if you so wish, Madam Speaker, to probably find a way of availing a log frame of activities of this financial year in their ministries. 

Yesterday, we had a debate that took one and a half hours on roads. Today, we have had ample time to discuss electricity and a lot of debate on the problems of the fishing communities. Wouldn’t it be proper, Madam Speaker, if the honourable ministers provided that information? Ordinarily, you would ask the Members to go and read MPS documents but I also know that because of COVID-19, there has been a departure from the MPS and we had not had occasion, as Parliament, to come here and discuss the frozen plans over the financial year. 

Would it be okay, if they so wished, through the Prime Minister, for each ministry to offer some form of log frame to the Members’ pigeon holes on activities? 

Yesterday on the discussion on roads, there was some kind of sparring. The ministers said they were working on particular roads and the Members disputed this. This will help Members to follow up and enable debate happen coherently. Would that help, Madam Speaker? This is because we seem to be debating at cross-purposes and losing ground on time. 

We have a recess of some days coming up. Could this be enough time, Madam Speaker, to ask of the ministers on the right to find space to produce some log frame that can facilitate Members to follow up issues? This is because some of the issues need Members to follow up with the ministers and the ministries and they do not have to find their way to Parliament for debate. 

I am thinking aloud, Madam Speaker, for a proper procedural arrangement. I seem to see how much time we are losing in scattered – I am sorry to use the word “scattered” because it might sound un-parliamentary but I am trying to find a way of helping Members be able to benefit from the debate and service their communities. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition.

4.15
MS CHRISTINE AKELLO (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my first time to submit on the Floor of Parliament. I rise on the issue of national importance concerning the effect of COVID-19 on the schools, especially the first lockdown. Students reported to school -   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Christine Akello, can you discuss that issue when we are discussing the matter of COVID-19 because you will be repeating yourself?

MS CHRISTINE AKELLO: Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Discuss it when we are discussing the report.

4.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has raised a very salient issue. I think he needs to get the Government’s position on that.

I concur with the Leader of the Opposition. Colleagues, I remember we were given copies of the Background to the Budget; we need to go and read through it. Also, it is very important, especially for the new Members, to take on from where our colleagues had stopped. As Government, our offices are always open. 

I request colleagues that instead of bringing every matter on the Floor as a matter of national importance, kindly come to Government offices, which are open, and first hear from the ministers. Most people who have taken that route have had their issues resolved. However, when you say that you want the constituency to see you presenting every issue, in the end it gets lost in all these matters. 

Government offices are open. Come to the ministers or to the Government Chief Whip; I can introduce you to your minister. This applies to both sides, even the Opposition. I have colleagues from the Opposition who have come and we have managed to solve these issues.

Madam Speaker, we are going to ensure that we provide those papers to the Members of Parliament. I thank you. 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, hon. Christine Akello was making her maiden speech. How I wish we gave her an opportunity to go – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have guided hon. Christine Akello and I guided her because the matter on COVID-19 is coming up. She will be among the first people to speak on COVID-19.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the Government Chief Whip. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for the Government Chief Whip to try to gag Members from raising issues about their constituencies. 

The Members of Parliament need their voters to hear that they are raising the issues that affect their constituencies. Yes, the ministries are there, but you must raise the matter here first to cause attention and people get to know, then they can follow up with you, the ministers, the Prime Minister or they can be given direction but they need information. 

On the issue of electricity, for example, which we are talking about, in the Ninth Parliament we did pass a loan request for electricity to be extended to every subcounty in this country. Today, I am surprised to hear that there are some constituencies that have not received power. What happened to that money? We passed loan requests here to make sure that every subcounty was connected. What happened? That is the information Members need to know, and that is the information the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development needs to bring to Members of Parliament so that they know where the money went. After getting that information, they can be able to follow up with the ministry responsible. 

However, trying to gag them, I think, is procedurally wrong, Government Chief Whip. Let Members raise their issues such that you get to know, take note and respond. If you think they should come to your office, then tell the Member, “Yes, I have heard your issue; can you follow up with me in my office to address that matter?”

Madam Speaker, the additional matter that I would like to raise, and I want the Prime Minister to respond to, is that we made a law here to conserve and protect the road reserves; how did Government allow a world power to build up to the road reserve? I am talking about the American Embassy. From Nsambya Road to Kabalagala, people with disabilities cannot pass. The road has been narrowed because the American Embassy has built a wall – a Berlin Wall - up to the road reserve. The road has been narrowed, causing traffic jam. 

Can the Prime Minister tell us why they have allowed American Embassy to violate the laws of this country and build a perimeter wall up to the road reserve, thus affecting the movement of pedestrians and people with disabilities? We need to know. Thank you, Madam Speaker.   
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it on the same issue?

MS OGWAL: Yes, I am following up with further clarification. Madam Speaker, I just want to add onto what hon. Okupa said. It is very important that we understand two ways of raising matters of national importance. We can specifically write to a minister or a sector through a question for oral answer. Maybe, some new Members are not yet conversant with that. I would wish the Government Chief Whip to, probably, try and sensitise us to know what problems we can ask through questions for oral answer. 

However, we cannot stop Members – I plead with you, with a lot of humility. There are some issues which are so burning that they cannot wait for the minister to come to the Floor of Parliament to respond to. Madam Speaker, I beg you, with a lot of humility, to allow Members to raise burning issues. We only need to know how burning it is and its magnitude. It must be a matter of emergency in nature or a matter that threatens security, like brutality at the lakeside. Those are urgent issues. People have died and we cannot keep quiet. We just want to be guided but not to be gagged. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Are you hon. Begumisa?

MS BEGUMISA: Yes. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. With due respect to the Government Chief Whip, we kindly request that we are allowed to air out our views. 

I am the Woman Member of Parliament for Ssembabule District. We have our political problems, which you know very well, Government Chief Whip, and you have been in our meetings. We shall not stop talking about the health problems in our district. We need a hospital and we are working it out, our roads and everything. The best tool for a Member of Parliament is his or her mouth. We shall continuously talk on behalf of our people, especially on the issues that affect them, and that is why we are here. I thank you.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to clarify to Members. What I was giving was a piece of advice. It was not a directive. I was only advising you. I have been here for five years as a backbencher. I got most of the projects by walking to the ministries and linking up with the ministers. 

However, if you prefer to come to the Floor, it is your right and no one will stop you. I just want to give you a piece of advice that you should go to the ministers. However, I will support you if you want to bring your issues on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is an unanswered question about the road reserve. Let us get a response. 

4.25
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you upon becoming the No. 5 of this country. I also want to congratulate Members for making it to the 11th Parliament. 

The issue of the road that hon. Okupa has raised is very pertinent. I know it is not right for people to construct road reserves. However, I am going to consult, follow up and then we shall come back here and answer why it has been done so. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need action on that issue of the road. Hon. Asamo will tell you that persons with disabilities are really suffering in that area. Cars cannot even bypass each other in that area. The law is the law and no one is above the law. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is something very important. When the Government Chief Whip was advising honourable members to go and contact various ministers in their offices, I have that experience – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That has passed, hon. Olanya. 

MR OLANYA: That is why I wanted to raise it, Madam Speaker, so that it guides honourable members in the future. 

Many of these ministers do not make their own decisions. We have gone to the Ministry of Health but whenever you tell them your problem, they refer you to either the Prime Minister or the President. These ministers are not in charge of their offices. They are just there and cannot make decisions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, our ministers are in charge. Do not belittle them. 

4.28
MS SAUDA KAUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for the opportunity to speak on this Floor of Parliament and congratulate you upon your win for the Deputy Speakership. 

I rise on a matter of national importance, although most of my colleagues have talked about it. It is about electricity. They have talked about connectivity and I would like to add something. 

Before the minister comes to give us a full report, he should also consider the cost of electricity because most colleagues have talked about connectivity. 

You recall that in the President’s State of the Nation Address, he complained about the distorted cost of electricity. He directed that power should be supplied directly from the dams to the industrialists to lower the cost of electricity to our people. Our people are crying, especially my people from the industrial area in the Northern Division of Iganga Municipality. There are many rice and maize mills but the costs are too high that they cannot even foot them. 

We also have another issue. Many areas were already surveyed and excavated for connection but nothing has taken place. We would like the responsible minister to give us an update of how far they have gone with that. 

The other issue is about the sugarcane. As a leader who comes from Busoga, I cannot keep quiet. Our people are still on our backs about what the Government has planned for them on the issue of sugarcane. 

I watched news yesterday and among the challenges that the Executive Director of Atiak Sugar Factory highlighted was that they do not have enough canes yet, in Busoga we have a surplus. We do not know why the Government cannot give us another factory, where our people have already invested heavily in the sugarcane growing.

Madam Speaker, the National Development Plan III is geared towards boosting and improving homesteads of the different people. Our people in Busoga had already engaged in sugarcane growing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are your prayers? 

MS KAUMA: My prayer is for the Government to tell us what they can provide for our people. The price of the sugarcane went low and they are even burning it down because they have nowhere to put it. 

Even the ordinary people –(Interruption)

MR DAVID ISABIRYE: On the issue of sugarcane, two years ago, His Excellency the President was in Bugembe Stadium and he promised to provide funds to build a sugarcane mill that would help the people of Busoga in as far as sugarcane surplus was concerned. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to bring to your attention that as we speak now, people have resorted to burning and ploughing out sugarcane. The reason is that there is no market. Yet, they use a lot of money to plant sugarcane. 

My prayer is: let the Minister of Trade, Cooperatives and Industry follow up with the President as far as the presidential pledge is concerned. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government, can you make a follow up on the issue of the sugarcane in Busoga? 

STATEMENT ON THE GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK OF 17-19 AUGUST 2021

4.33
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, Statement on the Government Business by the Leader of Government Business. Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament requires the Leader of Government Business to make a statement in the House regarding the Government’s Business of the succeeding week. I am therefore submitting the following business for the succeeding week 17-19 August 2021. 

    1. The Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2020
    2. Request to relocate funds from Rural Electrification Agency to Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development Vote
    3. Request to relocate funds from Ministry of Science and Technology to State House Vote
    4. Statement on the Government successor project for the Fourth Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF IV).

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit and I lay this on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO PARLIAMENT ON FRIDAY, 4 JUNE 2021

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I would like to have Item five discussed before Item four.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY TASKFORCE ON THE NATIONAL COVID-19 RESPONSE

(Debate continues)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion was presented in this House yesterday – a very good motion. There is now a response from the Government Chief Whip.

4.36
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the chairperson of the taskforce for the good work and the report that was presented. 

Government has received this report. However, we feel that for us to do justice to the recommendations and issues therein, Government should be given two weeks, so that we prepare a comprehensive response where we shall have Cabinet input. From the time this was –(Interruption)

MR SSEWANYANA: Madam Speaker, as a sportsman, after I read today’s Order Paper, I thought that we were going to give something to the sportsmen in this country. 

When I heard of the detention of Mr Julius Ssekitoleko upon his return by Uganda Police Force, I thought we were going to get a statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs. There is also another item on the facilitation of the men’s national basketball team. I thought that we were going to get a statement from the Minister of Education and Sports. 

When these two items are simply skipped, like they have been today and even yesterday, it means we are doing a disservice to the sportsmen in this country, who are busy making us proud in Tokyo and preparing to make us proud again tomorrow. When you tell them that their matters are pushed aside every day to the next date – I think we need these two statements, so that we have a discussion as Parliament. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall have the statement on Ssekitoleko. The issue on the basketball team has been handled.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, you had actually directed the Minister of Education and Sports to come back to Parliament on Tuesday, which was two days ago, to inform the House about the emergency money that we needed in order to allow some of our sportsmen and sportswomen participate in the current games. I think it was about US$ 179,000. You actually instructed the minister to come back on Tuesday with the report. 

We had also requested that they should come with a planned investment for sports, as a matter of national interest, because the sports sector is really boosting tourism and the image of Uganda outside there. We believe that the minister cannot defy your instructions and simply keep quiet. We kept quiet on Tuesday. Yesterday, we kept quiet. Are we going to keep quiet again today on that matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, my orders have not been defied. I had a meeting with the said people and that is why I am telling you that the issue of the basketball team has been finalised. What we are waiting for is a report on Ssekitoleko. That is what we are waiting for. As we speak, the team should be enroute to Cairo. 

Can you finish your statement?

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that this being a very important report, we felt a comprehensive response needs the input of Cabinet. We, therefore, request for two weeks. We will come with a comprehensive statement and thereafter, the debate can ensue. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman, hon. Katuntu?

MR OKUPA: Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. I know the request by the Government Chief Whip is well intentioned. However, if they want time to enrich the report, it would have been better for us to give our views. This is from a committee; I think it would be better if we add our issues but we do not conclude. The Government Chief Whip would then take all this and come back in two weeks and we finish. 

I say this because if he goes and comes back and then we raise issues, which possibly they would have also missed, we will again want a response from them. Therefore, I think it would be procedurally right if we go ahead with the debate and he captures the issues and when it comes to the responses, he then asks for two weeks, in order to come back with a comprehensive report.

If that pleases the Government Chief Whip and honourable colleagues, I think we would proceed that way. Thank you.

4.41
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I take this opportunity to thank all my colleagues with whom we worked on this report.

As you recall, Madam Speaker, you first gave us 14 days within which to finalise this assignment. Unfortunately, the two weeks were not enough, so we had to seek your indulgence and you gladly extended and gave us another two weeks.

This whole month has been a very busy month for all of us, sleeping almost every day after 1.00 a.m., trying to put this 174-page report together. We presented it the other day, and if I understood the Government Chief Whip, he is saying they need some time - which is like an adjournment - to peruse through this report and come back with a serious response.

I would not have any objection to it because we all realise the importance of the Government coming up to seriously address all the challenges we have identified. After all, next week we shall be on recess. To open it up now when they have not replied will be talking to ourselves. I think let them reply, then Members can come and debate after reading our report and hearing from the Government side. At that point, I think it would be a better and meaningful debate, other than us debating without listening to them. 

What are we going to debate without listening to what they are saying or their opinion, especially on the facts which we have put forward? I, therefore, concede.

MR NAMBESHE: With all due respect to the chairperson of the taskforce, senior counsel, hon. Katuntu, this House is governed by laws and Rules of Procedure, and I would like to be guided.

Madam Speaker, you are the custodian of the rules. Under which rule –(Interjections)–

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is speaking on a procedural matter.

MR NAMBESHE: I would like to know under what rule - When a report is due for debate and proceedings, it becomes the property of the House. The doctrine of separation of powers is unequivocally clear. This is the Legislature and good governance will demand - even civility – that this House should not allow the Executive to arm twist the business of the Legislature when it is due and it is proceeding.

I want guidance from your Chair, Madam Speaker, with your due indulgence. Even under the normal best practice of the Commonwealth, this has never been known at all. It would be a vice unknown to all of us if it is allowed. It would set a very bad precedent for this House if we so allow the Executive to arm-twist the proceedings of this House and even postpone like they are doing. I just beg for your intervention. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Had hon. Katuntu finished? 

4.45
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Let me cede ground for the chairperson to react to the procedural challenge on this matter. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sure hon. Nambeshe knows that I am the chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. When we talk about the rules of Parliament, that is my comfort zone. 

There is no rule under our Rules of Procedure which prohibits Government from replying to a report that has been made by Parliament. 

My understanding of the Government Chief Whip’s application -if I may call it so – is, can we adjourn this matter until we reply to that report? Then, we can open the matter up for debate after we have listened to them. It is because most of the findings faulted the Executive.

It is fair that we give them an opportunity to reply to us. You see, if your facts are correct, like mine are because they have been founded on evidence, I do not have any problem absolutely. 

In my view, there is no rule actually which my colleague is trying to cite under our Rules of Procedure. What exists is that we give chance to the other party to reply so that we listen to both sides and then have a meaningful debate. If we talk to ourselves, it will be a monologue. We produce our own report and we debate it without listening to the other side. Does that make sense? I think it does not. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Katuntu. One thing I realised is that Government appreciates this report. The report is factual and it is crosscutting - from health, security, education to all other sectors. 

The other thing is that Government wants to come with an appropriate action to the report as the Cabinet and not just as a single minister saying “I will do this.” We have realised we have issues with a minister making a commitment in the House. This report must be taken to the Cabinet and they must make resolutions on the issues that have been raised. That is why they are asking for the additional two weeks to take appropriate actions on what have been raised.

I am giving you the two weeks. Come with a response from Cabinet on all that have been raised. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. Of course I appreciate the liberal and generous interpretation of the rules by the chairperson. I can only add that if the concession is acceptable to the House, it must be conditional, namely that Government is not really intending to buy time and then we delve into an eternal lull without having any response to these matters of urgency. If it is two weeks, it must be purposeful two weeks.

Secondly, it should not be an attempt to introduce new facts because this committee worked on particular terms of reference. They must respond to these particular terms of reference, observations, findings and recommendations. It is because the committee interacted variously with stakeholders including ministers and technocrats. Therefore, they must limit themselves in response to the issues therein. 

If the purpose is to introduce new subjects, then Government must ask for special space and time to bring in new issues. Their response should not be an attempt to introduce new issues for us here to again to ask the committee to go back. We will then end up into an eternal lull. 

They must work within the limits of the report and respond to the observations and recommendations so that Parliament is in position to debate both the response and the recommendations at the same time. We can then weigh whether the response of Government is actually in consonance with the recommendations of the committee. Thank you. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO PARLIAMENT ON FRIDAY, 04 JUNE 2021

(Debate continues_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we started a debate on this motion yesterday and we are continuing with it today. I urge you to be brief to give opportunities to all other Members. 

I will start with the Members who had stood yesterday and could not speak. I request the whips to register the Members who are standing to speak today. 

Honourable members, please sit down and put up your hands. The whips will register you from where you are. I am giving each of you two minutes.

4.55
MS ANNET KATUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech. Allow me to congratulate you upon attaining the very important position of Deputy Speaker. I also congratulate fellow Members.

Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion. The President, in his address, was very clear and precise on the following points:

    1. The past performance and the challenges of the economy;

    2. Consistency in emphasising national development in priority areas which include commercial agriculture, industries, ICT services and infrastructure. These sectors are detailed on page 11.

Madam Speaker, it is in these priority areas highlighted by His Excellency the President that are meant to show proper utilisation of resources. No wonder, the subsequent address was –(Member timed out.)

4.57
MR DENES SEKABIRA (NUP, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the two minutes. I would like to use only one minute of my time and spare the other minute for another topic because I did not complete listening to the State-of-the-Nation Address. I moved out at a point when the President said that he recognised that there was corruption in the Government and that by way of fighting it, he was going to recruit people from the rich families only to be employed by the Government.

Madam Speaker, it is on record that last year when the President was fighting corruption, he walked for seven kilometres and thereafter he reshuffled his Cabinet and dropped hon. Haji Abdu Nadduli and hon. Janat Mukwaya.

In this quest to fight corruption, he said he is only going to consider people from rich families. Therefore, I moved out. I would, therefore, like to make a submission that it is not worth recognition. Thank you so much. I beg to submit.

4.58
DR NOAH MUSA (Independent, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech and I would like to thank you for the opportunity. I rise to support the motion that was moved by my colleague yesterday regarding the State-of-the-Nation Address.

I would like to say that the speech of the President was very precise on issues that are pertinent to this nation. He was very clear on areas of investment that the country needs to emphasize in to drive forward the economy of this country.

His analysis of the markets we have at our disposal - the internal, East Africa, Africa and international - was very good. I would like to implore you to thank him, especially in his efforts to do joint infrastructure investments with DRC to expand the market there.

However, Madam Speaker, there were areas in the President’s speech that need us to reconsider, especially the issue of corruption. I would like to see the President come out very clearly on how to deal with corruption. This is a fight which has been raging for a long time. We need to be convinced that it is not the usual rhetoric.

I was also concerned when the President said that the descendants of the resistance will be the ones to push this country forward because they work for passion and not for money or salary. I would like to say that it is not true that it is only the descendants of the National Resistance Movement that work for passion and not money. It is also not true that all of them work for –(Member timed out.)

5.01
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, you called me to the microphone before I tried to catch your eye and I thank you for that. I have only two to three issues to raise. I would like to give more time to other people to speak.

First of all, I would like to inform Members. So many Members have been asking me what the Pan-African Women’s Organization (PAWO) is all about. The Pan-African Women’s Organization is a continental women's organisation that struggles to liberate the African Continent. It is very surprising, particularly for the young women, to learn that PAWO came into existence before the Organisation of African Unity (OAU). Therefore, PAWO led the way to coordination and collaboration of liberating Africa from the circle of colonialism. It is very important that I get you to know about this because many people have been asking what kind of celebrations went on on Friday and Saturday.

Madam Speaker, I read the President’s statement which he made on the 4th. I have also read the statement made on the 10th. I can only say that the President is the fountain of honour, so we cannot condemn him if anything went wrong. However, we can condemn the people who are supposed to help him do a good job. I would like to say that for those who normally work on the President’s speeches, try to look at the –(Interruption)

There are two items I would like to raise. I would like to bring it to the attention of the President that in the recent appointments that were made, particularly of permanent secretaries, only three were from the east through the north up to West Nile. If I had time, I would have mentioned names - There is Ketty Lamaro, Alfred Okidi and Alex Okello. That is all. There is no other person right from Tororo down to West Nile.

I would like to find out what happened. However, I can only blame those who advise the President because this time, he was looking for fishermen and Langi, Acholi and Iteso are very good fishermen. It is therefore important that the list be reviewed.

We would also like to know why dedicated people, known for their services, like Permanent Secretary David Obong and Mr Mugoya should be retired in public interest.

We, as Parliament, particularly the people that know them to have served so well for all these years, would like to know what crime they committed. Were they involved in corruption or anything that would bring down the image of Uganda? We would like to know this.

Madam Speaker, there are many issues that I would have loved to bring up but like I have already said, I would want the opportunity to be given to others. 

I would also like Parliament to know that, as a mother of this country, I was extremely excited about the President recognising that the best fishermen in Uganda are women. It was as if he had listened to my last speech, when we closed the 10th Parliament. I had condemned the Government for forgetting that women also qualify to occupy top leadership positions as prime ministers or deputies. 

I am very happy today that the President, through his eyes, was able to listen to the cry of the mothers like me. Today, I have a female Vice President and a Prime Minister who is a woman. The first Deputy Prime Minister and the third Deputy Prime Minister are women. That is enough to tone me down but not to silence me. We need more. 

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.) 

5.06 
MR WILLIAM MUSEVENI (Independent, Buwekula South County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the President, especially for talking about agriculture; more so the performance of maize and dairy products. 

The President took agriculture as a centre stage to see Uganda attain a middle-income status by practising commercialised agriculture. However, Ugandans, especially those in the central region, have got challenges under that sector. We have the Foot and Mouth Disease, land wrangles and evictions and counterfeits in pesticides and acaricides. With those problems, I do not think agriculture can do much. 

I call upon the line ministries to shoot down these problems. I do not think these problems can persist for all that long. For years, we have been faced with the Foot and Mouth Disease here; what is the Ministry Of Agriculture doing about it? We have counterfeits but is that a business in Uganda? Is the ministry concerned? Is the Ministry of Lands doing what it is supposed to do by shooting down land wrangles? The people are on tenterhooks. How can they develop when they are being evicted? Thank you. I submit. 

5.09 
MR SIMON OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my other colleagues, particularly those who have applauded the President for his wise speech during the State of the Nation Address. 

I would also like to acknowledge the fact that the UPDF that he spoke of has been able to usher in peace and security for this country for the last 35 years, regardless of the few incidences here and there. Nonetheless, we have not had a conventional war in Uganda but what we have seen is Uganda exporting peace to other countries. For example, as we speak, we have our forces bringing peace to Somalia and ensuring that there is safety and peace in Equatorial Guinea.  

What I need to request His Excellency is to put in place very strategic measures, especially those regarding the protection of our strategic resources, for example oil. This is because we have always seen countries where there are such resources, are prone to war and economic attack. In the long run other people come and scoop their resources. Therefore, I would like to implore upon His Excellency to consider putting in place a nuclear strategic defence force. 

I am very happy that he spoke about our space exploration and putting in place a space station. I would like to see where we have put a nuclear strategic defence shield within to –(Member timed out.) 

5.11 
MR PATRICK NSANJA (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join others in thanking you for steering this House in a direction that is appreciated by Members of Parliament. 

When we talk about the State of the Nation Address, we see the President performing his constitutional duties, and in response, the Leader of the Opposition is also mandated to give an alternative report in form of interventions and the way forward. I, therefore, would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the elaborate interventions reported here. 

I will particularly talk about the corruption in the country. In his speech, the President alluded to the fact that there is corruption in the country. It is true that the vice of corruption is rampant because it is seen in safe homes of technocrats exaggerating figures in the procurement process. However, he did not come out clearly to talk about the strategies to be used in curbing this corruption. 

Madam Speaker, I urge this august House to collectively support the budget of the Judiciary when it comes here. We have the Anti-Corruption Court in place and we should support the increase in the budget so that cases in respect to corruption are handled amicably.  

The other issue, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude. 

MR NSANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In his speech, the President said that the Ugandan population will go up by eight million people in the next four years. That would mean that two million people per every two years. However, it does not give us the strategy on how the population increase will be catered for in terms of resources; the land for the agricultural growth and the indications, how people will be supported in the health sector and schools because the population would have gone up. 

That is key when we are handling matters of national importance because health, education, agriculture and security are important when the population is on the rise. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to officially notify Members here that we have lost a gallant and senior cadre, hon. Victoria Kakoko, who represented the people of Mukono District as well as Kayunga District. She served Parliament for three terms.

Her burial will be tomorrow, Friday, at 2.00 p.m. in my constituency, Ntenjeru County South, at Nazigo, Kayunga District. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we observe a moment of silence for our departed comrade.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

5.15
MR ALFRED EDAKASI (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for finally giving me a chance. 

I would like to thank the President for his intentional insistence on ensuring that infrastructure in our country is a priority in the budget, and I heard that in his speech. In particular, I thank him for the railway line. We, the people of Teso, have waited for the railway line since 1987 but because of the outbreak of the war, we have never been able to recover. This railway line will solve many problems, including eliminating the middleman that have stood between the local people and the market.

I was also happy that he focused on the roads and I thank him for that. The people of Kaberamaido have hope in water transport. For many years, since 1940, the people of Kaberamaido have not had an opportunity to cross Lake Kyoga the way they used to do. To see come out in the plan that the Government is pushing for the next five years through the BKK Ferry brings hope to our people. I thank him for that.

I also thank him for providing a special fund for investment through Uganda Development Bank (UDB). My advice to the minister is that they should decentralise Uganda Development Bank. The people upcountry cannot access this fund. Decentralising the office –(Member timed out.)

5.18
MR RICHARD LUMU (DP, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is also my maiden speech. I have realised that it is very difficult for your eyes to catch people like me. However, I would like to congratulate you for attaining that very high office of this nation.

I want to raise two issues. One is the Parish Development Model, which was proposed by the President. If you go to my constituency and Mubende subregion and talk about the Parish Development Model, none of the people will understand it. What they understand is the cooperative union, known as Wamala Growers Cooperative Union.

I would like to suggest that money that is put in something that is not understood should be channelled to rehabilitate cooperative unions. These unions will act as a market for produce of the people of Uganda and they will fight poverty. Many programmes of the Government have been established and taken to constituencies and villages, but they have all turned out to be failures because they are not well understood. I do not know whether research was conducted on the Parish Development Model and people were made to understand the model.

Therefore, I propose that the President –(Member timed out.)

5.20
LT GEN. JAMES MUGIRA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I rise to make a contribution to the debate on the State-of-the-Nation Address by His Excellency the President, specifically on his views on page 22, about development of society during the first, second, third and fourth industrial revolution.

Before I proceed, this being my maiden speech, permit me to add my voice to congratulate you upon your election and assumption of the high office of the Deputy Speaker. I also pledge my constituency’s total and unwavering support and cooperation during your term of office. (Applause)

The President commented on the fourth industrial revolution and observed that many times, we have had to swim against the current. He indeed quoted the late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere - may his soul rest in eternal peace – who said, “Africa needs to run while others walk”. 

Society does not develop by accident. Developed societies at whatever level they are now are a result of advancement in the area of science and technology.

Outside this Parliament, I have special interests because I am the head of the defence industries in this country. As you may be aware, defence industries worldwide are strategic facilities and they are always in the lead and then commercial industries follow. Indeed –(Member timed out.)  Thank you very much. 

I just wanted to say that apart from the military intentions of the bariatric missiles and nuclear technology, inventions like digital technology, the internet, navigation, plastic surgery, the microwave and water purification, among others, have all been inventions of the military.

I can see you do not have a lot of time but the point I wanted to put across, Madam Speaker, is that when we are talking about the Fourth Industrial Revolution, we are talking another language altogether. We are talking about artificial intelligence, robotics, genetic engineering and cloud computing. In Uganda, what are we talking about now? In Africa, what are we talking about in the state where we are? How can we talk of social-economic development of this country when we do not talk about science and technology?

In the concluding statement of the President on that point, he said that Uganda will not miss the bus of history again. Therefore, I call upon honourable members, that during this 11th Parliament, we pass necessary legislation that will help us to advance to another level as far as science and technology is concerned. 

Honourable members, among others, we need to – 

    1. Provide all the support, including approving the budget, to the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, especially the innovation fund.

    2. Support the proposal to have our great resource of scientists, who are already doing a commendable job, as we witnessed during COVID-19, to be well remunerated.

    3. Support institutions like the Uganda Industrial Research Institute and Luweero Defence Industries, which falls under my docket –(Member timed out.)

5.24
MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity, after staying in the House here yesterday up to 7.00 p.m. 

I stand here to add my voice on the State of the Nation Address that, in my opinion, addressed the key critical issues of economic development. The aspect of the speech highlighted the issues of fiscal decentralisation that this country has been grappling with for quite some time. 

As a country, we adopted the Local Government Act in 1997, and we have done very well in having constituencies and subcounties, but we have not done well in terms of sending money to the communities.

Therefore, I would like to appreciate that speech where the whole component of parish model was contained, but also all the different aspects of financing that goes down up to the community level. 

There were four aspects that His Excellency highlighted. Those are the critical key drivers of rural development worldwide. In my view, I think that if we implement all these issues that His Excellency highlighted, our country will achieve its destined vision. 

Finally, there was an issue of the impact of COVID-19 on our economy. Much as I appreciate the alternative views that our Leader of the Opposition highlighted, I also noted that in the World Bank report of the June 20th that worldwide all the economies are affected by COVID-19 –(Member timed out.)

5.27
MR JOHN PAUL LUKWAGO (DP, Kyotera County, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. By and large, the President addressed in a post-mortem way most of the issues that are affecting us, as Ugandans. I am only falling short in expressing my reservation about the concerns he raised that can move the industrial sector in this country. 

He mentioned three bottlenecks which were the issue of money; the cost of transport; the issue of electricity and labour. 

However, I felt a little disappointed when it got to the issue of electricity. The President clearly mentioned that the mistakes that were made by Umeme and the Bujagali projects were fundamental in raising the costs of power in Uganda. He mentioned that it was to the extent of about 55.3 per cent. 

However, the President never proposed any sort of solution. He said that all this happened; yet he was the Leader of Government at the time, and that he was not knowledgeable about it. That does not give me hope as a Ugandan, that we can move at that pace and speed and achieve the industrialisation we are talking about. 

5.29
PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Independent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion. The State of the Nation Address was well delivered and rich in content, and similarly, the response of the Leader of the Opposition was good. 

One of the indicators of a growing democracy is having an organised opposition, with alternative policies and responses. Thank you very much. (Applause)

On the economic side, the President came up with interventions that are going to stimulate demand. I give him a plus.

On security, he is committed to having a professional army and security agencies. We need stability if we are to move forward. 

On foreign policy, his vision on regional integration and having regional markets is very important. But if we are to make a breakthrough, we need to break through a global market. 

Finally, I am impressed by his determination to fight corruption. I hope this time we shall join hands together; all the stakeholders and fight corruption, because one of the crises that is facing Africa is corruption. If we can reduce corruption by 10 per cent, we shall have substantive resources to move our economies. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me time. 

5.31
MR DICKSON KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and commend the President for an elaborate speech that he gave. 

I would also like to appreciate the efforts of the Government that has seen an increase in the number of industries in Uganda that now stand over 500, and are employing a lot of our people. It is a good job done by the Government and we believe that this has been as a result of good governance; as well as good policies. 

While we are proud of this achievement, I would like to indicate that many years back, Uganda used to be a net importer of most of the products that we are producing here now. As a result of these industries that have grown, we have cut down on the imports that we used to import from our neighbours. Often this has led to trade wars and discomfort in our region. 

An example is our milk exports to our neighbours that have been denied market over the last one year. This has affected our farmers and has affected our revenue. We have seen our exports in the region decline. 

We would like to request Government to have strong negotiators; that will be able to stand with the East African Community treaty and discuss with our neighbours, so that we have free trade in the region; so that as we go into production, we produce with a market. I beg to submit.

5.33
MS JENIFER MUHEESI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This one being my maiden speech, I would like to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, upon the victory you achieved. I congratulate all of you, my colleagues. I know what you went through is the same as what I went through. 

I am here to support the motion that the President’s State of the Nation Address was very good and needs to be recognised and supported. I will base my debate on two things.

The first one is the security of this country. It has all been his effort to make sure that we have security and that we can even export to other countries. The second is the East African integration that has also been his effort and we believe that we should join hands with him. If we join hands with him, we will have very good market as East Africa and all that we are producing will have a market, as this has been a challenge.

Maybe the third matter is on the Opposition. If it was not for him having an organised opposition group that always opposes - whether it is good or bad, he still continues doing the right thing. It is all about his effort – (Member timed out.)

5.36
MR MOSES OGWAL (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech. Therefore, allow me to thank the people of Dokolo North for voting me and enabling me to also congratulate you and other Members for successfully attaining the positions we have.

I have come here to support the motion and thank His Excellency the President and appreciate the speech made by the Leader of the Opposition. I particularly loved that the President’s presentation is based on figures, particularly related to growth - elaborating the growth of the economy from $1.3 billion in 1986 to $40 billion.

I also appreciate and recognise the challenges which he mentioned, from locusts to floating islands. However, the major issue is coronavirus. Madam Speaker, the coronavirus has suppressed demand and production and that was key in suppressing the growth to three per cent. I do not understand why we say that we cannot talk about coronavirus as a challenge which has affected our development.

I was also very happy with the paper, particularly on socio-economic development, where the President –(Interruption)- Thank you very much. I was happy with the socio-economic development issues, particularly the development in homesteads, which the President is targeting.

Allow me to elaborate on one product - coffee. The production of coffee, which he said has grown to seven million bags, has a special advantage which we should be watching. The coffee frost in Brazil gives us an opportunity to increase the price of coffee. So, let us work and follow up that area.

The other areas, which are key, are in agriculture. Let us follow areas where we see agriculture supporting agriculture, with agriculture being a market. For example, there is maize, soya beans and cassava in the rural areas and also sugarcane, which we were talking about. This could support the development of livestock in the chain and bring up household income.

We also have an advantage in the oil sector, which has come in. We have signed the Front-End Engineering and Design (FEED). We are expected to have over 15,000 sophisticated consumers. Under Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU), we will, for example, have about 65,000 cartons of eggs consumed per day. Are we prepared for that? It goes on, up to meat. Let us work hard to ensure that this works for us.

Under BUBU, we also have construction-related issues. Our budget runs with expenditure running under procurement, where you have construction at 25 per cent but if –(Member timed out.)

5.40
MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me catch your eye. I join colleagues to thank the President for fulfilling his constitutional obligation of speaking to the country every financial year. I also thank my Leader of the Opposition for a very wonderful alternative statement.

After listening to the President and knowing that the State-of-the-Nation Address is a political balance sheet, I took it upon myself to look at other addresses of the preceding years. I found that in 2018, after the death of AIGP Kaweesi, the President told the country that police had been infiltrated by some criminal elements. 

Thereafter, in 2019, 2020 and 2021, the President has not updated the country on how far he has gone in clearing police of the infiltration. At this point, when we meet police, we do not know whether we are talking to kawukumi or we have the right people because we have not received an update to that effect.

At that time, the President told us that they had arrested 90 people and they were awaiting trial. This time, the President decried frustration by the Judiciary - that they arrest many people and the Judiciary simply releases them. I do not know whether that has informed the recent practice, where we see extrajudicial killings of suspects.

Madam Speaker, that kind of prompted me to think of profiling the people the President talked about - the 90 people that had been arrested. How many of them were released by the Judiciary, as the President said – (Member timed out.) - I beg for a minute to conclude. Thank you. 

I beg to give oral notice that in future, I will bring a motion to profile the 90 persons that were arrested at that time, to see whether they are alive, or whether they have been killed, or whether they have been released and they are at large terrorising our people. 

I beg to submit. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me time.

5.42
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (Independent, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me to express my views on the State-of-the-Nation Address by the President.

I took the initiative and time to go through the speech and surely observed that our President has a clear vision for this country. I observed this especially when he said that our cardinal role and historical task is to cause socio-economic transformation of our societies. 

I also agree with him that it is time for us to change our societies. However, he observed that even though the country is running well, we still have a big problem with corruption and that perturbed me. It left me wondering because he observed that corruption has gone all the way from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and penetrated the other ministries. It is even here at Parliament, up to the IGG’s office. When you observe on the ground, you will find that corruption has penetrated this country through the civil servants in the local government.

If we want to achieve socio-economic transformation of this country, how can we do it when we still have corruption everywhere in this country? I know that the President is the appointing authority of all these officials who are making us lament year in, year out –(Member timed out.)

5.45
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in supporting the State of the Nation Address that was delivered on 4 June 2021 by His Excellency the President. I applaud him for its content; it was very relevant to what is happening in this country.

I recognise him as a God-fearing person. I know he talked about the Passover Feast and indeed, I know that in Romans 13:1, the Bible says that leaders are anointed by God. 

I am thankful that what he refers to as temporary phenomena- this being the rising water levels in the lakes, the landslides and the Coronavirus - have been dealt with, although we are still dealing with COVID-19.

I am also thankful for the part of food security, especially during this period of the COVID-19 pandemic particularly in the rural areas. It is important that we join the money economy. This calls for continuous sensitisation and provision of equipment, pesticides, acaricides and vaccines to the population. 

He noted that our maize can be absorbed but it requires careful handling. It requires increased efforts by extension workers and also by the District Veterinary Officers (DVOs) in our districts.

Commercial agriculture is an area he encouraged using the Parish Development Model and I would support it too. I thank him for the wholesome consideration of factors that facilitate agriculture like the road network, markets, availability of funding for farming and electricity. I do support the Parish Development Model. 

I encourage production, storage, processing and marketing. These should be emphasised.

I would also like to thank him for consideration of the youth and to pray particularly that attention be given to the girl child and she is protected from abuse. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.47
MS CHRISTINE AKELLO (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the President’s speech contained in the State of the Nation Address. 

Security is fundamental and it is our role to make sure we keep it. It is through security that our socio-economic and political lives can grow. I quote what the President said, that the challenge is that the police use mobile phones and yet they are supposed to use radios. 

I have been moving around but I still see policemen and policewomen on WhatsApp playing on their phones when they are on duty. I urge the security people that when going on duty, they should leave their phones behind at the counter the way we, Members of Parliament, leave our phones when we are on duty. I thank you. I beg to submit. 

5.48
MS KEVIN OJINGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance to stand here and make my maiden speech. I am standing here to support the motion that was moved yesterday about the fulfilment of the President’s speech on 4 June 2021. 

I rise to thank the President for fulfilling his pledge on building for us the long awaited road; Tirinyi to Pallisa, Pallisa to Kumi and Pallisa to Kamonkoli. I must testify that the road is one of the best roads in the eastern region, as we speak.

The President also spoke about corruption. He said that we should focus on fighting corruption and commercialisation of agriculture to raise household incomes, among others. He insisted on using Lugwere and Ateso words and said we should avoid, “okukolera ekidakyonka. Asoma anwakoik”. I am speaking my language. So –(Member timed out.)

5.51
MS PEGGY WAAKO (NRM, Older Persons Representative, Female): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to address this august House. Today, I am making my maiden speech. 

I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your election to that high office of Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Please allow me to thank and congratulate the Fountain of Honour, His Excellency the President of Uganda, for the State of the Nation Address where he addressed the country on a number of very important issues affecting our motherland. Most importantly, I thank the President for handling the COVID-19 pandemic so well compared to other countries in the world. 

When the first batch of vaccines arrived, the President directed that old persons should be given priority, a decision I thank him for. 

With all these efforts made by His Excellency the President, I also request that if these vaccines can be made further accessible by the older persons deep in the villages through a door to door vaccination campaign –(Member timed out.)

5.53
MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NUP, Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the opportunity granted me to comment on the State of the Nation Address by the President. It was okay but not good. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to dwell on the agriculture sector, which is the backbone of Uganda’s economy. Allow me to bring it to your attention that agriculture employs 72 per cent of the working class in Uganda. However, 68 per cent dwell on subsistence agriculture and only four per cent are practising commercial agriculture. I wonder how only four per cent will shift the agricultural sector and transform the rest into commercialisation. 

Out of 36.6 per cent of the GDP of Uganda, we have 23 per cent that agriculture accounts for. However, there are no incentive measures being put in place for sensitive sectors like fishing; the only reward was the 8 per cent tax levy on fish maw without any incentive to that.

Madam Speaker, a number of measures that have been put forward to improve the agriculture sector, such as NAADS, Operation Wealth Creation to improve 68 per cent of the households, Youth Livelihood and women empowerment have ended in vain. However, a lot of money, like Shs 265 billion, has been budgeted for this. Also, Emyooga, for which Shs 260 billion was budgeted, has not yielded any results on the ground. 

5.56
MR GABRIEL OKUMU (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon attaining that high office. I would also like to congratulate fellow Members for having come this far.

Madam Speaker, I would like to support the motion on the following grounds: First of all, I would like to congratulate His Excellency the President upon having a vision for this country. Secondly, and most importantly, without diluting the matter, I applaud him for having thought about the poor man in the village in these coming five years. The President’s speech was very clear about poverty alleviation for our people. 

Thirdly, I also would like to applaud the President for having opened roads in the Democratic Republic of Congo. However, I would like to say that our people in West Nile are also grappling with poor roads. Therefore, I would like to draw his attention to our local roads in the rural areas of the West Nile region. I thank you very much and I beg to submit. 

5.58
MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE (Independent, Isingiro West County, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I start by congratulating you for your resounding victory and also congratulating my fellow Members of Parliament for this victory.

I rise to support the motion on the speech of the President. It was a very good speech, with a vision especially on how he controlled the floods and landslides in Lake Victoria. However, we should look for the root causes of these disasters. The root cause is mostly land degradation, especially of the wetlands and forest reserves.

Concerning scientists’ good pay, this would encourage most scientists to be more innovative and make this country shine again.

Regarding agriculture, I support him. With this parish model, now he is taking services nearer to the people and the production has increased, especially in my district. We are now producing excess matooke and we are able to feed ourselves.

About corruption, all of us need to fight it. It does not have borders; whether you are in the Opposition or in the Movement, no matter the colour, we should all join the President and fight corruption. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.00
MS MARY NAKATO (Independent, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to put this forward to supplement or complement the presidential State of the Nation Address.

The basic economic activities done in Buyende District are fishing, pastoralism and farming. I would like to supplement on fishing. In Buyende, at the lakeshores of Bukungu, we have an ice plant that was commissioned but is incomplete. I would like to bring this to your attention because so many people are suffering. To date, the fishermen are still looking for ice outside the district. When His Excellency talked about economic transformation, I believe fishing, which is under agriculture, should be considered.

Secondly, still on fishing, we have illegal roadblocks that are being planted. I beg the person in charge of wealth creation to take this up. It is a problem and hindrance to the transformation, economically, for the people of Buyende District. I beg to submit. Thank you.

6.02
MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This being my maiden speech, I congratulate you for your ascension to that position. I would like to commend His Excellency the President for the correct political, economic and social line he has taken in dealing with the socio-economic struggles of our people as detailed in the State-of-the-Nation Address. This is the right compass direction despite the strong tide. 

Madam Speaker, noteworthy is the fact that His Excellency the President correctly diagnosed contemporary bottlenecks to our socio-economic progress at a critical time when we are faced with the pandemic. The President’s prescription, of our people engaging in the four core areas, especially our young people, will enable us to deal with the unemployment question fundamentally. That is provided if this guidance is correctly implemented devoid of corruption.

Madam Speaker, by the UBOS statistics, we are all cognisant of the fact that the young people of Uganda are numerically superior in comparison –(Member timed out.) 

6.05
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Omoro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the name “Okot” has become very popular now in the 11th Parliament. I join my colleagues in congratulating the President upon delivering the State of the Nation Address to the country.

The President, in his speech on the State of the Nation Address, ably stated the problem of Uganda. However, he fell short in prescribing solutions to those problems. Where he did, he gave underdose prescriptions. 

All the sectors that the President mentioned as spurs to economic growth, if not matched with corresponding budgets, will only be a list of to-do-things without transforming into economic growth. 

I am aware that what the President came up with is all geared towards seeing Uganda attain a middle-income status but in attaining that status, no one must be left behind. For no one to be left behind, we know very well that it is the agricultural sector that employs –(Member timed out.) 

6.06
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion in thanking the President for having fulfilled his constitutional mandate. I would also like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for all the alternative views that he has presented in this august House.

Indeed, the President noted it very clearly that the year 2020 was full of challenges but we thank him that most of those challenges were dealt with to the extent that we overcame many of them. 

However, a battle of that nature, sometimes, is continuous. For example, in his State of the Nation Address, the President mentioned that locusts invaded Uganda and were dealt with. However, locusts are living things that reproduce and as we speak, they have invaded Agago North County in the subcounties of Lira Kato, Lapono, parts of Omiya Pacwa and even Adilang, especially in the villages of Obugulu, where many farmers have lost their crops. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity as well to request you to help so that we come to the rescue of these people because they are dire problems. They have lost seeds and this is the second rainy season. They need some seeds. Even the crops –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, there is an issue of locusts today. It is not something of the past, so, make a follow up with the honourable member.   

MR MUSILA: Order, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whom are you ordering? 

MR MUSILA: It is about the order of the House, Madam Speaker. Rule 83(c) says that while a Member is speaking, all other Members shall be silent. However, I have noticed that on your left and behind, we have a lot of chaos. We do not know whether you are presiding over two Parliaments here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, this is a House as I have always reminded you. Hon. Musila, thank you for being a watchman. 

6.09 
MS FLORENCE ASIIMWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and congratulations on that big office. I rise to speak to the motion of thanking His Excellency the President on his address on the state of Uganda on 4 June 2021, where he highlighted a number of salient issues. 

One, he focused on science, technology and innovation. A nation without science, technology and innovation is a lost and backward nation. Therefore, His Excellency’s main focus on science is a clear indication that he wants Uganda to move to another level. Science will create jobs for our youth, think-tanks and will also be able to –(Member timed out.) My two minutes were not over. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it a maiden speech? 

MS ASIIMWE: No, it is not. Madam Speaker, the second one was on the household income. We should support the President on the Parish Model, especially when we pilot a few parishes and see how they will work before we roll out the whole programme. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.11 
MR DONALD KATALIHWA (NRM, Mwenge County South, Kyenjonjo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion of thanking the President of the Republic of Uganda. It was a perfect presentation and I stand to support that. 

When you read through the speech and listen to him, he entirely focused on the rural people that we represent in Parliament. The President’s focus on creating wealth for the people - supporting our people to come from the rural economy to achieve a middle-income status - was a very big indicator that the President is focusing on the people and I support that.

The President also focused on the one-acre model of bringing people out of poverty. This is a very good indicator that somebody with one acre of land, especially in the rural areas, can get out of poverty by taking up innovations so that he can maximise that one acre of land to develop. 

However, as you notice, most of our people – and I think it was raised by one of my colleagues from Mubende - in our rural areas have challenges of land conflicts: people are being evicted. Therefore, for this one-acre model to take up the root that the President wants, we need to emphasise peacebuilding in our communities and resolve the land conflicts in our communities so that people can practise the one-acre model of agriculture.  

Madam Speaker, the President emphasised the role of the Members of Parliament in getting people out of poverty by assisting the people to solve their problem. That means we need to focus on our people’s problems such as roads, health, education and other sectors so that we assist them to come out of poverty. 

There are so many issues that were raised –(Member timed out.) 

6.13 
MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since it is my first time to speak, I would like to join the rest of the Members to congratulate you upon – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, do not make your own caucus. We are in the House.

MS NABUKEERA: I would like to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, upon your victory as the Deputy Speaker. I also want to congratulate honourable members upon making it to the 11th Parliament. 

My point is about the increment of salaries for scientists. Whereas I appreciate the increment, I feel that we should also put into consideration the other categories of professionals. I would appreciate if the Government increased salaries for all public servants because this would enhance effectiveness. 

I beg to submit. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.14
MR HASSAN KIRUMIRA (NUP, Katikamu South County, Luwero): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  With due respect, the address made by the President on the state of the nation - the focus of my debate is on the education sector. 

Fundamental to the growth of the nation, informed by Vision 2020 and NDP III, among others, is the notion of education. The rationale of these programmes is to address the socio-economic imbalances or issues of our country through educating our people.

At the moment, what is problematic is how we are handling the education sector, especially after the outbreak of COVID-19 or even before. The state of our schools and children of school-going age is appalling. Cases of child pregnancies and school dropouts are bad news for our country. 

The state of our teachers, especially in private schools, is heart-breaking. This is based on the fact that as a nation, we promised educational materials to our rural children, including TVs, radios at each and every village or household, but unfortunately, this never happened.

The Shs 20 billion that was promised to our teachers in private schools was never delivered. To that end, Madam Speaker, I would like to associate myself with the response to the State-of-the-Nation Address by our Leader of the Opposition. We need to critically review the Education Act –(Member timed out.)

6.17
MS RITA ATUKWASA (Independent, Woman representative, Mbarara City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you upon your victory and I would like to congratulate my colleagues as well. 

I rise to support the motion and to applaud the President for his exhibited brilliance, as always, especially in ensuring that the country is secure. The cameras that are installed in the cities and major towns in Uganda are a great tool in facilitating the tracing of hard-core criminals. 

However, Madam Speaker, you are aware that as we speak now, the insecurity that ravages women and girls is not on the streets. As we speak, a number of children and young girls have been impregnated and violence against women has gone higher. It remains to be addressed by the appropriate authorities at various levels, so that the emancipation of women in Uganda can be enjoyed fully. 

At an appropriate time, I hope we shall have the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development here together with the Minister of Education and Sports to specifically highlight how the future of the young girls that have become mothers without their consent can be handled. 

In addition to that, the two methodologies of the programme based budgeting and the parish model do speak to themselves very well. I see it as a good mechanism to help increase the involvement of women and youth in Uganda in the development processes. I do applaud the President for appointing more women in leadership; that completes the cycle.  Whereas we go to school –(Member timed out.) 

6.19
MS VICTORIOUS ZAWEDDE (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  This is my maiden speech. I stand to appreciate His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for acknowledging the existence of disaster in Uganda. It is true that Uganda has been hit by floods, landslides, famine, and even this COVID-19 pandemic. 

For your information, Nakasongola District is surrounded by Lake Kyoga, and it has been almost two and a half years since we were affected by floods. However, these floods have really affected us; our Government institutions, like the primary schools, have been swept by water. One of the health centres - Lwampanga Health Centre III - was swept by the floods. The maternity ward, the placenta pit and even the health workers’ unit were all swept away by the floods. 

As the situation stands now, the health centre is faced with congestion. There is a single small room where vaccines are administered to patients and admissions are done as well. Madam Speaker, my humble request is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, together with the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, come to Nakasongola and intervene. 

I would also like to appreciate His Excellency for acknowledging the rate of corruption in Uganda. It is true that corruption has led to our country’s backwardness in terms of the economy. We are fighting to uplift our economy, but again, we have the biggest disease within the House. 

My humble request is that we put in place laws that can limit the rate of corruption. As the legislative arm of Government, let us come up –(Member timed out.) 

6.21
MR OJARA MAPENDUZI (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Madam Speaker, I join the rest of the honourable colleagues in thanking His Excellency the President of Uganda for finding space to steer the country. His Excellency did a commendable job in communicating the aspirations and direction the country has to take. 

However, there are signs that are worrying as far as the fight to eradicate poverty is concerned. There are statistics that are coming up - the recent ones came from Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) - showing the level of poverty in this country, and it is sad to note that there are areas in this country that are doing extremely badly. Recently, the statistics that were produced by UBOS indicated that a place like Acholi subregion is actually performing even worse than what it used to be. That also includes places like Karamoja and other parts. 

It is, therefore, important, Madam Speaker, that deliberate efforts should be taken. I would like to particularly point out that there are programmes that were specifically designed to support some of these areas; for example, the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund III (NUSAF III). The NUSAF III did a commendable job; unfortunately, it ended and we were told that there are efforts being made to have a successor programme. 

It is important that the Government makes a deliberate effort to expeditiously handle some of these special programmes, which would help to support those areas that are not doing well. Thank you very much.

6.24
MR WILSON KAJWENGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): My name is Wilson Kajwengye, I represent Nyabushozi constituency. I rise to support the motion applauding the President for an excellent State of the Nation Address, specifically when the President raised the issue of African integration and called for a wider market for our agricultural products. This will positively affect my people of Nyabushozi because then, their products will be sold. 

All right thinking Ugandans should support the integration of Africa and especially East Africa. In fact, the gates of hell are wide open and ready for anybody not enthusiastic about Africa’s integration. 

I support the President when he espouses and consolidates the centre of gravity for the protection, defence and survival of the African continent. I support him on that and on many other things. 

The President told us clearly in the State of the Nation Address that 61 per cent of the Ugandan population has been lifted to the money economy. It is now incumbent upon us, honourable Members of Parliament, to legislate positively to uplift the remaining 39 per cent to the money economy. I submit, Madam Speaker. 

6.25
DR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi): Madam Speaker, I rise to add my voice to the rest of my colleagues to thank His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. What has caught my eye are three key messages. 

The first one is the strategic direction that His Excellency has provided this country in security, agricultural modernisation, industry, services, infrastructure and ICT which we appreciate him for. 

My concern is walking the talk; the execution of the beautiful programmes, projects and services backed by sufficient resources that as Parliament, we need to support the population in. As the Executive, we need to see to it that we put the people of Uganda at heart. We need to execute the beautiful issues that we have articulated in our social contract with Ugandans. 

Last but not least is the emphasis on security and safety as well as humanitarian response. The President has been categorically clear and has provided that stewardship in the response to COVID-19, the locust invasion, the floods, amongst other things. 

What we need to do as Ugandans is strengthen our national and sub-national disaster preparedness and response efforts. I submit. Thank you.

6.27
MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the motion on the Floor on two grounds. One is the coherence of the policy package well-articulated in the State of the Nation Address. The second is the tool that is data-based, that has been handed over to us through the same State of the Nation Address. 

Before I make my submission, this being my first time to stand on the Floor and speak, may I take this opportunity to make my maiden statement. 

I am Maximus Ochai, MP, West Budama County North, Tororo District in Bukedi subregion, a subregion which is both rich and poor. The subregion is endowed with natural resources. It is located at the border between Kenya and Uganda. It has a population that is largely youthful. It is well networked with roads, railway and airfield. It is a rich sub-region. 

However, one third of the population of the sub-region is living below the poverty line. It is poor. The people of West Budama County North and Bukedi sub-region at large have been craving for affirmative action that will see the other one third of the population being lifted out of poverty to live above the poverty line. 

That, in my view, will ensure that the road network joining the subregion from Busia to Bukedea – in my mind, the affirmative action that we are advocating for here is that we should see an upgrade of the intra sub-regional road network connecting Busia to Bukedea. 

We should see elevation of Tororo District Hospital to a regional hospital. We should see an upgrade of Tororo Municipality to a city. We should see an upgrade of the industrial areas in Tororo and Busia to industrial parks. 

With that, I beg that this Parliament puts into consideration the plea of my people in West Budama North and Bukedi subregion at large. 

Now, back to the motion on the Floor, I indicated that I stood here to support the motion on two grounds with respect to the coherence of the policy package that the President articulated in the State of the Nation Address. 

I see, when unpacked, that the policy on security provides us with an opportunity to have peace and stability. 

The policy on the growth of the economy will provide us with the opportunity for macroeconomic stability. Thank you. 

6.31
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion thanking the President for his State of the Nation Address and for fulfilling his constitutional mandate. 

I stand to thank the President for mentioning infrastructural development in terms of road network in the rural villages. A number of roads were mentioned which are going to be tarmacked and among the many, we had the one of Kabimbiri-Zirobwe-Bamunanika-Wobulenzi. 

In 2017 when we had Heroes’ Day in Zirobwe, the President pledged to make sure that the road from Zirobwe to Kikyuusa, Bamugolode up to Nakasongola town is tarmacked but when you look at the budget and the national work plan, that road has not been mentioned. 

Another issue is about the selection of contractors. There are contractors who have been given contracts and they are doing shoddy work. I would like to mention to this Parliament that there is a bridge being constructed to connect Nakasongola District to Kayunga District. This contract was given to Omega Construction Company in 2018 and it was supposed to last for only 18 months. The contract sum was Shs 15 billion. 

This contractor is the one who had abandoned a contract of just Shs 200 million and I wondered how he was given a contract of Shs 15 billion. The 18 months elapsed and the contractor asked for an extension of six months and they also elapsed. He asked for another six months, which have also elapsed and the bridge is nowhere to be seen. 

My humble prayer is to the Committee of Infrastructure to visit the site and see how this person is tarnishing our Government’s name. I beg to submit.

6.33
MS PATIENCE NKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech. I congratulate you, Madam Speaker and all honourable Members of the 11th Parliament.

I stand here to support the motion to thank the President on his State of the Nation Address speech. He talked about agriculture, tourism and security. In Kanungu, we depend on all those things, being a border district.

We have two national parks; Queen Elizabeth National Park and Bwindi Impenetrable National Park. I thank him for promoting tourism but urge him to help us in the agricultural sector. Farmers have a problem of wild animals eating farmers’ crops. If we can get an electric fence, it will help those people who are bordering the national parks to secure their gardens or plantations.

On the issue of security, I thank the President of Uganda who makes sure that everyone is secure. When we are going to bed, we do not turn around to see who is going to hurt us. However, on the issue of putting a chip on everyone’s car, I do not know whether it is a good idea because it might breach the citizens’ privacy and might cause more harm to us than it will prevent most of the insecurity.

On top of that, I recommend to the President of Uganda or those who are giving out contracts like in ICT, that they award these contracts to Ugandan people - because we have so many people who are good at ICT - instead of giving them to fake Russians who are bankrupt. I beg to submit.

6.35
MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the motion to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. The President has been very clear on the issue of job creation in this country.

There are a few things that we are not doing well as a country. Our contractors and suppliers are not being paid and that is killing the industry that is employing many of our youths. What is also funny is that UDB is actually calling these very people to lend them at a subsidised rate yet their money is being held in the different Government entities.

The issue of local content has also not been emphasised. This industry of contracting has really helped our youths but Government has failed to emphasise the issue of local content. Many of our contracts are being taken over by foreigners and they come with their own people. 

I request that those in Government positions take this seriously. By way of creating jobs, we need to do research and investment. That way, we shall do industrialisation –(Member timed out.)

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I rise on a matter of procedure regarding the attendance of ministers in this important session. We have a Cabinet of over 70 ministers and we are discussing the State of the Nation Address. Honourable members are raising critical issues that touch various sectors of our country but the ministers, who are supposed to be around to take notes, are not there.

Madam Speaker, are we proceeding rightly to be discussing a State of the Nation Address and only about 15 out of over 70 Cabinet ministers are around? Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Asuman Basalirwa, we started this debate yesterday. The only fortunate bit with you is that you can walk out, take tea and come back, unlike me who is permanent and pensionable here. (Laughter)

The ministers have also gone to take tea, the way you had gone to do. (Laughter) So, we are proceeding well. We have had almost 180 people debating. Hon. Basalirwa, I thank you for your concern. (Applause)

All the information that regards each sector is being recorded. That is why we have these recordings. The Government Chief Whip is here. The Prime Minister, Hajjati Nakadama is also here. Can you have respect for Hajjati? (Applause) Hajji, can’t you have respect for Hajjati?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): In fact, Madam Speaker, we are concerned about the empty bench of the Opposition when the statement for the Leader of the Opposition is being discussed. However, we were just keeping quiet.

6.40
MS AGNES KIRABO (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you upon election to your office. I take this opportunity to inform you and honourable colleagues that as a youth representative for the central region, I represent over 28 districts.

In the same spirit, we have youth leaders, right from villages of each constituency to district level. First of all, I thank the President for the Government programmes he has put in place to boost the youth. However, the youths in my constituency complain that they have been left out of most of these Government programmes.

I request my honourable colleagues, as we take this week off, to follow up on the Emyooga programme and involve the youth.

Like I have told you, we have youth leaders from village to district level; so, it will be of much benefit to us if we prioritise the youth and involve them in our engagements with –(Member timed out.)

6.42
MR DENNIS NYANGWESO (Independent, Samia-Bugwe Central County, Busia): Listening to the President on 4 June 2021, you realise that he emphasised the need to support science and innovation through payment of salaries and remuneration to scientists. As a colleague has noted here, scientists do not work alone. There are a number of people employed in the Public Service who are collectively contributing to the socio-economic transformation of this country. 

We have had instances of increment of salaries because of industrial action and lobbying to the Executive. This has created a lot of salary disparity. I suggest that there is need for Government to come up with a pay policy to guide the payment of salaries and remuneration to all public servants such that we minimise a very wide pay disparity as it is now evident in the numerous salary structures that are being proposed by the Ministry of Public Service year in year out. I beg to submit. Thank you.

6.44
MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): In the same vein, I join my colleagues in applauding the President for the wonderful speech he gave. From the agriculture point of view, we have been battling with tobacco. The people of Terego are willing and ready to take on any alternative crop. Recently, we took banana suckers. You cannot believe how much people were yearning for them. This particular crop, being perennial, does very well. I urge the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and NAADs to supply the people of Terego with drought resistant crops.

Secondly, as the Minister of Works and Transport goes to inspect the road from Koboko to Moyo, I request that he comes through Terego. We have a very terrible district. I almost lost my life last Sunday. The hind tyres were up - UNRA is responsible for this road. I kindly beg that we are included in the inspection process by the minister.

On health, I request that when we are getting the ambulances and pick-ups that the Ministry of Health is talking about, Terego should be considered. You should not forget giving us a mortuary too. We love you. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I want you to bear with me unless you are telling me that we should go up to 10.00 p.m.

6.46
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, the President’s State-of-the-Nation Address locates its basis in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy. It is premised on the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy (I) (ii). 

Why I give compliment to the response by the Leader of the Opposition is that he has given counsel and guidance to the Head of State so that in his subsequent State-of-the-Nation Address, his speech should be aligned and structured in accordance with the policy objectives and principles. 
 
The National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy I(ii) states vividly here that “the President shall report to Parliament and the nation, at least once a year, all steps taken to ensure the realisation of these policy objectives and principles.” The realisation of these policy objectives and principles is missing in every aspect in that State of the Nation Address.

It should be a performance scorecard. For instance, his emphasis now is the fight against corruption. Being the substantive Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development constitutionally, he should be giving us a report on how he has cracked the whip and the heads that have rolled. We would even be borrowing a leaf how – for example, if you go to Rwanda and Tanzania, you would know what I am talking about, as far as the fight against corruption is concerned. 

In his State of the Nation Address, therefore, which should be literally his performance scorecard; the President should be giving us a report on what has been done. 

To conclude, Madam Speaker, he lacks the political will, which should be the silver bullet in the fight against corruption. In my view, this was not a State of the Nation Address, but the state of the mind of President Yoweri Kaguta Tibuhaburwa Museveni, so to speak. He was even lamenting, Madam Speaker. Thank you.  

6.49
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I take this opportunity to thank all the Members, on behalf of the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business and on my own behalf, for your contributions. 

I take this opportunity to thank His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, for delivering his address. I also thank him for the result-oriented dedication in the fight against COVID-19 and as well thank the Leader of the Opposition for the alternative address. 

It is very evident that His Excellency, the President delivered the State of the Nation Address to Parliament at a time when the country had and is still facing a number of challenges like COVID-19, floods and locusts among others. 

His Excellency, the President made emphasis in a number of his messages both to the respective leaders and Ugandans at large on the way forward. 

Honourable members, I request that we take it and walk together to help His Excellency, the President and the Executive to see that what has been put forward is worked on. There is no way he can work alone. People have been talking about corruption. Corruption is something that has been on and off; he cannot fight it alone. We have to join him in the fight and we get rid of corruption.

Government is going to strengthen observance of regulations that relate to the climate and environment such that occurrences of loss, taking a case of Kasese - I have just been to Kasese whereby our mountain no longer snows. The snow is no longer there because of what we do to those places.

I know as leaders, we can talk to the communities so that we observe all those regulations.

I do not want to continue, but to assure honourable members, that be rest assured that what you have raised has been taken note of and the respective ministers are going to respond to them. 

I thank His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda for delivering this State-of-the-Nation Address, which is taking Uganda forward. For God and My Country. Thank you. 

6.52
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have seen the debate we have had. You have done wonderful work by giving us the tremendous opportunity to sit here since yesterday. It is really very wonderful work you have done. 

I, therefore, move under rule 81 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that the question be put to adopt the motion. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I have recorded all the people who have not spoken. In the subsequent debates, I will start with those people. We are going for a recess of one week. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this is just a matter of correction for the purposes of our Hansard. The Government Chief Whip was quoting rule 21. Rule 21 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He did not say rule 21.

MR TAYEBWA: I said Rule 81 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

MR OKUPA: I have not concluded my statement –(Interjection)- Anyway, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have conceded just like that, hon. Okupa. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I now put the question on the motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for a clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address on the state of the nation by His Excellency the President of Uganda, on 4 June 2021. 

(Question put and agreed.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Members, for your time and patience. I ask you to kindly bear with me. I cannot pick everybody. However, I have recorded the names of the Members who have not spoken and I will keep them. Please, we are still in this Parliament. 

I request, as directed, that you go to the constituencies and find out the issues of Emyooga. The issues of Emyooga will either make you stay in this Parliament or leave because there will be nothing that you will have done for your people. It is the issues of Emyooga that will build the parish model. Once you have a successful Emyooga project, then you are sure of registering a successful parish model, which you can be proud of and say that this is what I did during my time as a Member of Parliament. 

Let us not leave Government to do everything. Let us do the oversight role. You are acting under Article 90. You have all the powers to ask for whatever document you need in the district regarding Emyooga. I have officially written a letter to you, which you will use when you are in the constituencies. If anybody asks you why you are there, you are there representing the Parliament of Uganda. 

I would like to thank you. I wish you a blessed short recess.

THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, we faithfully take your assignment on Emyooga - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not my assignment. It is your assignment as a Member of Parliament. That is your work as a Member of Parliament; do not tag it to me.

MR NAMBESHE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. However, you remember that the line minister made a pledge to get all the information pertaining the same -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The information is in your pigeonholes.

MR NAMBESHE: It is not yet there, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is there. Honourable members, do you have the letters? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chief Opposition Whip, when you are in Opposition, it is not about arguing. (Laughter) 

Thank you very much. Have a blessed evening. I now adjourn the session to the 17th.

(The House rose at 6.58 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 August 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
