Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Tuesday, 20 August 2019

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice-President and honourable Members of Parliament, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have four areas of communication.

The first one is in relation to the judgement of the Supreme Court under Constitutional Appeal No. 8 of 2016, the Parliamentary Commission vs Mwesigye Wilson, wherein the procedure of determining Members’ emoluments under section 5 of the Parliament (Remuneration of Members) Act, Cap 259, was challenged.

Honourable members, the particular issue that was before court was whether the procedure prescribed and practised under section 5 of the Parliament (Remuneration of Members) Act was in conformity with Article 93 of the Constitution. I would like to inform the House that court recognised and reiterated the mandate of Parliament to determine the emoluments of Members of Parliament, as prescribed under Article 85 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, but that this must be done in harmony with Article 93 of the Constitution.

Honourable members, I would like to put it on record that this Parliament has used that procedure of section 5 only once to determine Members’ emoluments. That was on 30 October 2001 in the Seventh Parliament and we are now in the Tenth Parliament. Since then, Members’ pay has been determined in harmony with all the provisions of the Constitution.

I, therefore, would like to assure you, honourable members and the public at large, that Parliament has and continues to determine emoluments of the Members of Parliament in conformity with all the provisions of our Constitution; so, there is no illegality. Thank you very much. (Applause)

Secondly, honourable members, yesterday, I visited an avocado farm in Mayuge. It is a huge farm of 2,500 acres, 400 acres of which are of avocado. It is called Musubi Farm. They are preparing to process avocado oil and other things, as long as they can get sufficient quantities. They also look forward to exporting the Hass variety of avocado.

Honourable members, we were informed that one acre of land takes 160 trees of avocado and at harvest, each acre yields Shs 28 million. So, if you have got two acres, you already have about Shs 50 million. If you have 10 acres, you are really in business. Sorry, apparently I forgot my wig. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, I was saying that we can get Shs 28 million from one acre. I would like to encourage Members to take interest in going to Musubi. I would like to encourage the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Committee on Trade and Tourism in particular to visit. Members can also go and visit the place; it is very impressive and a lot is going on.

I would also like to report that in the same area, in Bugoto Sub-county, I continue to receive reports of shortage of water. Bukabooli Sub-county is water-stressed and I would like to ask the Minister of Water and Environment to really assist those people. They are near the water but cannot drink the lake water. So, Minister of Water and Environment, please address the issue of water shortage in Bukabooli Sub-county.

Honourable members, we also have the same complaint which has been coming here, in relation to ejecting Ugandans from the fishing villages. The people of Bugoto told me that they have been ejected and no longer have sources of income. They would like to know why the Government is impoverishing Ugandans in that area and why, if they think fishing is illegal, they have not provided an alternative. It is a question that the Government has got to answer so that we can assist our people.

Fourthly, honourable members, I visited Tororo about three weeks back. Among the issues the leaders raised was the failure by Government to give a report on the outcome of the border dispute between Tororo and Tororo. They told me that they did not participate in the LC I elections because they are waiting for the decision and they are not going to participate in the forthcoming elections if the Government does not tell them where the boundaries are.

Honourable members, we spent money, including money from this House, to send Members with the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to London to identify the maps and come back and report. They came back but have not reported. Therefore, I am giving the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development up to tomorrow to come and report to this House; otherwise, we shall cause the information to get out through other channels. 

As leaders, we are the ones they ask questions. I do not think the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has ever been to Tororo. When I move around the country, people ask, “What happened to this report? You spent money; where is it? What happened?” So, Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, please come and tell us what happened to that exercise so that we know how to advise the people of Tororo, so that they can have some calm.

Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have children from Daniel Comboni Primary School. (Applause) They are represented by hon. Bildad Adome and hon. Margaret Aachilla. You are welcome. You look very smart; thank you for coming. (Applause)

We also have, in the public gallery, pupils from Nakivumbi Modern Primary School in Bugweri. Please, stand up. They are represented by hon. Abdu Katuntu and hon. Brenda Asinde. You are welcome. They are also very smart. (Applause) Honourable members, there were a few – Yes they are very smart. (Laughter) 
Honourable members, there are a few matters of national concern but three of them are related to accidents and the overturning of trucks which caused death. I think let me ask hon. Ndamira to come.

2.50
MS CATHERINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance on the accidents that continue to happen in the country and have claimed the lives of many people. There is escalating road carnage happening in this country.

Some time back, the Uganda Police Force tightened its grip on drivers of all vehicle categories, to ensure compliance with the law. Although the drivers of heavy vehicles report at specialised check points and weigh bridges to ascertain the type of goods in transit and their weight, there seems to be laxity in all this. As Government, there is need to review this.

I raise this issue based on the various fatal accidents that have happened in this country, taking an example of the most recent one that took place at Kyambura Trading Centre where a fuel tanker exploded, killing many people. Worst of all, the police delayed in rescuing the situation. The fuel tanker rammed into four stationary vehicles at the roadside, destroying lives and property. The police fire brigade reported hours later; they claimed they did not have fuel. This is very unfortunate. The Ministry of Internal Affairs needs to address this unfortunate situation.

My prayer is that the Government, through the Ministry of Works and Transport, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and the Uganda Police Force, should revise their operations in quick rescue operations. The fire brigade from the police should also be equipped to be on standby for such incidents. The Government of Uganda should come up with a policy and rules that provide for the quickest rescue for such fatal accidents on innocent Ugandans. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Those are requests. For me, the key issue is whether the Uganda Police Force had no capacity to respond in time because I am told they went there after five hours.  That is what we would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to clarify; what was their capacity? So, we ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and explain to us how they handled the accident and the fire in Rubirizi. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. While raising serious matters, we have been guided before that at every point we are sitting here, somebody should occupy the office of the Leader of Government Business. Would it not be procedurally right for us to know who is seated in that office for purposes of our proceedings today -(Interjections)- I know what I am talking about because the Vice-President cannot receive delegation from the Prime Minister. That is the protocol of this country. May we know who in Government we are addressing issues to in today’s sitting? 

THE SPEAKER: Can I know who is taking charge of the Prime Minister’s desk? 

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as we wait for the Prime Minister, I am taking charge of the business of Government in Parliament. We are able to respond to issues that will be coming from Members and any other matter that you need the Executive to attend to. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I know you are capable of taking charge, but there is a Prime Minister and two Deputy Prime Ministers. Today, there is no Cabinet meeting. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the First Deputy Prime Minister is on his way coming to the House. That is why I said as we wait for them, they have asked me to step in and answer any questions from Members. 

THE SPEAKER: I think let us hear about the accident and then we shall task the minister – 

2.56
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing here with a heavy heart because of the enormous fatal accidents taking place especially on the route between Iganga and Mbale involving YY Coaches. In a period of one month, three accidents have taken place with two happening in one week. Last Monday, there was one accident. I passed that bus when I was coming to Kampala. Two people died in that accident. Last Sunday, ten passengers perished.

Madam Speaker, talking about accidents, last month, we had a fatal accident around Mukura Trading Centre where nine people perished. This is one of the many accidents that have taken place in this country. We need answers. 

I have a few prayers. The first one is that our Committee on Physical Infrastructure should investigate why YY Coaches are prone to accidents. Remember in Ethiopia, there were similar accidents and they had to investigate the source of the problem. That is why we must also investigate why our people using YY Coaches are perishing all the time.

Secondly, the minister should come and tell us why these accidents are so rampant and yet in – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute. 

MR ABALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are so many traffic officers on every road in this country, but the accidents are happening every day. What could the reason be? That is what I want the minister to come and tell us. 

My other prayer is that the bus companies that have cost life because of reckless driving must compensate and treat the victims. The victims did not want to get those accidents. It is the drivers who were reckless and did things in a manner that suited their understanding. Maybe they signed an agreement with Satan to kill our people. That is why my prayer is that these companies should compensate the victims. 

As we talk, I am supposed to go and bury one of the victims who perished on Tirinyi Road in Busembatia tomorrow. He was a student who was going home. That is why I am saying these people should be compensated. They should not be taken for granted. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Joy Ongom, I would like to know from the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Internal Affairs whether there are sanctions against these companies whose vehicles are continuously involved in accidents, because a number of them have repeatedly been involved in accidents. What is the Government doing about it? Has any driver been prosecuted? Has the company’s licence been revoked? Have the buses been grounded?

In the meantime, join me in welcoming Mr Moses Golola. He is seated up in the public gallery. He has recently become the World Kick Boxing Federation champion. He defeated Mr Umar Semata. He is accompanied by his manager, Mr Innocent Kawooya. You are both welcome. Congratulations, Moses Golola.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, you just said here that Mr Moses Golola is in the gallery.

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR FRANCA AKELLO: We, the women, fear that we might get pregnant (Laughter.) So, I do not know whether the House is proceeding well with the man in the gallery who just looks at a woman and she gets pregnant (Laughter). I wonder whether we are not at risk. How do we proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I can advise is that the ladies should not look at him; look elsewhere (Laughter.)

3.02
MS JOY ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

As colleagues have just done, I also would like to talk about the increasing fuel tanker accidents on our major roads, which have claimed a lot of lives. Just in the last two months of this year, the following infernal accidents have taken place:

On 12 June 2019, a fuel tanker exploded just in front of Lira Police Station, forcing the police to unconditionally release all the suspects that were in the cell –(Interjection)– Yes, it happened; they were all released as a result of the fuel tanker overturning near the police station.

On 18 June 2019, a fuel tanker exploded into flames following a collision with another car in Naalya on the Northern Bypass and road users were inconvenienced for more than five hours.

Another accident occurred on Sunday, 18 August 2019 where a fuel tanker burst into flames after it overturned in Kyambura Trading Centre, following its failure to negotiate a corner. More than 20 people were reported dead, many others got injured and property was destroyed.

Madam Speaker, all these accidents have happened without the responsible ministry making any statement up to now. As road users, we are worried about our safety. Many lives are lost and are never compensated. This is an issue. 

Insurance companies have not reached out to the victims or to the public to inform them about the mechanisms to be used in claiming their compensation. For the case in Lira where at least 23 motorcycles were burnt, nobody has come out to compensate them. The owner of the fuel tanker is just fooling them around, saying he will only compensate them if the insurance company also compensates him.

Therefore, can Government explain to the public the safety measures being put in place to curb these infernos and how the victims can be assisted to get their compensation? Thank you.

3.05
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you for the opportunity. I would like to supplement on what my sister has raised. There is a catastrophe waiting to happen at Busitema near the junction to Busia off Iganga-Tororo Road. When you reach at that point, you will find a very long queue of trailers and fuel tankers yet the road is very narrow. Other drivers are forced to overtake yet on the other side of the road, there are trailers going back to Kenya. This is another serious national problem which Government needs to address either by widening this road or by finding alternative routes for these trailers.

Madam Speaker, it is very dangerous for us who are always driving on that road. Every time I reach that spot, I begin to say my last prayers because any spark from any loaded fuel tanker there can cause a catastrophe. Over 300 trailers on that road can catch fire at the same time and there would be loss of income and serious loss of life.

Madam Speaker, I would like to hear from the Government on what their plan is about widening that road. Do they have such a plan to enhance the safety of Ugandans, Kenyans and other foreigners who frequently use that road? I thank you.

3.07
MR JACK WAMAGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We know that malaria is a major killer of people in this country. However, accidents are now second to malaria. 

I raised an issue on the Floor of Parliament at one time that the Minister of Internal Affairs and Minister of Works and Transport should re-call all driving permits and that people be re-tested before they can be issued with driving permits. The United Nations (UN) tested drivers at Namboole. These were people who were going for peacekeeping missions, and among them were police officers. However, some of those police officers failed that test and could not get driving permits.

When you see how people drive on these roads, you realise there is a lot left to be desired for people to drive on main roads. Most of these accidents are therefore caused by poor driving. People get driving permits when they do not qualify to drive at all.

We would like Government to act because these days, whether one travels in bus or a taxi, we have to keep praying for them to come back alive. The accidents are so rampant but Government is keeping quiet about them. Government should have found a remedy to resolve the problem of accidents because they keep happening on all of these roads. 

I request that all driving permits be re-called and people go for fresh driving tests before they can be allowed to drive on our roads. We have lost so many lives yet Government is silent. I thank you.

3.09
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. During the Ninth Parliament, we lost a Member of Parliament in a fatal accident. We have continued losing so many lives in this country because of accidents.

Madam Speaker, the observation that was made is that we have not given priority to the financing of the Road Safety Council and all road safety mechanisms in this country. However, we have gone ahead to improve the roads and the traffic has increased tremendously. The aspect of planning and directing this traffic on the roads constructively is, however, still missing. 

It is a very big shame that every year, we lose not less than Shs 5 trillion in road accidents. The losses that are incurred through carnage, when one equates those losses economically, in financial terms, it comes to Shs 5 trillion. It is also said that no country can develop with such a magnitude of losses. 

Madam Speaker, as the chairperson of Parliamentary Forum for Road Safety, I would like to conclude by saying that when you go to Mulago Hospital, it is overwhelmed; you cannot believe the magnitude of patients we are sending there every day. You see people criticising Mulago Hospital, but it is overwhelmed. When you get there, you just stand and watch as they bring in bodies and people. We need to stop this. The Ministry of Works and Transport must come up with a comprehensive statement on these issues that are appalling to our economy.  Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the issue of accidents is extremely grave, especially when it involves fuel tankers exploding at any time. You may be in your shop or children may be going to school and they get killed. There have been five fatal accidents in hardly two months. We would like to get an explanation from the Ministry of Works and Transport on what measures they are planning to take.

Hon. Nyakecho raised something that has worried me. There is that junction where you find all these trailers; supposing fire broke out, how far would it go? It would reach Mbale and the whole of Tororo. The Minister of Works and Transport should tell us whether she knows what is happening and how she is going to solve it. We need urgent answers. 

Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, are the insurance companies responding as far as these accidents are concerned? People pay third party insurance. 

Ms anywar: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we talk about the loss on the road, what is now glaring is the effect of these fuel tankers bursting into flames and causing more deaths than even the road accidents. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to also come to this House to explain? 

I raised the issue of the sale of fuel in bottles along the roadside. We raised, in this Parliament, the issue of the location of petrol stations. Some are located in residential areas and some are next to schools or hospitals. This is a time bomb, which will cost us greatly.

Can the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development come to this House with details and tell us how fuel is transported, stored or where it is located so that we save Ugandans? That is only on the road; what about if a petrol station, which is located next to a hospital or a school also gets such an incident?

The Speaker: Honourable members, Plot 1 on Kampala Road has a petrol station. I do not know whether they are aware. It is in front of the railway station, less than 100 metres from here.

3.15
Mr patrick NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the request to the Minister of Works and Transport to explain and give us a plan. However, when you look at the police records of these accidents, it is said that most of the accidents are related to human error. The bigger question is: Who trains our drivers? All the drivers are trained in driving schools on the streets. Who trains the instructors in those driving schools?

In this country, we have no training institution for drivers’ instructors. The Ministry of Works and Transport must explain why that is the situation. We may not be relying on only private driving schools but we need an institution of Government that can be sure of the quality of drivers that we put on the road -

The Speaker: Honourable member, we shall handle that when we have got the explanation and then debate as part of the resolutions.

Mr Nsamba:  Thank you.

3.16
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the issue is wider than the Ministry of Works and Transport coming to explain. This is because there are very many accidents, which are happening, for example because of the way the roads are done. 

There is no physical planning in this country. When you travel from Masaka and reach Kyazanga, you get trailers meandering at the corner and entering houses. Most of the residential houses on that highway are within the road reserve. In Kampala, for example, there are no road reserves. People have built into the road reserves. 

I would like to know if the minister in charge of physical planning can come and give us a general physical planning policy for this country, as well as those people who issue licences for petrol stations. It is not only the Ministry of Works and Transport but it is a general disaster within Government planning; we need general physical planning so that this is made clear. The Ministry of Works and Transport cannot exhaust this.

The Speaker: Honourable members, that is what we are going to debate when the statements come. I will allow the honourable Member of Parliament for Rubirizi to say something because she was anxious to say something. Do it very quickly.

We shall ask the Prime Minister to tell us what we should do because the matters concern the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and also the ministry in charge of planning.

Honourable member for Rubirizi, you have two minutes.

3.18
Ms grace kesande (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance.

Last Sunday, the 18th of August, at around 3.00 p.m., a fuel tanker lost control and rammed into people’s shops and residential houses. People’s property was destroyed and we also lost lives. 

The fuel tanker lost control and it killed over 20 persons and destroyed property worth millions of shillings. About 30 families got affected and they are helpless and homeless right now. Those who survived in the accident were rushed to Kampala International University (KIU) Hospital and Mbarara Hospital because we do not have any hospital in Rubirizi and the health centre IV we have is faced with many challenges.

Those who survived are still in severe pain with no help. There is a turnboy called Grammar Abdul Aziz Hassan, aged 26, who claims to come from Bombo but they have failed to trace his relatives. 

My humble appeal to the relevant –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Conclude quickly. We would like to conclude this matter.

Ms kesande: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My humble appeal to Government and the relevant ministries is that they quickly support the 30 affected families that are helpless and homeless.

If our Government can manage to procure road equipment for each district, why not establish at least one fire brigade station in each district? 

The vehicle that was meant to extinguish fire reached the scene after three hours. The tank was empty, so they first had to fetch water and fill it at Lake Rutoto. Therefore, I really – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: I just allowed you to speak but the point had been made. 

3.21
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It would have been unfair if you had not given me an opportunity to speak, so I am very grateful. A section of the road from Bweyogerere up to Namanve is a death trap for us who travel to the east. That road is very uneven and narrow. I do not know what the Ministry of Works and Transport is doing about it. 

Recently, there was an issue similar to that on the bridge in Jinja. This bridge was even closed and repaired. This stretch of the road from Bweyogerere to Namanve is very dangerous because the road itself is uneven, the vehicles are many, it is narrow and most of the vehicles go at a high speed while carrying fuel. 

The state of the road has created a lot of traffic jam, especially in the evenings. Are there any plans to repair it? We would like to know from the Government whether there are ways of expanding this road or creating alternative routes because this road is a death trap. Thank you for the opportunity, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I allowed a small debate because the accidents have occurred almost across the country but now, we want to hear from the Government about what we are going to do. First, there is the issue of relief for the people of Rubirizi and the others who are in Namutumba, Lira and so many others. The Ministry of Works and Transport, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, please give us answers.  

3.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, first and foremost, we would like to send our sympathies to the families who lost their dear ones in these accidents. 

Secondly, there are so many factors driving these accidents on the road, ranging from the way people are trained to drive, the designs of the road and financing of the institutions that are required to do the work.

Madam Speaker, we are going to have a joint statement by Government, and we will be led by the Minister of Works and Transport. We will come here on Tuesday next week to tell the country about the situation and the measures that we are putting in place to be able to reduce the level of accidents on our roads.

For the immediate situation that needs our attention, we will ask the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to attend to these issues tomorrow morning, then we will continue to report to the House as and when it is necessary. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were two other issues. There was one from hon. Mbwatekamwa, but as he comes up, join me in welcoming primary seven candidates from Kitgum Parents Primary School. Boys and girls, you are welcome. They are represented by hon. Beatrice Anywar and hon. Margaret Lamwaka. You are welcome and they look very smart. (Applause) 

We also have pupils from Air Force Secondary School, Wakiso. Please stand up. They also look very smart. They are represented by hon. Rosemary Seninde and hon. Rosemary Tumusiime of Entebbe Municipality. You are welcome. 

3.25
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter of urgent national importance I would like to raise is about the so-called health energy drinks in the country. 
                        
The lives of Ugandans are being threatened by the rampant use of these so-called health energy drinks, which are very many from different manufacturers. They take advantage of Ugandans and sell these products, whose contents we do not even know. Examples of these health drinks include Ahu, Neza, Kitunzi, Nankabirwa, Mukiibi, Amelia, Aceng Energy Drinks to mention but a few. 

As Ugandans, we are not certain of whatever we are consuming. We do not know whether what we consume is genuine or not. My prayer is that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives comes up with a certified list of all the energy drinks fit for human consumption. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: We have the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives here. Could she quickly respond? 

3.27
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, yes, we are aware of the health drinks but we are working closely with the Ministry of Health because they are the ones to clear them first. We have actually certified some, so I will come in with a list of those that have been tested by Uganda National Bureau of Standards. I beg to be given time to bring that list of those certified in a week or two.

THE SPEAKER: How is Tuesday next week? 

MS KYAMBADDE: Yes, I can bring that list on Tuesday next week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives will bring the list of certified drinks for your information.

3.28
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, on Thursday and Friday, desperate sugarcane growers were arrested in Kenya by the authorities. These sugarcane growers have put forward a lot of complaints, but the Government seems insensitive towards their cry and they have not been helped. Therefore, last week, they desperately tried to travel to Kenya and sell their sugarcane but they were arrested. 

Last year, the people from this area were growing maize, which was being sold at Shs 200. The Government had promised to set the price at Shs 500, but they did not see the money. They were convinced to go and begin preparing nursery gardens and beds for citrus fruits as well as coffee. However, Government did not buy citrus fruits from these people, so they resorted to sugarcane growing. Government has still refused to help them. 

These people have mortgaged their houses and land as they have got loans. They are desperate and are sitting on a time bomb. They are very poor and every property they own is about to be taken. They have forwarded a lot of complaints to Government so that they are helped but Government is not coming to their rescue. They are now wondering what they should do. 

As a representative of the people of Busoga, Kamuli and Bugabula South, we need an answer from Government to give to the desperate suffering Ugandans from this area. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it seems that the economy of the people is shrinking as the Government is watching. How can people be arrested for going to Kenya, which is in the East African Community? What is this integration about? 

3.30
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform this House that ever since this matter came up on the Floor, we have met the manufacturers; we have engaged some outgrowers and we have also engaged Kenya over this matter. 

I would like to inform you that when we engaged the manufacturers, they told us that they were repairing their equipment at the same time. Therefore, they could not purchase canes at that time. Secondly, they said that some outgrowers have not registered with them. They further said that they normally have a list of their outgrowers whom they signed contracts with. However, there are some outgrowers who are speculators and do not want to confine themselves or to contract with specific manufacturers. 

About two weeks ago, when I went for the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa meeting, I engaged Kenya by talking to the Minister of Trade and the Permanent Secretary. They informed me that they are not ready to buy our canes. The reasons they gave me are that they also have their canes and they want to have a market for their canes. Therefore, they are not ready to buy our canes. Another reason we have here –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, over the weekend, I was in Jinja; I left yesterday. While I was there, the cry of the ordinary persons was that they are stranded with lorries of sugarcane, which they desperately wanted to sell to Kenyans. They said that it is the Ugandan Government - and I believe it is through the ministry of my senior sister on the other side – that has been attempting to give an explanation as to why the trucks could not cross to the Kenyan side. This is if the producers or the manufacturers on the Ugandan side came out clearly and said many of the outgrowers were not listed on their membership and so, they were growing sugarcane on their own.

Secondly, even if you were registered, right now, the manufacturers are not in production because their machinery requires overhauling. Surely, in a free market, should a person produce and just allow stock to dry in the gardens expecting a producer to fix machinery even if it takes between two and three years, and go hungry without money? Even if an out grower is not listed with you, why should you tie my hands? This is a free market economy, meaning that if anybody grows any crop here, he or she should be allowed to export it anytime he or she feels that there is a better market out there. 

The plight of the people in Busoga, is very appalling because their livelihood, ever since I have lived in Busoga from as far back as 1983, is dependent on sugarcane growing. I think Government should do something to salvage the situation. Otherwise, the people are in pain. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I really like you but I would have thought that you would be trying to find solutions for the Ugandans and not give excuses that all the 10 millers stopped work at the same time; really! Why do you allow the Kenyans to come and buy maize here and take it to Kenya? 

In addition, in Busoga, the Government has killed the fishing industry. Therefore, people cannot fish or trade in fish and yet they cannot sell sugarcane. What do you want them to do? (Applause)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter and that is why I am not rising on clarification but on a procedural point. You asked a very simple question: Who ordered for the arrest of the vehicles? You could only have ordered for the arrest of those vehicles and cargo if they had broken the law. How did they break the law? Did they go without a licence? What caused the Government agency to arrest those vehicles? I think that we need to know. 

Furthermore, we want to know the people behind that decision to arrest the traders or their cargo. It is important for us to know and unveil the faces of the people who are extorting money from innocent Ugandans. You can imagine, these are common people and some of them have hired the gardens where they are growing their sugarcane. Some of them have borrowed money from the banks to do the trade and you are now telling them that they cannot even go to Kenya, which has ready market. They cannot sell in Uganda because somebody is saying, “my factory has broken down; keep your sugarcane and wait for my factory to be ready.” I think this is an insult. Is this Parliament representing those people or have we become slaves in our own country? 

The minister must explain to us the interest she is serving in that office.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I stand here for the interests of the people of Uganda. 

Secondly, who ordered the arrests and where were the arrests made? Honourable member, can you give me information about the arrests? The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, does not arrest. Therefore, can you give us information about that particular incident - when, who was arrested and by whom?

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The customs authorities at Busia, on the Kenya side, are the ones that arrested them. They said that they had requested our Government to clarify and give the traders formal authority to pass through. When a team went to court to secure their release, they were released but they were asked to go to Government and get permission so that they can be allowed to sell. These people are not smuggling timber or ivory; they are only going to sell their sugarcane but the Government is not ready to help them. 

Now the minister is here saying, “who was arrested; who gave them powers?” The minister cannot help her people who have looked for the market themselves by –(Interruption)

MR NTENDE: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to my colleague and the honourable minister is that it is on record that the executive of the outgrowers’ organisation has made several attempts to meet the honourable minister of trade but she has not availed herself; she has denied them that opportunity.

Secondly, they even made an effort to call her on telephone but she has been very arrogant to them. They told us that she said that she has no time for them and this is on record. 

As a minister in charge of this sector, you should be at the forefront in helping our people to sort out this issue. The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, who should be helping our farmers to sort out this mess, is the one who cannot avail them the opportunity to meet our outgrowers? They requested for a letter but she said that she could not write that letter and then she comes here to say -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, more than a month ago, we came here and made a request to the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, saying that there is an economic crisis in Busoga and other areas because they cannot sell. We thought that the Government which we vote for would hurry to help their people find market. 

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker I stand to be protected from personal attacks. If I did not pick the call, how was I arrogant? Can you clarify that? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to speak.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I wish we could desist from personal attacks. We know very well that we are industrialising. We know very well that we need sugarcane as a raw material. I wish to inform you that I cannot stand here and make a decision now that we are exporting cane tomorrow. That is not a decision I can take now. I pray that I make further consultations –(Interjections)- Yes! Do you have enough cane to export? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is a House of records. That request was made over two months ago. You said then that you are going to consult.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I have been monitoring. I have finished my paper but it has never been put on the Order Paper - (Interjections) - Yes. The Clerk knows that. 

THE SPEAKER: On my Order Paper? 

MS KYAMBADDE: Please, allow me time to bring the paper and I present the details.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is not only about sugarcane growers. It is now a matter that cuts across almost all sectors of the economy, where the poor are being deliberately squeezed by Government. (Applause) 

We have the sugarcane growers who are now being squeezed because they cannot supply to the markets of their choice. We have the fishing industry that has been militarised - taken over by the military - and the fishermen are collapsing. In my region, in Kigezi, the districts are now losing over Shs 10 billion in terms of sales of Irish potatoes because they cannot access the market in Rwanda. In the mining sector, especially in the regions that have been in the mining sector, there is an unofficial ban on exporting minerals that have been processed. Over 100,000 artisans are at stake. The entire economy is being squeezed and people are only being allowed to survive on handouts. 

I thought this is a matter that would require us, as Members of Parliament, to join efforts and come up with a motion that will touch all these sectors so that we get comprehensive answers from Government. We do not know why Government is deliberately making people poor by inaction. 

MR ABALA: I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. In Soroti, a fruit factory was opened but as we speak now, the factory has deliberately decided to reduce the price of oranges from Shs 800 per kilogramme to Shs 400. In addition, they have stopped buying. The factory is now not working and the farmers have resorted to exporting their oranges to Kenya. That is the information I would like to give you. 

MR NIWAGABA: I had risen on a point of procedure and I should not be giving information. In light of these revelations, is it not procedurally right that Government, especially the Prime Minister, because this cuts across many sectors - It is not only the ministry responsible for trade but we have agriculture, mining, fisheries and others. Everything is being targeted. 

Is it not procedurally right for the Prime Minister to come up with a statement on what Government is doing to help these particular sectors come out of unnecessary Government regulation, which is not helping the community to advance but actually making them regress? Is it not right for them to come up with that comprehensive statement for Members to debate within a specified period of time? 

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I think some statements are a bit political. For someone to say that Government is deliberately making people poor is political - (Interjections)- Yes! Come with figures and statistics. 

I pray that I present a paper on these commodities: sugarcane, maize and fish; and the figures of the exports that we have, the production and – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, who is selling the fish to the factories? It is no longer the people. Honourable members, let us not just look at the exports. I do not even know who is receiving that money. Let us look at the population. How are they living? What are they earning a living from? That is what we are asking.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, I am at pains when I hear a senior minister giving a blatant political lie. To call the issues raised - that the people of Uganda are becoming poorer and poorer – political!  

Is she in order to take national issues, which cut across, and make them political? The matter we are discussing cuts across political lines. Is she in order to want us to discuss political issues when we are discussing national matters that touch every Ugandan across the political lines? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like the Government to understand that traders were sent away from the streets of Kampala. People were evicted from the fishing villages. They are looking for money in vain. People have tried to grow sugarcane and they cannot sell it. The people in the mining areas were thrown out. What more do you want to say?

MAJ. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Amelia Kyambadde needs to be a bit more sober to really appreciate the point. surely, the issue of sugarcane outgrowers is an old story. A majority of the plantation agriculture crops have outgrowers – tea, coffee and sugarcane. Therefore, the question of sugarcane outgrowers in Busoga is not a new story. However, the question of why Government cannot enjoin big investors such as Madhvani to buy the crops grown in private zones is an issue that the minister should sort out because it has been simmering for a long time.

It is a genuine issue, with all due respect, honourable minister. It is an issue that you need to soberly look at. Discuss it with fellow Cabinet ministers and sort out the matter once and for all. (Applause)

Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba said, and correctly so, that there are a number of other aspects of the economy that are affecting all the regions of the country. Today, there is a demonstration of milk producers in Ankole. There is some kind of cartel of these Indians. We thought that once the economy is liberalized, we would benefit from higher economies of scale but these guys are becoming a problem. There is need to review - hon. Bahati, who is seating in for Ndugu Rugunda – and maybe meet these guys so that they do not impoverish Ugandans.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when are you bringing the statement?

MS KYAMBADDE: I can bring the one on sugarcane tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Niwagaba, the point you have raised is important. I think we need to look at all the sectors of the economy. Please, bring the motion and we debate it. Thank you.

3.54
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono South County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here on a matter of urgent national importance. Fire gutted Katooke Landing Site on Koome Island, destroying 158 houses and all the property. We were lucky it happened early on Saturday morning and no lives were lost.

Madam Speaker, we communicated with the Office of the Prime Minister through a telephone contact but now people do not have anywhere to sleep. As their MP, I only managed to provide a few food items for only one day.

Our prayer is that the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness comes in very fast because the islanders are now very poor. They used to enjoy fishing but they are no longer getting any money from that. As I speak, they are looking forward to receiving relief aid from the Office of the Prime Minister. We have only sent Red Cross there.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Office of the Prime Minister should respond to the situation in Koome Island and give them some relief and maybe sources of income since they can no longer fish.

3.55
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. One of the roads of Bukwo, that is, Kiriki-Kapnandi-Suam Road, is dead and yet that was the only alternative road we are using as the Suam-Kapchorwa Road is being constructed.

The Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) people came in April with a company – Engineers Investment Limited – and convinced the district that they were going to work on that road. As we speak, all the bridges have broken down and every vehicle that uses that road must go to the garage. All the Irish potatoes are rotting on the roadside. The boda boda guys are crying because their motorcycles are breaking down on the road very day. We would like to know from the Ministry of Works and Transport whether they sent contractors to work on the road.

Secondly, last week, we lost a young woman who was shot dead by police officers who invaded her home at 5.00 a.m. under the pretext of arresting her husband. Because the woman failed to open the door – a wooden door – she was shot dead without explanation. These police officers even came without an arrest warrant.

We would like to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs what is happening with the police. Last month, we equally lost a young man who was shot dead by Uganda Wildlife Authority. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I see the Minister of State for Works and Transport, Gen. Katumba Wamala, here. Do you have anything to say about the Bukwo-Kapnandi-Suam Road?

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, I will get the details and come back with a full report on the issue. I may not be able to give convincing answers right now.

THE SPEAKER: The minister will come back to us next Wednesday. Hon. Obiga Kania, I do not know whether you have got a report about this lady who was shot dead in Bukwo.

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Yes, Madam Speaker, we got that report and we regret the incident. It is true that the police went on an operation that night and in the process of the arrest of the suspect, another person was killed. The team that went for that operation has been arrested and is being prosecuted for a criminal offence. 

We asked the Inspector General of Police to get in touch with the family to extend our condolences and support during the burial and that was done. What is left now is for us to know how far the process of prosecution has gone. I will find that out.

3.59
MR YORKE ODRIA (Independent, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, and this is communication from the West Nile Parliamentary Caucus. As the vice-chairperson of the caucus, I take the opportunity to raise this matter. It is communication from the West Nile Parliamentary Caucus on the threats against hon. Anite Evelyn.

This is arising from the gruesome murder of our brother, the late hon. Abiriga, whose murder investigation findings up to date have not yet come out and who also went through the same kind of threats that our sister, hon. Evelyn Anite, is facing. This is a very big challenge to the people of West Nile.

As Members of Parliament from the West Nile Region and in light of these allegations, we demand two things from the Government: One is that we need assurance from the Government about the security and life of our sister, hon. Evelyn Anite. Two, Government must pronounce itself and assure Ugandans and the people of West Nile about the affairs and assets of Uganda Telecom Limited (UTL) for which hon. Anite demanded accountability, which has now turned against her. Thirdly -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think hon. Anite should come here and speak on those issues herself. Otherwise, what you are raising is hearsay. Let hon. Anite come and present her issues here.

MR ALIONI: Madam Speaker, it is a message from the caucus.

THE SPEAKER: No, that is an informal caucus. Let hon. Anite come and report to me. Otherwise, we do not know. Hon. Anite should come to me; my office is open.

4.03
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance.

Madam Speaker, students of Nazigo Primary Teachers’ College, who sat their Grade III Certificate exams last year, came to my office and raised issues to me so that this Parliament could help them. These students sat the exams and passed. The results were released early this year, in March, but up to now, Kyambogo University has failed to release their results. These students are desperate and they cannot access employment because their results were held by Kyambogo University on grounds that Nazigo Primary Teachers’ College has a debt with the university.

My prayer is that this House requests the Minister of Education and Sports to intervene in this matter so that these innocent students are not punished by the debt to Kyambogo University by Nazigo Primary Teachers’ College. As students, they paid their dues and they are entitled to their results in order to access employment in this country. 

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Education and Sports address the issue of the results of Nazigo Primary Teachers’ College for 2018 so that these children can be allowed to get their certificates and get employed? Give us a report on Thursday next week. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE AFRICAN CONTINENTAL FREE TRADE AREA AGREEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives - I believe that Members have copies on the iPads

4.05
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, it was uploaded on the iPads but I can also give you a copy.

Madam Speaker, Africa signed an agreement establishing the African Continental Free Trade Area on 21 March 2018 during the extra ordinary session in Kigali, Rwanda. Uganda was elected to chair the negotiation process and I chaired the negotiations from May 2018 to July 2019.

I wish to inform the august House that the African continent remains Uganda’s main export destination, accounting for an average of 47.2 per cent of the country’s total exports over the last five years – 2014 to 2018. Our exports to the African continent have increased from $ 0.89 billion in 2014 to $ 1.6 billion in 2018, a trajectory that we intend to boost with the African Continental Free Trade Area Agreement. 

We note that Africa’s annual imports for 2014-2018 average $ 524 billion, implying that measures aimed at boosting intra-African trade, such as the African Continental Free Trade Area, are a step in the right direction, given the size of the market.

Madam Speaker, you may recall that the 18th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the African Union (AU) held in 2012 recognised the importance of promoting intra-African trade as a fundamental factor for sustainable economic development, employment generation, and effective integration of Africa into the global economy; and they subsequently adopted a decision on boosting intra-African trade and fast-tracking the African Continental Free Trade Area.   

The action plan identified the following seven clusters that require addressing: 

a. 	Trade policy;
b. 	Trade facilitation;
c. 	Productive capacity;
d. 	Trade related infrastructure;
e. 	Trade finance;
f. 	Trade information; and
g. 	Factor market integration.

We went through a rigorous consultation process with the public and private sectors, civil society and the academia. To ensure harmonisation of positions by the East African Community (EAC) Partner States, we conducted meetings at regional level with a view of preserving the integrity of the EAC Customs Union.

As far as Cabinet is concerned, in the course of negotiations, I presented two Cabinet Memoranda before the signing and ratification, in order to get Cabinet’s approval of the negotiation positions generated during the process. Indeed, Cabinet approval was granted. A sub-committee of ministers was constituted to work out the modus operandi of the agreement.

The status quo now is that currently, 54 of the 55 African Union Member States have signed the agreement with only Eritrea yet to sign. Last time, when I was here, Members were concerned about Nigeria but they have also signed. The agreement entered into force on 30 May 2019, following the lapse of 30 days after the 22nd Instrument of Ratification was deposited with the Chairperson of the African Union Commission. So far, 27 countries have deposited the instruments of ratification with the African Union Commission. 

The negotiations and ratification of the agreement have been handled in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Ratification of Treaties Act.

Scope and Content of the Agreement

Madam Speaker, the agreement covers the following:

1. 	Trade in goods. 
2. 	Trade in services.
3. 	Aspects of investment.
4. 	Competition policy. 
5. 	Trade-related intellectual property rights.

The last three elements of the agreement are very complementary in enhancing the productive capacity on the continent while at the same time providing the necessary protection and fairness in the trade sector.

The negotiations are structured in two sequential phases: 

1. 	The protocol on trade in goods, trade in services as well as rules and procedures on the settlement of disputes.

2. 	Investment, competition policy and trade related intellectual property rights. 

The modalities are:

1. 	Market access/trade in goods.
2. 	Rules of origin.
3. 	Trade in services negotiations.
4. 	Instruments for the operational phase of the African Continent Free Trade Area. It was launched from the 6th to 8th July, 2019 in Niamey, Niger. 

During the 12th Extra Ordinary Summit of the African Union, the following trade facilitating instruments were launched to guide the implementation of the agreement:  

a) 	The non-tariff barrier reporting, monitoring and elimination mechanism.
b) 	African trade observatory dashboard.
c) 	Password protected online portal for tariff offers.
d) 	Pan-African digital payment and settlement platform.
e) 	Mobile based application for business -

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, may I know what is interfering with our services? Please, allow the minister to present. Minister, please proceed.

MS KYAMBADDE: Thank you. What does the agreement mean for Africa and for Uganda? The African Continental Free Trade Area involves the 55 Member States of Africa, and is the world’s largest free-trade area, by the number of countries. It establishes a single market of 1.2 billion people, with a combined Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of $3.4 trillion.

In the case of Uganda and indeed most African countries, large markets support more trade in goods, services and assets produced by job-creating enterprises but also generate income and create jobs. 

The African Continental Free Trade Area is one of the vehicles to catalyse the development of African countries through trade. As a continent, Africa is now a more powerful negotiating platform.

Africa is the continent with the largest arable land - 874 million hectares - of which only 274 million hectares is under cultivation, while 600 million is idle or underutilised. It will be utilised because it will need to produce for the continent. In addition, there are large reserves of strategic minerals and abundant aquatic resources. 

The demographic dividend of the youngest population of 60 to 70 per cent is also an opportunity for Africa. However, Africa is the continent with the lowest level of development. Thirty-five of the world’s poorest countries are in Africa; Africa is the least industrialised and has the highest rates of unemployment – between 50-80 per cent youth unemployment. Aggressive skills development is of importance and it was emphasised through the negotiations.  

Infrastructure Development

The success of the implementation of the African Continental Free Trade Area will require accompanying measures such as the Plan for Infrastructure Development of Africa. This will enable the increase in the stock of infrastructure in terms of land, air and maritime transport, energy and ICT, which will improve interconnectivity and reduce the cost of doing business. Uganda is on course with aggressive development of energy, road infrastructure, ICT and storage infrastructure.

Cross-border trade through trade facilitation is also on course along all borders. 

Protocol on Movement of Persons, Right of Residence and Right of Establishment: This will enable nationals of the African continent to freely cross borders and conduct trade in goods and services. 

What Uganda Stands to Gain from the Agreement

For Uganda, our objectives in African economic integration is driven by the need for – 

    a)  markets for our growing economic operations; 
    b)  attracting cross-border investment; 
    c)  creating employment opportunities for our young population domestically through expansion in production of goods and services that will be demanded by the expanded markets; 
    d)  improving the interstate infrastructure interconnectivity to help us harness our productive capacities; 
    e)  enhancing peace and security in the continent through engaging people in gainful economic activities.

Government has put in place a Cabinet sub-committee to fast-track Uganda’s penetration into the broader market and to ensure our competitiveness in the market.  

I would like to conclude by saying that with the integration of the African continent, Uganda stands to benefit from an expanded market, stimulation of increased production, increase in trade in services and creation of employment. 

We are immediately, targeting livestock products, notably dairy and beef, coffee, tea, iron and steel, among others. Services will include education, tourism, business services and infrastructure services. 

The key markets are West Africa, particularly Nigeria, Ghana and Cameroon. In North Africa we are targeting Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia. The others are in the COMESA and EAC Blocs; we will continue to harness them using the respective regional instruments. The EAC and COMESA remain the foundations for engagement in the wider African Continental Integration.  

The onus is on us now to popularise this agreement. We are going to work with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to start with the private sector, academia and the legislature.

Madam Speaker, I look forward to continued interaction with the House on this, and many other economic opportunities that Government is creating for the prosperity of our people. I rest my case. Please, allow me to lay this copy of the statement on the Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, that was for our information about the new African Continental Free Trade Area. If there are no comments, we move to the next item.

4.19
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 

Madam Speaker, I have heard the comments and the report from the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. I would have liked to hear more on what is encouraging impediments on interaction of people in the whole region, like the Non-Tariff Barriers (NTBs).

We were in South Africa. If I am a Ugandan businessperson and I have my passport and I would like to travel to South Africa, I want to be easily facilitated. However, to get a visa, you take a week; you are not free and this is an impediment to trade. By the time you think of agreements and services, there are some basics which you need to deal with before we enter into this agreement.

I would have loved to hear that when you are going to Nigeria as a businessperson from Uganda, you do not spend a week requesting for a visa. These are the issues which need to be dealt with politically. When you want to go to Chad, can you go there freely? Is security free in this? These are the real issues which you must deal with before we even think of trade agreements on this continent.

I would have liked a more detailed report stating that there are no tariff barriers like visas and there is free interaction of people in Africa, but this is still a problem. So, what are we talking about when some impediments that facilitate trade are still existing?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when we were meeting at the Pan African Parliament, we were told that this African Continental Free Trade Area is supposed to move with the Protocol on the Freedom of Movement of Persons. So far, although the Heads of State have ratified this, only two have ratified the other one. So, how will the people of Africa move if they are not going to ratify that protocol?

4.21
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for making that very elaborate statement from my Government. There are about three points that we need to note.

In Africa, most of our leaders lack the political will to implement what they agree upon. I am aware that most of the countries have already signed and deposited their instructions, but the implementation is going to be a problem. Therefore, the minister should come and tell us how they are going to implement that agreement that has already been endorsed by most of the African countries.

Madam Speaker, as you mentioned, trade cannot be facilitated without movement of persons. We have serious problems with most of the countries in Africa. It is good you have sent me to the Pan African Parliament. We are experiencing a lot of problems. We agree, sign and do everything but there are other barriers that we meet; for example, people and vehicles were stopped by our neighbours here. Nobody was going to Rwanda yet they have signed the free trade agreement. Why were we stopped?

In Africa, we are still importing cereals from Europe and America, yet we are producing cereals here. We have rice, maize et cetera but we still import from our colonialists. That is undermining the unity of Africa.

Without clear language - Language facilitates our movements. We are in the Pan African Parliament. Most of the French speaking countries know two languages. They have – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MR OKOT OGONG: I would like to implore Members that if we want to facilitate our people to trade in Africa, we need to again agree on our policy on education. We need to introduce French so that we can communicate throughout Africa. Once you know French and English, you can communicate, trade and move freely because language is going to facilitate you to move to negotiate, communicate and do everything. So, that should also come in our policy as soon as possible.

I support the statement presented by the minister. We would like our Government to always be on top. Once we have signed, let us implement it. We still have the Malabo Protocol; we signed it but the minister has not come here.

Honourable members, how many times do we see the ministers of foreign affairs on the Floor of this Parliament? They are never here. How then do we impact on the policy of Africa and the continent when our ministers are not with us here? We have many protocols and treaties that are not signed. They simply sign them there but implementation is zero, and the ministers are not even here to defend them. We are now talking here without the ministers of foreign affairs. They are the ones to facilitate what we talk about here.

Madam Speaker, I would like to, therefore, propose that you write to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and let them know that as much as they are busy, they should treat this Parliament as a very important arm of Government. One minister should always be here to represent the ministry and our Government because they are the ones representing us in all these agreements and meetings. If they are not here to follow the debate on the Floor of Parliament, how are they representing us there?

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Foreign Affairs is not here. We have urged them to sign the Malabo –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: On the Malabo Protocol, we had a debate here and some said it is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in charge while others said it is the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, so it was very annoying. 

4.20
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister as well for presenting this statement on the Floor of Parliament. I think it has been long overdue. At one point, I should have raised this issue but my colleague, hon. Okot Ogong, has brought out very pertinent issues. 

I have one issue I would like to draw the attention of this House to. Our people are always left behind when it comes to such preferential trade areas. I would like to implore the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to create strong awareness amongst our people this time, so that they can also benefit from this free trade agreement.

On the issues of our participation from a foreign perspective, I think my colleague has articulated it very well. Recently – I think yesterday – there was a very big social media outburst where few young people in South Africa stormed our embassy because of poor services. That particularly reflects so much not only on our international relations but also on our ability to integrate in terms of trade and other aspects in business. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you precluded from laying that treaty here, because you have summarised it but we have not seen it? Are you precluded from laying it before this House?

4.27
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We thank the minister for making this statement. 

We are surprised that in her statement, she said that she is informing the House that the African continent remains Uganda’s main export destination, accounting for an average of 47.2 per cent of the country’s total exports over the last five years, from 2014 to 2018. The House knows for sure how much, as a country, we have been worried about our produce. As the honourable member has said, we produce a lot but we do not have anywhere to sell it, and the minister and Cabinet are aware of this. There is no way the population has been made aware that they can traverse this country to sell their produce. When they are taking their produce, they face hurdles, just like we have heard about the sugarcane sector. It is never easy for us.

I saw in the protocol where they said that we are going to trade in goods and then services. I do not know how much we are positioned as a country. If we are not mistaken, other countries will come to invade Uganda and we shall employ them, but Ugandans will never be taken anywhere because we are not strategically positioned. Nobody is telling the universities that these are the areas that we have to venture in. 

Therefore, I feel that much as we signed the protocol – and you chaired it for a full year – you have not told us how you make this country know what is happening –(Member timed out.)

4.29
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am going to be very brief. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister but at the same time ask her some questions, since I believe she was a part of the team that negotiated this deal on our behalf. 

There is the problem of animosity by the people in South Africa. Of late, you have heard of shops belonging to non-South Africans being looted in broad daylight yet South Africa is part of Africa and part of this treaty. In your negotiations, have you also taken into account issues of this nature, so that the African countries that are a party to this trade agreement are able to give protection to all who are doing business in their areas of jurisdiction, so that one feels free to go and trade wherever he or she likes?

Secondly, there is the issue of service delivery. There are many Ugandans who are out there because they are not able to be employed in our home country, even technocrats like medical professionals, engineers, nurses and ICT specialists. They are out there finding difficulties in getting jobs yet in Uganda, when you look at the social service sector especially in hotel management, you realise that it is dominated by foreigners, and we are able to receive these foreigners well. How about the issue of reciprocation on the part of Ugandans who are out there? 

Are these issues all well-articulated so that the parties to this trade agreement take it in good faith and really mean what they put their signatures to? Thank you.

4.31
MS CECILIA ATIM (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the minister. I think this is a healthy development. This report is very good and detailed. 

However, I would have loved the minister to give us more details. When you say that Uganda would prefer to approach the negotiations from the East African perspective, I think that is disadvantageous. Why? It is because we have countries like Burundi and South Sudan that are not actively involved in the regional trade. As a result, we need to take advantage of that.

Secondly, you are aware that the Pan-African Parliament discussed different economic activities like trade, industrialisation and infrastructural development. All these issues are very important for us to plan for. It is important that the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives gets to know the plans you have and how Uganda is prepared to fit into them. We need to know what Africa, at the continental level, is planning and how Uganda fits into that plan, and it applies to infrastructure; unless we are ready to that extent, we are still not going to reach there. 

I would like to thank the minister because at least she has been able to tell us that we are improving in intercontinental trade, which is very important. However, we need to be smarter. Ugandans are poor negotiators. We do not know how to catch the season and that is our problem –(Member timed out.)

4.34
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, as we prepare to fast-track the integration of the African Continent in terms of the free trade area, what the preparations on the ground in Uganda are to undertake this. My concern is that we can sign the trade agreement yet on the ground as a country, we have not prepared ourselves just like in the regional integration of the East African Community where we still have issues that we have not sorted out for Uganda to benefit, especially in the areas of trade policy within the country.

Madam Speaker, just before we came to this, we were discussing the challenges faced by the sugarcane growers. All these matters are there because we do not do things with a clear policy on the ground to support them. You move ahead, sign the protocol yet on the ground, the policy you have put in place to match it and to prepare the people – In the consultations, you are looking at the Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) and the academia yet the real business people right from the villages are not aware of this and how they should get in.

I think that as we move into this, we should get everybody on board so that when we sign the trade agreement, we hit the ground running and get into business. Otherwise, at the moment, the President goes around drumming up support for people to do commercial agriculture but for that agriculture we will need the market to evacuate whatever is produced.

Therefore, honourable minister, we would not want to sign protocols when in the actual sense, it will not help our country. I would like you to respond to this. Thank you.

4.36
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the minister. I would, however, have expected just one more element in her statement, which relates to her efforts locally to produce in order to benefit from that arrangement. Already, we have trouble on the discrimination in taxation, which is a disincentive to productivity locally. We have a problem of lack of incentives in production, particularly in the sector of agriculture, if you want to be specific. So, you need to tell us the steps you have taken. 

It takes a level of ministerial cooperation and integration. What are you doing with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to promote both quantity and quality locally in order to compete at that front? I think that is lacking. As I observed, we are likely to become more of importers than exporters.

4.37
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for their contributions. 

Talking about visas to South Africa, it is evident we needed that agreement yesterday. You actually have identified the challenges that we have in doing business in Africa. So, there was need to open the market for us, and you have actually just justified my presentation.

On the issue of implementation, it is true we have not started implementing. We have finished phase I of the negotiation. Phase II is the implementation, like I mentioned in my statement. I said that the modalities are the actual market access, the rules of origin which are being drafted, the trade in services negotiations, and the instruments for the operational phase of the African Continental Free Trade Treaty. That is the implementation stage.

On awareness and popularising of the programme, in all these negotiations, we involved members of the private sector. Indeed, even Members of Parliament attended all these sessions. We need to do more though. I mentioned in my statement that UNDP has pledged to support us to popularise this agreement. We need to educate and sensitise members of the private sector through their associations and involve the local governments so that other players and stakeholders also know. We have not done that but that is the phase we are going to embark on.

I would like to thank the Member for the idea of French. We have taken note of that one and we will see how we can involve the education ministry to see that we bring back the teaching of French in the curriculum. However, I thank you for that piece of advice.

On the issue of xenophobia mostly in South Africa, it is true this is an issue that we have been raising ever since we started the negotiations. That is why in our protocol on trading goods, trading services, as well as rules and procedures on the settlement of disputes, we have even gone further to negotiate in depth with the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) about those free trade areas. One of these has been key and very high in the agenda and I thank you for raising it. We must emphasise it as a non-tariff barrier.

On the issue of the services sector, I would like to inform you that in some of the countries, for example in Zambia, Namibia and Zimbabwe, we have over 500 Ugandans who have established legal firms, started school and they are happy that we have this African Continental Free Trade Area because it has eased their mode of doing business. Therefore, it is an advantage.

On the Pan-African Parliament, we have been together. We have been members of the African Union and have been working together on drafting this agreement. How do we fit in the plan? We have been working together, as I said earlier, with the African Union and all these. We have been trying to harmonise some of the policies.

On productivity, are we ready? Yes. We have the National Export Development Strategy which is under trade. We have started implementing it and we have prioritised coffee. Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) has gone out aggressively to give out seedlings in the entire country; that is one of the priorities that we are looking at to export coffee to the rest of Africa. 

Regarding tea, we have even set up industries in Kabale and various tea-growing areas. We are giving out seedlings aggressively so that we step up production. Milk is another area for which we are giving out equipment to most of the people. Therefore, all these are aggressive projects or programmes that are there to help step up the production of our commodities.

Tourism is another area to encourage people to come here. Other than other regions, there is simsim in the north. It is also one of the areas we are trying to promote. Millet is also there. There are also other programmes for commodities that we are trying to promote.

I would like to thank you all for the advice you have given me. I will lay the treaty on the Table tomorrow. Madam Speaker, with your permission, is it tomorrow? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Keep us posted along the way on all the stages. Of course, our committee on trade should remain focused on that issue so that we monitor what is happening.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON UGANDA’S PREPAREDNESS TO PARTICIPATE AT THE 2020 WORLD EXPO

4.44
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): The trade expo will commence in October 2019 and will end on the 10 April 2020. I suspect that the statement was uploaded.

THE SPEAKER: Can I have a copy?

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that I am given more time. I need to include more information and I understand it was not uploaded. Maybe tomorrow when I come for -

THE SPEAKER: When you come to lay the treaty of free trade area on the Table.

MS KYAMBADDE: I will come with the treaty tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but just make sure Members receive it by 10 or 11 o’clock.

MS KYAMBADDE: Okay. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. That matter will be handled tomorrow.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT INTERVENTIONS TO ENSURE CONSTANT WATER SUPPLY IN HEALTH FACILITIES

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Water and Environment. I thought he was here but he is not here.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE CHAIRPERSON: I believe we had completed the debate.

Clause 1

MS ERAGU:  Thank you very much -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, can you assist us to get the Attorney-General? I think he is somewhere in the lobby.

MS ERAGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have proposed amendments in clause 1. We propose to delete paragraphs (a)(iv), (b), (c), (d) and (f). We also propose to replace paragraph (g) with the following: “(g) in section 286(2) by substituting for ‘sentenced to death’ the words ‘liable to suffer death’”.  

We propose to replace paragraph (j) with the following: “in section 319 (2) by substituting for ‘sentence to death’ the words ‘liable to suffer death’.” 

The justification is that:

    1.  The proposed amendment has the effect of amending Article 22 of the Constitution by infection.
    2. To comply with the decision in Susan Kigula.
    3. The proposed amendment goes beyond the decision in Susan Kigula by converting the discretionary sentences prescribed in the provisions of the Penal Code to life imprisonment.
    4. The proposed amendment removes the death penalty from some of the most serious offences in Uganda, thereby going against the international best practices.

The chairperson: Honourable minister, do have any objection to the proposals?

Mr rukutana: Madam Chairperson, we accept the proposals.

The chairperson: Mover?

Mr sseggona: Madam Chairperson, we agree with the proposals. We passed them in the committee.

The chairperson: Honourable members, the mover and the sector minister have no objection. I now put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

Ms Eragu: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 
 
Amendment of Act No. 14 of 2002 

We propose to delete paragraph (a)(ii), (b) and (c). 

The justification is:

1. 		The proposal goes beyond the decision in Kigula, which dealt with the mandatory death sentences. The proposal by the Bill to replace the death sentence with life imprisonment therefore goes beyond the decision in Kigula and the object of the Bill.

2. 		The proposal removes the death penalty from some of the most serious offences in Uganda, thereby going against international best practices.

The chairperson: Any objections? 

Mr rukutana: Madam Chairperson, we concede to the proposal.

The chairperson: Mover?

Mr sseggona: I have no objection.

The chairperson: Honourable members, the mover and the sector minister have no objection. I now put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

Ms eragu:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

Amendment of Act No. 7 of 2005

We propose to delete the entire clause. The justification is:

1. 	The proposal not to punish acts or omissions leading to the loss of life or operation is not in line with the general criminal principles applicable in civilian wrongs, which punishes acts or omissions leading to loss of life.

2. 	The proposals go beyond the object of the Bill.

3. 	The proposal has the effect of amending Article 22 of the Constitution by infection.

4. 	The proposal goes beyond the decision in Kigula by converting the discretionary sentences prescribed in those provisions to life imprisonment.

5. 	The matters that the clause sets out to address have long been addressed under the Constitution (Sentencing Guidelines for Courts of Judicature) (Practice) Directions, 2013.

6. 	The proposal removes the death penalty from some of the most serious offences in Uganda, thereby going against international best practices.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, the proposal is that the entire clause be deleted.

Mr rukutana: Madam Chairperson, we concede.

Mr sseggona: That is our position.

The chairperson: Honourable members, the mover and the sector minister have no objection. I now put the question that clause 3 be deleted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4

Ms eragu: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not have anything to say about clause 4.

The chairperson: I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

Ms eragu: Imprisonment for life 

We propose to replace clause 5 with the following:
 
“5. Treatment of life imprisonment or imprisonment for life in any enactment

(1) 	For purposes of any enactment prescribing life imprisonment or imprisonment for life, life imprisonment or imprisonment for life means imprisonment for the natural life of a person without the possibility of being released.

(2) 	Notwithstanding subsection (1), a person liable to imprisonment for life or life imprisonment may be sentenced for any shorter term of imprisonment not exceeding fifty years.

(3) 	When sentencing a person under subsection (1) and (2), court may order the minimum term of imprisonment a person liable to imprisonment for life or life imprisonment may serve before he or she may be considered for parole or the imprisonment of such a person may be reduced on account of remissions earned.”
 
The justification is:

    a) To limit the maximum duration a person may be imprisoned to 50 years.
    b) To allow the remission of sentences of life imprisonment.
    c) To encourage persons who have been sentenced to life imprisonment or imprisonment to reform.
    d) To empower court to determine the minimum duration a person may serve before he or she qualifies for parole or remission of sentence.
    e) To keep within international best practices imposition and remission of life sentences.

Mr magyezi: Madam Chairperson, I think life imprisonment is not the same as imprisonment for life. When the chairperson of the committee talks of being imprisoned without possibility of being released and thereafter provides circumstances for possibility of release, it means that we need to go back to the definition of these two words. 

In my understanding and looking at what we see in various dictionaries, life imprisonment refers to life in prison for a long time. In the Prisons Act, it is given 20 years. I think 50 years would be okay –(Interjections)- Just look at Google, you will find it.

It is more lenient to imprisonment for life. It is actually recognition that the natural life of a person is not just the physical life; it includes the spiritual life, which could actually, after the 20 or 50 years, be reviewed and it can be seen that this person can actually be released. However, imprisonment for life goes to the very definition that the chairperson has given - living a life in prison forever without the possibility of release.

Therefore, to go away from this apparent contradiction, which I see in the definition of the chairperson, we need to give the two sections definitions - life imprisonment with its definition and imprisonment for life with its own. This will, of course, give a lot of options to the courts so that we are not fixed with one format of sentencing. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I have listened to the submissions of hon. Magyezi but I would like to allay his fears. When you look at the proposed amendment in subclause (3), you realise it addresses exactly what he is talking about. All it does is to put a minimum cap on the term of imprisonment, whether it is imprisonment for life or life imprisonment, and it is also justifiable. 

We would like to limit the discretion of a court - I think we are entitled to do it - to ensure that there is a minimum below which the court should not go if somebody is sentenced to life imprisonment or imprisonment for life. To me, that is a good principle. In a case where somebody would be imprisoned for 50 years, court has the discretion to say that the person should be imprisoned for 20, 10 or five years. I think it is not proper. We are putting a lower cap below which court will have no discretion to reduce the penalty. As far as I am concerned, that is okay.

MR SSEGGONA: Just to add to what the Attorney-General said, for the benefit of hon. Magyezi, in the case of Tigo, which we made reference to in our report, the Supreme Court clarified that it actually means the natural life of a human being. As to whether that extends to life after death – I do not know if it is life after death – is a different matter. I think it is about the life and the life does not include after death. We do not make reference to the spiritual life.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you. I appreciate the explanation from the senior learned lawyers. However, what harm would it do to separate these two into subsections for purposes of clarity? This is because not everybody is a lawyer. 

I will give an example. Court may make a decision but when they decide against me, my people and I need to understand what sentence I have been given and the opportunities there are. So, what harm would it make to separate them into subsections?
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Kamateeka, for giving way. If you want those two sections separated so that you understand them, then you are also saying that you want to know what doctors do in terms of medicine. There are those who know the law and will deal with it. For you, who does not know the law, you will go to them and they help you. Therefore, what separation would you need, my sister? 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you for asking for that clarification, but the two are different - what we are discussing here and the issue of doctors. I want us to separate life imprisonment as a subsection and imprisonment for life and give them specific definitions. The definitions are there but for purposes of clarity, separate them.

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Chairperson, it is important that we recognise this. The debate the other time was on whether to uphold the death penalty or not, to make it mandatory. If it becomes mandatory, it has to be done when a certain offence has crossed the red line. This is where hon. Kamateeka is right; we need to show the circumstances and the gravity of the offence, which leads to life imprisonment. Yes, it is a harsh penalty but it is a little more lenient than imprisonment for life. If it cannot be done in this Act, then it has to be done in the subsequent regulations. Nevertheless, I think we need to hold these two differently. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to advise that a close scrutiny of the Kigula case shows you that the Lordships, in their interpretation, thought that there was no difference, in principle, between life imprisonment and imprisonment for life.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let me just read what the memorandum of the Act 2015 is: “In Stephen Tigo Vs Uganda, the Supreme Court held that life imprisonment or imprisonment for life means imprisonment for the natural life of the person.”

Honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing to delete the entire clause 6. 

The justifications are: 

    a) The provision is redundant in light of paragraphs 9 (4) (a) and (4) of the Constitution (Sentencing Guidelines for Courts of Judicature) (Practice) Directions which prohibits the imposition of a custodial sentence where the offender is of advanced age; advanced age being 75 years and above. 
    b) The provision may be challenged for infringing on Article 21 (1) of the Constitution, which guarantees equal treatment of all before the law. 
    c) No evidence was adduced during consultations, indicating that persons above the age of 70 cannot commit offences carrying the death sentence. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is that clause 6 be deleted. I put the question that clause 6 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you have some new clauses? 

Ms ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, I have the insertion of new clauses. Immediately after clause 6, insert the following clauses: 
 
“Imposing a death sentence 
(1) The court may only pass a death sentence in exceptional circumstances where the alternative of imprisonment for life or other custodial sentence is demonstrably inadequate.

(2) The exceptional circumstances referred to in subsection (1) are where a person commits an offence whose prescribed punishment is death and –
(a) the court is satisfied that the commission of the offence was planned or meticulously premeditated and executed;
(b) 	the victim was –
(i) 	a law enforcement officer or a public officer killed during the performance of his or her functions; or 
(ii) 	a person who has given or was likely to give material evidence in court proceedings; 
(iii) the commission of the offence was caused by a person or group of persons acting in the execution of furtherance of a common purpose or conspiracy;
(iv) 	a child;

(c) 	the death of the victim was caused by the offender while committing or attempting to commit -
(i) 	murder;
(ii) 	rape;
(iii) 	aggravated defilement;
(iv) 	aggravated robbery;
(v) 	kidnapping with intent to murder;
(vi) 	terrorism; or
(vii)		treason; 
(d) 	the commission of the offence was caused by a person or group of persons acting in the execution or furtherance of a common purpose or conspiracy; 

(e) 	the victim was killed in order to unlawfully remove any body part of the victim or as a result of the unlawful removal of a body part of the victim; or 

(f) the victim was killed in the act of human sacrifice.”

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I have a slight problem with subjecting the sentencing to death, what the committee calls “exceptional circumstances”. The committee has done a good job; they tried to enumerate the exceptional circumstances envisaged but to me, this list is not exhaustive. Court may come up with other unforeseen and un-provided for exceptional circumstances.

My view is that we leave that to the discretion of the court. It is enough for us to say that a court may only pass a death sentence where the alternative of punishment for life or other custodial sentence is demonstrably inadequate. To me, that would really serve our purpose without bringing in any ambiguities or unforeseen situations. 

Having said that, we do not need to consider subclause (2). In any event, these are the circumstances the court considers. It is good to leave this to the discretion of the court, and the guiding principle should only be that the death sentence should be imposed where other alternatives of imprisonment are demonstrably inadequate. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. By listing these in paragraph (c), I think we are making a mistake. In such a case, anybody can allege any of these and anything happens. We should leave this to court to determine. We should not make a law specifying instances. Death is death and the deaths, which have occurred, must be interrogated - how they were caused and what the problem was.

Madam Chairperson, paragraph (c) should be deleted. I also agree with the Deputy Attorney-General and I am trying to understand why we are putting exceptional circumstances.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, are you insisting on the amendments?

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, on reflection, I agree with the Attorney-General that we leave most of these things to the discretion of the courts. Listing everything now may not help justice or its application and implementation thereof.
   
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, by doing that, you may cut out other things that you have not thought about.

MS ERAGU: That is why I said, on reflection, I really feel that I must concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we then just leave subclause (1) and stop at “demonstrably inadequate”?

MS ERAGU: Yes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed with subclause (1) and delete the rest of the subclauses.

(Question put and agreed to.)


MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, the other proposed new clause is: 

“Confirmation of death sentence

(1) 	Where court passes a death sentence on any person, the registrar of that court shall, where the convicted person does not appeal the sentence within the prescribed time, transmit to the Supreme Court a copy of the judgement and proceedings of that court within thirty days after the conviction for confirmation.

(2) 	The Supreme Court shall only confirm the death sentence where it is satisfied that the circumstances of the case warrant the imposition of the death sentence.

(3) 	The Supreme Court shall, where it does not confirm the sentence, impose an appropriate sentence or make any other orders as it deems fit.

(4) 	Where the Supreme Court confirms the death sentence, the registrar of the Supreme Court shall in accordance with Article 121(5) transmit to the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy a written report of the case and its judgment.
 
(5) 	The Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy shall, within six months from the date of referral, consider and advise the President on whether the death sentence should be carried out.

(6) 	The President may, acting on the advice of the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy –
(a) 	order for the carrying out of the sentence in the manner prescribed by court;

(b) 	grant the convicted person a pardon, either free or subject to lawful conditions;

(c) 	grant to the convicted person a respite, either for an indefinite or for a specified period, of the execution of any punishment imposed on that person for such an offence;

(d) 	substitute a less severe form of punishment for any punishment imposed on that person for such an offence; or 

(e) 	remit the whole or any part of any punishment imposed on convicted person for such an offence.

(7) 	A sentence of death imposed by a court of judicature or a court or tribunal established under the Uganda People’s Defence Forces Act, 2005 shall only be carried after it has been confirmed by the highest appellate court and upon an order of the President issued under subsection (6) (a).

(8) 	In this section and in any other enactment, a reference to the highest appellate court shall be taken to be a reference to the Supreme Court.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know what the Attorney-General has to say. Must every sentence be confirmed by the Supreme Court?

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, it is only those cases that are of a severe nature. It is the last one in this section. 

MR SSEGGONA: May I be of assistance? Madam Chairperson, this confirmation is a requirement under Article 22 (1) – “No person shall be deprived of life intentionally except in execution of a sentence passed in a fair trial by a court of competent jurisdiction in respect of a criminal offence under the laws of Uganda and the conviction and sentence have been confirmed by the highest appellate court.” 

We had the situation of the two soldiers, whose names I have forgotten, and the Uganda Law Society took up a challenge. The Supreme Court reiterated after those Kotido executions that any execution where the sentence is not confirmed by the Supreme Court is unconstitutional. That is where we drew this from.

I think the last leg of the President is where it may raise some problems. A prerogative of mercy, for example, must be applied for. It is not automatic that you just transmit the file. That is the only leg I recommend that we remove. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, on the last point of who is eligible to benefit from the prerogative of mercy, I entirely agree with my colleague that the prerogative of mercy should be applied for. The proposal here means that for every death sentence, every convict will be considered for the prerogative of mercy, which should not be the case.

Secondly, I appreciate your concern when you ask whether every sentence will have to go through this. I was talking to the chair; all these proposals have to be tied to subclause (1) which says that where court passes a sentence of death on any person, that is when all this should arise, so that we remove the perception that even other offenders can benefit from this prerogative of mercy.

When we come to (6), I have no problem with all the provisions except (c). Subclause (6)(c) says, “The President may, acting on the advice of the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy – 
(c) grant to the convicted person a respite, either for an indefinite or for a specified period, of the execution of any punishment imposed on that person for such an offence.”

We are talking about a death sentence, why would the President say, “I give you respite; instead of being executed this month, you will be executed in January next year.” To me, that is inhumane. If somebody is to be executed, the principle is that the execution should be prompt and painless. Now you are saying that the President should say, “we shall not kill you now, but we shall kill you next year”. That is the respite they are talking about. People have said that lengthy custody of death row convicts is inhumane; you continuously torture them psychologically.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I will start with the period. They are saying that somebody who has been convicted must be killed within three years. Supposing this is a political convict and the struggle is on and then you convict him and kill him because you know that he was fighting against you? If this was the case, many people who are politically convicted would have died. Therefore, I propose that these three years should be removed.

Secondly, they say that where court has passed a sentence, they should transmit a copy of the judgment to the Supreme Court. I thought the Supreme Court is also a court. Supposing the High Court has done it, I would imagine that since such a person is entitled to state representation, then he should go to the Court of Appeal and from there to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court would then be able to determine. It is not right for the Supreme Court to act on a copy of a judgment, which has been transmitted to it without hearing them. Somebody can write a very good court ruling yet if somebody came to the court, they could be defended.

Therefore, I see this whole confirmation of a sentence falling on the wayside because we should say the due process should be followed until we reach the Supreme Court. 

The Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy is there. It should be incumbent on the committee – I think it is the President who sends these convicts there. If the committee is there and wants to see, then it should be the same for every case determined by the Supreme Court. They should get a copy of the ruling and then it would be up to them to advise the President not to kill. I, however, think the President does not depend on this committee. It really depends on how happy or annoyed he or she is, then he or she can kill you or allow you to stay around. After the Supreme Court ruling, then a copy should be sent to them to decide whether to kill or not. 

I would like to ask the Attorney-General this: Does this Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy apply the “legal mind” or it just looks at someone with mercy, saying “this one is from the wrong region, kill; this one is from the right region, keep.” How does this committee operate? We need to find out so that we can make a decision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the reason I asked whether all sentences must be confirmed by the Supreme Court is because of a situation where someone does not appeal – a person forgets or ignores the Court of Appeal and goes straight to the Supreme Court. I am not clear about that area.

Secondly, I heard the Attorney-General saying the prerogative of mercy has to be applied for. Does it mean all these people sitting there never applied or they applied and nothing has been done? I never hear about that committee. We never hear about their work and I do not know who composes it yet. There are thousands of Ugandans seated there; did they apply or not? How does one apply?

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, as I listened to hon. Nandala-Mafabi making a comment on the duration of three years, I was a little worried. There have been instances in this country where even after court has pronounced itself and convicted a suspect, after some time it turns out that the person was erroneously convicted. 

There is a man – I think lawyers who are conversant with case records are aware of this man - who later on turned out to be a preacher in Kamwokya. He was charged for allegedly killing a man in Masaka and convicted. However, while he was languishing in Luzira Prison, the same man, who was said to have been killed, emerged. This man had languished in prison for many years and when he was released, he became a convert and started preaching. Assuming this regulation that you are putting in place was the case to go by, this man would have been innocently killed because he had stayed there for a number of years.

Secondly, this issue of the committee on the presidential clemency –(Interjections)– yes, it is all clemency because prerogative of mercy is clemency on his part. It is him to pardon you or not to pardon you. There are people who have languished in our prisons for years and there are others who have gone there and within a short time, you hear that their application has been successfully entertained by the President and he has granted them clemency. 

What are the criteria for giving this clemency? Is it on first come first served basis, so that whoever has stayed there longest should be given an opportunity to appeal to the President for clemency, or is it because the person convicted is well connected and is probably known to the President so that his application is hastened overnight and he is granted the presidential pardon? Are there laid down guidelines to follow so that the store management principle of first-in first-out is applied? What is the procedure?

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On the question of the timeline of three years, the practice is that when somebody has been sentenced to death, you cannot keep him or her there for 30 years, waiting and thinking every day about when they are going to be executed. Those are 30 years of psychological torture. In the United States and other places, once one is sentenced to death, they give a short period and that person is executed.

The question of investigating cases and convicting people wrongly now comes to our judicial system, but we should not keep somebody there indefinitely. There must be a timeline for keeping a person sentenced to death in prison. Also, keeping many people on death row in prison is an issue. That is why we are saying, let us remove the death sentence from our laws and replace it with life imprisonment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we, for the record, know who the members of that committee are? What are their names? Where do they sit? Where are they?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy is provided for under Article 121 of the Constitution. It states thus: 
“(1) There shall be an Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy which shall consist of-
(a) the Attorney-General who shall be the chairperson; and
(b) six prominent citizens of Uganda appointed by the President.”

As to how it operates, let us look at Article 121(5), which says, “Where a person is sentenced to death for an offence, a written report of the case from the trial judge or judges or person presiding over the court or tribunal, together with such other information derived from the record of the case or elsewhere as may be necessary, shall be submitted to the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy.” Apparently, all convictions of death, according to this clause, have to be referred to that committee.

Article 121(6) says, “A reference in this Article to conviction or imposition of a punishment, sentence or forfeiture includes conviction or imposition of a punishment, penalty, sentence or forfeiture by a court martial or other military tribunal except a field court martial.” A field court martial is a court martial at war and that is the only one which is exempted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, may we know whether this format or procedure has been reduced into an Act of Parliament or it is straight from the Constitution?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I am not aware of any Act of Parliament. I will check but it seems there is none. 

Members were concerned about the procedure. What has been done is that a person, on his own, or persons interested, make presentations to the committee. After making presentations, the committee reviews the entire case. This review is very consultative and even the victims have to be consulted. They look at the evidence and judgment – actually, they fully review the case. When they form an opinion, they consult the victims to ascertain how the release or the mercy will affect them psychologically and emotionally and the committee sits and makes a decision, which they transmit to the President.

The committee is available but it has not received submissions. I was told that they last received submissions about two or three years ago. Otherwise, it is in place. It is unfortunate that we have never had an Act of Parliament to operationalise this Article of the Constitution.

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, who makes the submissions?

MR RUKUTANA: If hon. Wadri was listening, I said that the convicts themselves or any interested person or persons.

Mr SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, I think there is a problem, first with respect to the question hon. Nandala-Mafabi asked, which has not been answered by the Deputy Attorney-General. What is very magical about the three years? It was in the wisdom of the Supreme Court that if a person has been convicted and their sentence confirmed but they spend more than three years on the death row, that amounts to torture, inhuman and degrading treatment. That is how Susan Kigula and the group ended up with their death sentences reduced or commuted to life imprisonment. 

Secondly, with respect to the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy and how it works, I think a practice has been developed that these people apply to the President or the committee to receive consideration. Madam Chairperson, the last person I heard who applied for consideration was Omuhikirwa John Sanyu Katuramu of Toro and Sharma Kooky, the Indian who killed his wife.

What the Attorney-General has been talking about is a developed practice that is not guided by a law - where someone writes to the committee that receives and advises the President. The earlier we bring a law to operationalise the Constitution, the better. Otherwise, it will remain available to the whims of this committee.

Madam Chairperson, the President whose mercy is sought to be exercised may never know because there is no guidance, and if it is a question of mercy, the person exercising the mercy has the power to decide. These people may work on guidelines, which may not have been pleasing to the President. We must, therefore, put in place mechanisms that make the President know that someone wants mercy to be exercised. Otherwise, it will be the committee exercising mercy.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually, they are not exercising it. Have you heard of the prerogative -?

MR SSEGGONA: They do because they receive the applications and decide what to do with them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is a lacuna.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I entirely concur with hon. Sseggona. Article 121(5) is clear and makes it mandatory that for every death sentence, a report compiled in the terms stipulated in this clause must be submitted to the Advisory Committee for the Prerogative of Mercy.

I agree that maybe the practice, which has been going on, is because we have not made a law to operationalise the provisions of Article 122 of the Constitution. I, therefore, undertake that we shall quickly work on that law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give evidence. I am lucky that I knew one member of that committee although he died. He was my former Bishop of North Mbale called Rt Rev. Peter Mudonyi.

When the Bishop died, I discovered that we were supposed to go and report to the committee that a member had died. I went to Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to report but no one knew what I was reporting -(Laughter)- yet, he would say that he was going for meetings and sometimes, I would take him back. I think they would give him between Shs 30,000 to Shs 60,000. He died in 2012.

Madam Chairperson, the reason I am bringing this up is because this committee is not known to the people. If they do not know, what about those of us who are outside the system? I, therefore, think it is important that this committee remains known and the cases are put across.

On the issue of time limit, Madam Chairperson, putting a time limit is very dangerous. Just say “people will be killed” but do not put a time limit. If you have decided in your wisdom that in one week, you will kill someone, it is good. In case someone is supposed to be killed in three days, I am telling you one day to the three years, that person might hang himself or herself because he or she is not sure whether they will cross.

MR SSEGGONA: The information I would like to give to hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that if I were the one - God forbid - and it is one day to three years, I would celebrate. What that would mean, going by Susan Kigula, is that I would not be executed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, fortunately, the Attorney-General has undertaken to expeditiously handle the enactment of the law to put in place an operational law for Article 121 of the Constitution. Let us now go back to the provisions.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I had reservations on subclause (6) (c) but I now note that my reservations were per incuriam. I was not aware of Article 121(4). Actually, all these conditions have been transplanted from the Constitution to subclause (6). Paragraph (c) in the proposed amendment, on a respite, is contained word for word in Article 121(4)(b) of the Constitution, which says “grant to a person a respite, either indefinite or for a specified period, from the execution of punishment imposed on him or her for an offence.” 

The proposed subclause (6)(c) of the Bill says, “grant to the convicted person a respite, either for an indefinite or for a specified period, of the execution of any punishment imposed on that person for such an offence”. It is word for word as the constitutional provision. I, therefore, withdraw my objection.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But it does not absolve you from working on the law.

MR ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree with my colleagues but I wish to also emphasise the fact that if we made Article 121 into law, then there would be no need of confirming death sentences. However, I would like to thank the Attorney-General for removing his objection and conceding.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, I have another proposed amendment on commuting of death sentences. We propose the following:

“Commuting of death sentences
(1) 	A sentence of death confirmed by the Supreme Court shall be carried out within three years of its confirmation.

(2) 	Where a sentence of death confirmed by the Supreme Court is not carried out within three years, the sentence shall be deemed to have been commuted to imprisonment for life.

(3) 	Where a death sentence is commuted to imprisonment for life, the convicted person shall be liable to imprisonment for 50 years.”

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, I agree except for the use of the word “shall” in paragraph (1). I propose the word “may” so that it reads, “A sentence of death confirmed by the Supreme Court may…” It is better drafting.

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with that and so, we can amend it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if we say the convicted person shall be liable to imprisonment for 50 years, it is very dangerous. Supposing the convicted person is 80 years and you add the 50 years, it becomes 130 years. I think it is practically impossible, unless you are looking at someone who is 20 years old at the time of conviction. My proposal is that a convicted person may be liable to imprisonment for 50 years.

Madam Speaker, if a person dies before 50 years old, they will remove the grave but if a person dies before serving 50 years under the law, their grave is supposed to stay there until the 50 years expire.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is dealing with sentences which have been commuted - it was death now it is reduced to life. So, it is okay; if you reach the 50 years, you can leave. I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, on issuance of sentencing guidelines, we propose as follows: 
“(1) The Chief Justice shall, in exercise of powers conferred upon him or her by Article 133(1)(b) of the Constitution, issue orders and directions to guide the sentencing powers of judicial officers.

(2) 	The sentencing guidelines made under subsection (1) shall be laid before Parliament. 

(3) 	Without limiting the general effect of subsection (1), the sentencing guidelines shall-

(a) 	set out the purpose for which offenders may be sentenced or dealt with;

(b) 	provide principles and guidelines to be applied by courts in sentencing; 

(c) 	provide sentence ranges and other means of dealing with offenders;

(d) 	provide a mechanism for considering the interests of victims of crime and the community when sentencing; and

(e) 	provide a mechanism that will promote uniformity, consistency and transparency in sentencing.”

The justification is:

1) 	To make this amendment in line with Article 22 of the Constitution, to require death sentences to only be carried out after confirmation by the highest appellate court, being the Supreme Court in all circumstances.

2) 	To require death sentences to be carried out within three years of their confirmation by the highest appellate court, following a submission of petition of mercy under Article 121 of the Constitution.

3) 	To comply with the decision in Kigula, which held that inordinate delay in carrying out a death sentence after its imposition was unconstitutional and unreasonable.

4) 	To define the highest appellate court.

5) 	To require that all death sentences imposed in Uganda shall be only carried out after its confirmation by the Supreme Court.

6) 	To define the time within which to carry out sentences of death.

7) 	To make provision for what happens when a person sentenced to death by a court does not appeal to the highest appellate court.

8) 	To make provision for commuting death sentences and prescribe how long a convicted person may serve.

9) 	To prescribe when to impose a death sentence in Uganda.

10)	To empower the Chief Justice to issue guidelines to guide the sentencing powers of judicial officers in criminal matters.

11)	To comply with the decision of the Supreme Court in Suzan Kigula, wherein court recognised the unfettered power and discretion of court in sentencing matters.

12)	To recognise the independence of the Judiciary as prescribed in Article 128 of the Constitution. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is that a new section be introduced.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.53
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume to consider the report of the Committee of the whole House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.54
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and passed it with amendments in clause 1, clause 2, clause 5, deleted clause 3 and clause 6 and inserted the following new provisions:

i)	Imposing a sentence of death; 
ii)	Confirming a death sentence;
iii)	Commuting of death sentences; and 
iv)	Issuance of sentencing guidelines.

I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE
OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.55
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.


BILLS
THIRD READING 

THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

5.55
Mr MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the third time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2019.”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause) Let me congratulate the Members; it has been such a long and bumpy journey but we are finally there. Honourable minister, would you like to say something?

5.57
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, it is my singular duty and obligation to thank and congratulate the private Member, hon. Sseggona, for coming up with this Bill. It has enriched our legal framework and added value to the law that we have had in place. I would like to thank him for being accommodative because there were areas where we were uncomfortable, to which he conceded and we put them aside.

I thank him for the professionalism and manner in which he handled the Bill. This professionalism and intelligence reflects on the calibre of the people who taught hon. Sseggona and they are known. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson and then we shall ask the mover to say something if he has something to say.

5.58
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Madam Speaker, I would also like to register my gratitude to the mover of the Bill, which is now an Act, for the professionalism he exhibited. We benchmarked with him at the House of Lords and had so many disagreements but we always talked about it.  

I would also like to thank the Attorney-General. When we were starting – I will reserve those. The two of them exhibited – It is also nice when you are professionals and you know the same things and do the same thing; it was really a pleasure working with them.

Madam Speaker, this law has been long overdue. The courts’ hands were tied after the Susan Kigula ruling. Now that Parliament has pronounced itself, cleaned and at least confirmed a new law, it will be a big move in enriching the jurisprudence of this country. I still would like to pray that the Attorney-General quickens the bringing out into legislation Article 121, so that we can clean out most of the things that are hanging. 

I would like to thank the Members for the debate and I thank you most sincerely for guiding us. I thank you.

6.00
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I will start with you; I thank you very much for facilitating not only the debate but the entire process in this long journey. I would like to thank the Attorney-General. I have always described him as my big brother of the same height. (Laughter)

I would like to thank the chairperson, the committee and every one of the Members that have facilitated this debate. How I wish this would be the way to go in future. Of course, we have hurdles, as private Members, when bringing Bills. However, I think it is high time we looked at it again to ease the process of a Member bringing a private Member’s Bill because it is very tedious and cumbersome. 

This time, I thank the Attorney-General; he did not bring other Bills along the way that would have the effect of frustrating this. I thank him and will offer him coffee one of these evenings. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let me also thank the staff for facilitating this process. Let us go to item No.5.

RESPONSE TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. SARAH NAJJUMA ON THE NEGLIGENCE OF HEALTH WORKERS AT THE MILITARY HOSPITAL IN BOMBO AND ITS DEVASTATING CONSEQUENCES ON THE LIVES OF PATIENTS

6.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col (Rtd) Charles Okello Engola): Madam Speaker, I beg to respond to the allegation that was brought to this august House by the Member of Parliament for Nakaseke, hon. Sarah Najjuma. 
In the course of debate in this august House on 8 August 2019, Parliament required me to make a statement on the alleged negligence by health workers at Bombo Military Hospital.

The Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs offers healthcare services to officers, militants, defence workers and their families. However, the defence health services are part of the national health infrastructure and thus extend free services to the civilian population as well. The defence health infrastructure covers the entire country, as well as mission areas.

The strategic infrastructure is comprised of one regional referral hospital at Bombo, four district level hospitals, seven health centres IV facilities, 33 health centres III, and over 45 health centres II facilities that are currently being upgraded to health centre III status.

The healthcare delivery is undertaken by various levels of health cadres including specialists, general practitioners, allied healthcare workers, nurses, social workers and support staff. 

In addition to the curative services, the ministry also offers preventive and health promotion services throughout Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) formations and units –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not have your answer. The question was about Bombo Military Hospital but you are briefing us about the whole country.

COL (RTD) ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, I am trying to give this background because these are health centres, which are helping; in case Members also get problems somewhere in these other health centres, we should be notified –

THE SPEAKER: I wish you could first deal with the situation in Bombo Military Hospital, where the honourable member said there was lack of care and attention, and then you can tell us about where else to go.

COL (RTD) ENGOLA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I would like to respond to the above matter as follows: The allegation of negligence by health workers and general poor state of the military hospital, made by hon. Najjuma during the 20th Sitting of the First Meeting of the First Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, held on Thursday, 8 August 2019, has been duly investigated by the ministry.

Whereas the honourable member, during the session, described the hospital’s state as appalling and health workers as negligent, a state she said was bearing devastating consequences on the lives of patients, I hereby report as follows:

1. 	No substantial evidence of alleged patient negligence has been registered. Despite the high volumes of patients, the hospital is duly covered by a team of 364 professional staff. The hospital also has countable command, control and incident reporting structures that monitor the delivery of services. 

The hospital has an in-built mechanism and a code of conduct for identifying and punishing errant staff, as a measure of ensuring adherence to set standards. An occurrence of such magnitude as to cause devastating consequences on the lives of patients could not have gone unnoticed.

2. 	There is no doubt that, given the heavy number of patients as earlier indicated, there are bound to be occasional delays in attending to some patients and shortages of medical supplies. This should not, in any way, be construed to mean negligence but rather a manifestation of having to care for big patient loads with limited resources. Even in such circumstances, the hospital has a mechanism for identifying seriously sick patients for urgent attention.

Since our healthcare services have spread across the whole country, we would encourage the honourable members and other community leaders to periodically check on these facilities in order to appreciate the realities on the ground and offer on-spot guidance whenever necessary.

The Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs is open and welcomes constructive criticism that will help us offer better services to Ugandans. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see hon. Najjuma here for the supplementary question. Since she is not here, there is no supplementary question. 

On the other issues on the Order Paper, I see the Attorney-General. However, I do not see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; and the Minister of Internal Affairs. They had issues to respond to. 

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. PAUL MWIRU ON THE DELAY BY GOVERNMENT TO RELEASE THE REPORT ON INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE DEATH OF THE FORMER WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE FOR BUTALEJA DISTRICT, HON. CERINAH NEBANDA

6.10
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I am supposed to report on the investigations into the death of the former Woman Member of Parliament of Butaleja, the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda. This is a matter that was raised by hon. Paul Mwiru.

Madam Speaker, I regret to inform you and this House that I do not have a statement because apparently, there were some procedural irregularities and the inquest is yet to be undertaken. 

What happened was that the Chief Justice duly appointed a coroner in the name of Justice Paul Mugamba and a committee for him to work with. The group was gazetted and they were poised to start work. However, because there was tremendous demand for the prosecution of the accused persons who had been arraigned in court, the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) rushed into the prosecution.

When that happened, everything the coroner and the inquest team would have used was taken by the DPP to prosecute the case. The coroner and the inquest team found it difficult to embark on the work when they did not have the files, evidence and everything that they required to carry out an inquest.

Honourable members, the prosecution took a bit of time and the time that had been given to the inquest team expired. When the time expired, we never considered reinstating the request for inquest.

Madam Speaker, it was good this matter was brought to our attention. We are now examining the possibility of constituting an inquest afresh. When we do that, we shall inform the House. 

6.13
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the minister is just informing us that they are considering the possibility of whether to conduct the inquest or not and yet they had been required to produce a report. 

Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence in this matter. Maybe we should give a timeline within which the Attorney-General would report. Even the question that was put on the Order Paper clearly shows that this matter has been snubbed on a number of times, yet the Deputy Attorney-General deems it appropriate to respond to this question in this format. Maybe, they will give us a timeline within which they will conduct the inquest. Otherwise, if they do not give the timeline, I would be inclined to think that this was a smart way of disposing of the inquest. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, do you have anything more to say on this issue? - It was concluded? 

MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since the trial was concluded, I remember it ended with a conviction that would have paved way for the inquisition to take place in earnest. This is now more than three years down the road. Apparently, there is no excuse now because the files, at that time, would have been returned. 

Secondly, this is a matter that touched on the grandeur of this Parliament. For the Attorney-General to tell Parliament that files were taken and handed over to the DPP – this is one and the same Government. The movement of files is known; once the purpose of those files was over, it was prudent to return them to other urgent issues like the inquest. Therefore, unless the Attorney-General is telling Parliament something else - that they lost interest - there is no reason now that can stop the inquisition from taking place. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are saying notwithstanding the conviction, you still want an inquest? I do not know what value it would add at this stage.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the technicality we were still considering is that ordinarily, an inquest is done to solicit evidence to use in the prosecution. The prosecution case is now closed and there was a conviction. 

We are looking at the law to see whether even in those circumstances, we can still legally go ahead with the inquest. To give an example, supposing we did an inquest now and the findings contradict the sentence of the court, how would we handle it? 

Anyway, as I said, those are the technicalities we are considering. We shall revert back to the House and inform you. 

It is in our interest and yours –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank my learned friend for giving way and for accepting to receive information. 

An inquest is about findings. Even where there is a conviction, once there is a suspicion – You know, under no law or principle of common sense would you rule out the possibility of a different finding. We are dealing with a matter involving the death of our very own. We can still receive that information and the proper killers may still be prosecuted. 

Take an example; a lot has been said about the death or the murder of the late Andrew Felix Kaweesi, the Deputy Assistant Inspector General of Police. You will remember that immediately after his death, several Muslims were rounded up across this country. Subsequently, we started receiving information implicating officers of Government and to be specific, officers of the Uganda Police Force. However, even when they were implicated, we still see those people whom they first rounded up appearing in court, which means that in death, anything is possible in Uganda including posturing. Somebody may come up and posture that “I killed”. 

When they torched the royal tombs in Kasubi, a mad man appeared the following day and said “I burnt them because they are satanic”. The Inspector General of Police was very quick to say, “we have arrested the suspect” only to receive the following day, letters from Butabika Hospital that they had been looking for this man. Even when they torched the tombs, the man was in Butabika Hospital.

Therefore, an inquest is still necessary even when you have that conviction. After all, you told us that the man convicted is a drug addict. Supposing we are dealing with a drug addict who knows nothing about the death of hon. Nebanda; we still need information.

However, finally, let this go to the abilities and the distinction with which the Attorney-General and his people serve this country. Surely, three years down the road, you are still grappling with this simple technicality! You should have taken a decision whether you are continuing with the inquest or not. It is a very simple matter. You would not need this time to still be considering unless you are telling us that that is the best of your ability.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, when will you come to update us on your new strategy?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, kindly, give me two weeks.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, a fortnight.

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. THEODORE SSEKIKUBO ON THE INTENTIONS BY UGANDA LAW SOCIETY TO SUE THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF INTERNAL SECURITY ORGANIZATION (ISO) FOR BREACHING SECTION 4(2) OF THE SECURITY ORGANIZATIONS ACT, 1987 BY THE ALLEGED, ARREST, TORTURE AND DETENTION OF ADVOCATE PATRICK MACHIKA MUGISHA AND MS OPRAH PHOEBE KIDDU 

6.20
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Gen. Elly Tumwine): Madam Speaker, this is in response to an issue raised by hon. Theodore Ssekikubo. He raised concern about the intentions by Uganda Law Society to sue the Director General of Internal Security Organisation (ISO) for breaching section 4(2) of the Internal Security Organisation Act, 1987 as contained in the Daily Monitor of Tuesday, 6 August 2019. It was alleged that the Director General was involved in the arrest, torture and detention of Ms Oprah Phoebe Kiddu, a member of NRM for Justice, allegedly opposing the sole candidature of President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni in the forthcoming 2021 elections.

It is not true that the Director General of ISO was directly involved in the arrest, torture and detention of advocate Patrick Machika Mugisha and Ms Oprah Phoebe Kiddu. First of all, I wish to state here clearly that Ms Oprah Phoebe Kiddu is unknown to us and has never been in any of our offices or custody. I do not know where they got her from.

On the case of Advocate Patrick Machika Mugisha, there had been a complaint from Mr Samuel Muwanguzi Mukasa aka Biyinzika, who was defrauded of Shs 500 million by a group of people including lawyers. The police had for a long time tried and failed to make headway on the case. Our officers were assigned to track those involved, in consultation with the Uganda Police Force, and have them prosecuted. Unfortunately, our officer became overzealous and moved on to arrest Advocate Patrick Machika Mugisha and Mr James N. Mullika and put them in the ISO facility.

Madam Speaker, this matter was brought to the attention of the Director-General who immediately ordered those arrested to be brought before him. He apologised to them and ordered for their immediate release. It has now become a general outcry by a number of innocent people who are being fleeced of their hard earned money by fraudsters and when they report, sometimes no action is taken. 

This situation has degenerated to a situation where the victims are taking the law into their hands in some cases and has become a security matter. This is also detrimental to the economy of the country and social stability.

It is the practice of ISO, when confronted by such public outcry, to make attempts to investigate the facts and try to reconcile the parties or refer them to the relevant sister agencies to handle their matters. In this particular case, our officer had been overzealous, as I have already said, and the organisation is carrying out investigations and punitive measures will be taken against the errant officer.

I wish to mention that what I called an ISO facility is sometimes called a safe house. This is a secure place used for intelligence work. All intelligence and security agencies world over operate safe houses. Therefore, running safe houses is not peculiar to Uganda but it is a worldwide intelligence practice.

Madam Speaker, let me take this opportunity to explain the functions of the so called safe houses, which are sometimes perceived in a bad way. These functions are in the interest of security:

    1. To coordinate clandestine intelligence operations.
    2. To debrief and re-brief intelligence assets. Assets are people who help intelligence.
    3. To secure and protect witnesses in danger especially criminals who have turned into witnesses. Sometimes use a thief to catch a thief -(Interjections)- Let me finish –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: This is a matter of law. If my brother would do that - Madam Speaker, as my big brother, hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine, reads - I know he prefers that I refer to him as “father” but I mean brother in Christ.

As he reads his statement, I am looking at the law establishing this particular agency. Isn’t it procedurally right that he guides us on where he is drawing those functions from? The law is here and this is an establishment by statute.

The speaker: Honourable minister, where do you derive those functions?

Gen. Tumwine: Madam Speaker, the law he is referring to is about the functions of ISO. Under ISO, there are many things that are not even in that law but which are relevant. You should be the one to explain what you are referring to. However, if it is the functions of ISO, then just know they include intelligence work, which is provided for in that law. It includes securing witnesses for security purposes and intelligence work.

Fourthly, I was explaining – (Interruption)

Mr sseggona: Madam Speaker, I am very courteous especially to those that are senior to me in life. We are dealing with a very sensitive issue that touches the lives of Ugandans, where the minister has political supervision over the agency in issue. The agency in issue is ISO, one of the security organisations established under the Security Organisations Act. It has functions under section 3 of that law.

I raised a point of procedure and you guided that the minister makes reference to where he is drawing those functions from because it is the starting point. I could have waited for the debate. However, the minister has not guided us on the legal instrument where he is drawing the functions from. Is he in order?

The Speaker: Honourable minister, did the Act give you authority to create these functions? Are they part of the law?

Gen. Tumwine: Madam Speaker, if you looked at the law that establishes ISO - the national security internal organisations Act - you notice that it provides that one of its roles is to do intelligence work.

Intelligence work is done in many ways, including having witnesses and information collected from the public. In the statement I was reading, No. 4. is about securing persons who come seeking protection by the state for various security reasons. If hon. Sseggona had a security problem, he would be welcome to be provided with security and could have a fantastic sleep in one of those houses. (Interjections)

5. To manage hard core criminals who require a long time to reform –

The Speaker: Let him finish first. You will ask a supplementary question because it has to arise from what he is answering.

Gen. Tumwine: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that the final one is to observe and survey hard core criminals who after leaving prisons and have not yet perhaps reformed, are surveyed. Sometimes, they are surveyed using houses, which could be called “safe houses”.  Thank you.

6.32
Mr theodore ssekikubo (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am at a loss. I do not know whether it is a supplementary question or not because fundamentally, the honourable minister has restated the impunity that there is, the pervading impunity where he is operating outside the law.

I would like to remind the honourable minister that we are all Ugandans. Any government’s agencies and organs must work within the law. It is not a licence for you to be the minister and you stand here and justify the unjustifiable. Whatever you are doing, hon. Tumwine – now I am calling you in person – be mindful of the law. Work within the confines of the law. This is the essence of this question.

There are ministers who have been there before you and many more are coming after you. However, when you stand on the Floor of this House, which is the bastion of democracy in this country and which should protect the rights of individuals, those in and outside Parliament, do you want the House to look on as you go on to act and read outside the law?

Are those centres you are talking about, whether they are safe or not, gazetted to confine persons? The law provides that any detention centre should be gazetted. I am surprised that he is asking me, “Which ones?” and that he is ignorant about the law he is supposed to be operating under –(Interruption) 

Mr mwiru: Madam Speaker, on a close look at section 4 of the Act the minister was referring to, it provides for restriction and exercise of the duties of the organisation. Section 4(2) even creates a restriction on arrests. The law does not allow ISO to arrest. It is only the Director General who can request the police to effect an arrest. It states thus: “No officer or employee of either organisation shall have power to arrest, detain or confine any person by virtue of being an officer or employee of the organisation.”

I thought this information is important to show the position of the law.

Mr sseggona: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Ssekikubo for giving way. Why this matter is very important to us is that it should be of grave importance to the minister himself because he has both a constitutional and statutory duty to protect Ugandans, including protecting them against Mr Kaka Bagyenda.

The Constitution itself, in Article 23, provides that a person can only be detained in a gazetted place. In the case of ISO, the law is not even silent on them; it provides that you have no powers to detain. However, he is here telling the Parliament of the country that, “We take them to our ISO facilities” even when they are telling him that people are dying and are being tortured from there. 

The information I would like to give hon. Ssekikubo is that since Gen. Tumwine again contemptuously was asking, “Which law; you read your law”, he did not know the law. The first law is the Constitution. It is only by virtue of that Constitution that you are seated where you are and I am not. It is only by virtue of that Constitution that you can be allowed to arrest somebody.

Finally, if you want to enforce the law, you can only act lawfully. You cannot enforce a law unlawfully. The moment you do so, you become a criminal and the moment you justify that, you become an accomplice. Gen. Tumwine, be careful, my brother, do not cross into the red line of criminality.

Mr ssekikubo: Madam Speaker, what is very perturbing is that this matter had nothing to do with security at all. He has confessed that the differences were over fraud or somebody failing to pay Shs 500 million and there you move in to arrest. Are the security agencies turning into debt collectors? Gen. Tumwine, under your supervision, the security agencies are turning into debt collectors. They are being used to settle petty disputes that have nothing to do with security. You want this country to degenerate into the bad times we had before and you are leading straight to that. 

Gen. Tumwine, with that mentality, do not go there because it took lives to bring us where we are. Do not take us back there. This impunity is surely leading us back to those dark days. When people have disputes over spouses, land, delayed payments, transactions and business, you call in the army; you arrest and torture people under the guise of security. What was the security issue with the Shs 500 million that you alleged was misappropriated or failed to be paid? 

Madam Speaker, Gen. Tumwine is not honest to this House. The Director General of ISO only released these two people after a production of a habeas corpus; it was through a court order. They were told that if they had any charges against those persons, then they should be taken to court. If they did not take them to court, then they had to immediately release them. Indeed, they went on to release them on Sunday –(Interruption) 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I am very sorry to come back but this is critical, and either the minister was not told what happened or he is not telling us. This particular man, Patrick Machika Mugisha, had actually been summoned by police before. He reported to police, gave his version of events and the police released him unconditionally. That is when ISO moved in or swung into action and kidnapped him. This was not an arrest. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, it is with a heavy heart that we raise these matters. It is up to this House - You keep quiet at your own peril; keeping quiet when somebody’s rights are being trampled upon and when people are being tortured on flimsy grounds like this. If we allow this, we shall have failed the country and the people who voted us to come to Parliament. 
The dark days are creeping back. The minister has just stood here, without any provisions of the law, and read things outside the law, yet he is supposed to be enforcing law and order. That is not your mandate. It is only the mandate of the police. If you have done your investigations, hand over the information to police and that is what the law, under which you are operating, stipulates. 

A lot is happening outside, including evictions and arrest of livestock done by the security agencies that have no mandate to do that. You are dragging in the army. The so-called Kyengera facility is being guarded by the UPDF. Unfortunately, we have representatives of the UPDF in this House. The army is for the people of Uganda but not to be used by the Tumwines of this world. This Tumwine should not hold the country at ransom and you keep quiet because he is a General here. For how long must you allow him to drag down this country when we are watching? You are 10 here and he is one of you; why do you allow him to do this? 

Gen. Tumwine, please, know that this country belongs to Ugandans. Your participation in liberating this country is not a licence for you to continue to abuse those rights and say you liberated this country. It is not your right. We are under the protection of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are going into other submissions.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I beg to end by saying that whatever he has said is an abuse of the parliamentary process. With Parliament, a minister has to be supported by the law. It has come out that he was not supported by the law. We are telling the House that these persons, such as Machika, were not released after the intervention of court. Therefore, he cannot stand here, before this House and pretend that he was acting under the law and continue to abuse it. 

It is high time this Parliament took firm and decisive action. Where we are going, the situation is going to be harder with the conduct and behaviour of persons in charge of the security of this country, like Gen. Tumwine. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Would you like to respond, Gen. Tumwine? 

GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, I made it very clear that the question of arrest and detention is not part of what I said. I said the errant officer, who was overzealous, is being investigated and is going to be handled administratively, in accordance with the law. 

Safe houses are not detention centres. I have explained their functions and there is nothing to say. Hon. Ssekikubo is trying to speak his own words as he wants but they have nothing to do with how we are handling the security of this country. 

The people concerned have freedom. If you bring specific cases, stating dates and names, we shall listen to them. Afterwards, we shall hold those responsible to account. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have instructed the Committee on Human Rights to go and visit those places and bring us a report. If you recall, even for Nalufenya, until our committee went there, they had never admitted that it was a “safe house”.

MS NANTUME EGUNYU: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification. Yes, you told us to go and find out if the facilities are safe houses or not. However, as the chairperson now, I request Gen. Tumwine to help, before we go, and define for us what safe houses mean. According to our own understating, safe houses are detention centres that are not even gazetted or known. In most cases, they are torture centres.

Nevertheless, I request Gen. Tumwine – for these safe houses that he knows and are in existence – to really define for us what they mean so that we go there from an informed point of view. He should also inform us of the people that qualify to be taken to safe houses instead of being taken to the known police stations. Which people qualify to be taken to such places? 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you go there and bring a report and then we shall debate it and identify who are there, where they fall and how they go there? That is what we need to know. If they do not allow them to go and visit the facilities, we shall know that they are hiding something. 

Honourable members, the other ministers are not here. The other work will be done tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you very much for the work done today. 

(The House rose at 6.45 p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday, 21 August 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

