

Thursday, 9 August 2018

Parliament met at 3.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I thank you for the work you have been doing over the last few days. 

Over the weekend, I attended a scouts’ jamboree in South Korea. I would like to take this opportunity to inform you that in 2020, Uganda will host two important meetings: the World Girl Guides Conference in July 2020 and two months later, in September, the Africa Scouts Jamboree. We had gone to South Korea to inform the scouts about this and to invite them to Uganda for both meetings. 

In that regard, I appeal to the scouts and girl guides who are in this Parliament - both Members of Parliament and staff  - to reorganise ourselves to be more visible on the national scene and more proactive in preparation for these two meetings, which are important for our country. I understand the scouts in Parliament have appointed hon. Robert Kasolo as interim chairperson. However, on our side as girl guides, we have not done anything yet. Therefore, I request Members who are scouts and girl guides to register with my office so that we know our numbers and organise ourselves. This will enable us to give a good impression when the Africa Scout Jamboree and the world conference come to Uganda. 

In addition, a young entrepreneur called Hamis Kiggundu has written a book on success and failure, based on his experiences, and he has donated a copy of this book to Members. They will be put in your pigeonholes. Read them so that we can see what he is telling us.

Honourable members, yesterday the Speaker’s office communicated some of the changes on the Opposition side. We shall be writing formally to the party concerned and on Tuesday, we shall issue directives in relation to those positions, which we did not handle yesterday. 

I would like to advise Members about raising issues of national importance as it seems Members are misusing this opportunity. A matter like the maize prices, which we handled, was really a matter of national importance as it touches the whole country and I would like to thank Members for their vigilance on that. Today, you saw in the headlines that the Government is now going to buy the maize. 

However, for some other issues, you can ask the minister a question. I have received a number of issues but in my assessment, some of them are not really matters of national concern. You can ask the minister a question or since the Prime Minister is going to be here today, you can raise some of those issues.

Therefore, today I will allow hon. Ouma Abott to raise the issue touching the economy of the people of the islands. That is the only issue that qualifies for today’s matters of national importance. We have talked about the issue of refugees many times and we cannot go on repeating the same issue in the same Session; our rules do not allow that. Therefore, I will not allow that one. 

Regarding the killing of people by prison warders, you can ask a question to the minister. On the arrest of someone in Democratic Republic of Congo, I think you can also ask the minister, hon. Onzima. Maybe we can allow the one about supplying dirty water since it is a health hazard. 

On the position of the Ministry of Education and Sports on MDD, ask a question to the minster. On the assault of a nurse by a doctor, I think you should write a question to the minister. 

Let issues of national importance be issues that really cut across. On the others, let us concentrate on holding the ministers to account.

Hon. Ouma, you can raise your issue.

3.22
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

The main activity of the people of Bukooli Island is fishing and we sell both fresh and smoked fish. However, in the last three months, the people who are operating within the waters have stopped our people from buying and selling smoked fish and this has affected our people very much. 

My prayer to this Parliament is that the ministry concerned should address this issue on the Floor of Parliament and tell us whether there is any law barring any Ugandan from selling or consuming smoked fish. If there is any legal backing in this regard, we should be told - (Interjection) - I am not talking about immature fish but mature smoked fish. 

What is happening in the waters is that whether the fish is 10 or 20 kilogrammes, they impound it and say there is a law barring Ugandans from selling and consuming smoked fish. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, this has to do with the operations of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) on the waters. The other time I told you that they were arresting people for selling by-products of fish, not fish. I think the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs was supposed to come back to us on that issue. Are you ready, hon. Mwesige? Issues concerning fish and skirmishes on the waters have really been many. Can you respond to this on Tuesday? There are many issues; get them and respond.

3.24
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka South County, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My major concern is the threat of Ebola in my constituency. 

My constituency, Kyaka South, has a refugee camp known as Kyaka II Refugee Camp. By June last year, we had 25,000 refugees. However, since then, every week, we get 10 buses of refugees from the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). As I speak, the number is approaching 80,000 refugees.

My biggest worry is that these refugees come from DRC and the health ministry in DRC issued an alert about Ebola. Two months ago, we had an outbreak of cholera within the camp, which also affected the neighbouring villages although it was contained. I fear that we are exposing my constituents to some unnecessary risk. Therefore, I would like to request the ministry in charge of ferrying these refugees to have a holding area outside the border to keep the refugees until DRC is declared free of Ebola.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether that matter is supposed to be handled by the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees or the Minister of Health because there is an Ebola alert. What plans do you have for the areas near our border with DRC?

3.26
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that from the time when the Minister of Health in DRC declared an Ebola outbreak in Beni District, which is 100 kilometres from our border with Kasese, we went into action.

To date, we have sent a rapid response team to all the five districts along the border: Kasese, Bundibugyo, Ntoroko - I have forgotten the other two. We have assessed the border points and engaged the district officials. We have also trained the districts and yesterday and today, we were putting in place screening facilities for people who are coming in. Everyone coming into Uganda is being screened for signs and symptoms of Ebola. We have empowered the districts with all that they need in terms of personal protective gear and protection of patients.

Yesterday and today, the World Health Organisation (WHO) Country Representative joined our teams on the ground and strengthened our efforts along the border. We have had cross-border meetings with the team from DRC to agree on what we need to do to ensure that Ugandans are protected.

Madam Speaker, we are up to the game and we would like to assure Ugandans that they are safe. I thank you.

3.28
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to present a matter of national importance regarding the National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) supplying contaminated water to the people of Mityana.

The water supplied by NWSC is very dirty and smelly and it looks unfiltered and untreated. The water smells like it contains faeces. As of now, the people of Mityana are being supplied with water that contains faeces. Actually, most of my people are suffering from water-borne diseases like typhoid, cholera, dysentery and diarrhoea.

Madam Speaker, in our country, 26,000 people die every day because they consume dirty water. You can imagine - (Interjections) - I researched this figure. If it is true that NWSC is supplying such water, this is very bad.

Madam Speaker, I tried to engage NWSC, Mityana branch, concerning this issue but they always tell me that they are handling it. However, I have realised that they source this water from boreholes and from a polluted and contaminated small lake and supply it directly to the homes of my people. 

I pray that the Ministry of Water and Environment intervenes and carries out an investigation concerning this issue and reports back to Parliament. I also request that the contract of NWSC is reviewed. If they do not comply, their contract should be terminated. I have samples of the water, which I can provide to the concerned ministry to investigate.

In addition, I would like to request the Ministry of Health to supply Mityana Hospital with the required medicines and vaccines so that they can handle patients and prevent people from contracting these diseases. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Water and Environment is here. When will you be ready to speak on the issue of NWSC?

3.31
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The allegations made by the Member are extremely serious. If it is true that NWSC is supplying water mixed with faeces, this is a very serious allegation. (Interruption)

MS AMEEDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to affirm to the minister that this year, a relative of mine who lives in Kololo had that kind of water being supplied to her house. She took a sample of the water to Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) and indeed the water was contaminated. When she called NWSC, they rectified the situation. Therefore, the minister should take this matter very seriously.

MR CHEPTORIS: Madam Speaker, the mandate of NWSC is to supply clean and safe water. If it is true that the water is contaminated, as a ministry we are going to carry out very serious investigations and find out. 
 
Madam Speaker, I request to come and report to this House on the results of my investigations on Tuesday next week.

THE SPEAKER: The minister has said he is going to investigate. Let us give him time to carry out the investigations and come back on Tuesday next week because these are allegations. Honourable member, you said the Minister of Water and Environment should handle the issue of the contaminated water.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Madam Speaker, the honourable member requested that I ensure that Mityana Hospital is well stocked with commodities. We pledge to do that. Thank you.

3.36
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. It might sound individualistic but it involves an institution of Government. 

On 2 July 2018, a midwife called Sarah Nangobi, working with Kamuli Hospital, was assaulted by Dr Steven George Daaki, who is in charge of Kamuli Referral Hospital. This same midwife was pregnant and at the time of the assault, she was attending to other mothers. I pray that the Minister of Health investigates this case and gives us details on how she is handling this matter because it is a matter between a boss and his subordinate.

This lady is traumatised because she is pregnant and is worried about her job. She has tried to report to the police but it seems nobody is helping her in the district. That is my prayer. Thank you very much.  

3.37
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This case was reported to us about three weeks ago. It was also reported to the police and it is in court. We cannot interfere with the proceedings but we are doing our administrative work to discuss the issue and handle it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please update us when it is concluded. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We hold Government offices in trust as these are public offices. When something goes wrong, rather than waiting for your people to suffer for a week until Parliament sits, you go to the minister. You know, there is a lot of construction work taking place in these towns and they are cutting pipes. In the process, water gets contaminated. It has happened in several places. 

I am bringing this up as a point of procedure, Madam Speaker, because I think it is good to raise these matters with the relevant ministers rather than conducting business in the House.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much; we take note of that. Honourable members, let us go back to item No.2. I was waiting for some documentation. 

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

THE SPEAKER: As we receive the Member, I would like to introduce hon. Chris Rwakasisi, former Member of Parliament for Bushenyi East. He is in the gallery and has come to observe the proceedings. (Applause) Of course, there are other people in the gallery too. 

The oaths were administered to:
    1. Elioda Tumwesigye

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Elioda Tumwesigye, I welcome you to your usual Parliament – (Laughter) - but now in a different capacity. Although you are a member of the Cabinet, you are still a Member of the House. Therefore, I give you, again, the instruments of office - the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure - to guide you in your work.

Honourable members, this morning I received a letter of resignation from hon. Elioda Tumwesigye. I therefore direct the Clerk to declare the seat of Sheema East vacant so that a by-election can be held. Thank you.

PERSONAL STATEMENT ON THE ATTACK BY UNKNOWN PEOPLE ON 27 JULY 2018 ON THE POLLING DAY FOR BUGIRI MUNICIPALITY

THE SPEAKER: Is hon. Silwany here? Let us go to item No.5.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES (UPDF)

THE SPEAKER: Is the UPDF whip here? Let us go to item No.6.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, ever since the Third Session begun, we have not had Prime Minister’s Question Time because the Prime Minister has actually not been here. I am reminding the Prime Minister of Uganda that he has a responsibility to come and speak on policy issues in this House. He has not done so since the Third Session begun. Therefore, next week, the Prime Minister must be here for Prime Minister’s Question Time.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES AND IMPLEMENTATION ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES IN THE SECTORS OF HEALTH, WORKS AND TRANSPORT IN SELECTED DISTRICTS

3.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES AND IMPLEMENTATION (Mr Hassan Fungaroo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I salute you all. I stand here as the Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation. I would like to also ask all the members of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation to stand up. Honourable members, this is for a reason; this committee is very important to you. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the report of the committee and the minutes of the meetings, which led to this report. Honourable members have the report uploaded on their iPads. I request you to open it and follow from there. 

This report comes in accordance with rule 176 subrules (2), (4) and (5). In the interest of time, I am not going to read the provisions in detail. 

The methodology we used is provided on page 2. However, I would like to mention that- 
1. 	We compiled and categorised all Government assurances in all sectors. 

2. 	We held meetings with the relevant Government officials from ministries, including ministers and permanent secretaries. 

3. 	We carried out oversight visits to project sites to assess the level of implementation of Government assurances in selected districts throughout the country. 

4. 	We also interfaced with political leaders and relevant technical officers in the relevant selected districts. 

5. 	We interacted directly with the intended beneficiaries in the districts visited -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, Members can read that. Go to the body of the report.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Observations

This section of the report generally looks at the sectors of health, works and transport. This is important for colleagues who may expect something to be said about other sectors. The reports about other sectors are also coming. In this one, we particularly focused on these selected sectors. 

We visited the following districts - for those whose districts may not be covered by this report, they are covered by other reports: 
    a)  We went to the east and covered Kamuli, Buyende, Iganga, Bugiri and Kaliro in Busoga.
    b)  We went to West Nile and visited Arua, Moyo, Pakwach, Nebbi and Maracha.
    c)  We went to the Acholi sub-region and visited Gulu and Kitgum.
    d)  In Teso, we visited Kumi, Kaberamaido and Soroti. 
    e)  We went to Bukedi where we visited Tororo and Busia.
    f)  In Buganda, we went to Nakaseke and Luwero.
    g)  In Sebei, we visited Kapchorwa and Kween. 
    h)  In Kigezi, we visited Kanungu.
    i)  In the Rwenzori region, we went to Kasese.
    j)  In Ankole, we visited Bushenyi, Rubirizi and Sheema.

The committee made the following general and specific observations and findings: 

General Observations

It was generally observed that the responsible ministers had not provided definite timeframes within which assurances were to be implemented. The committee followed up on 92 assurances; of which, 65 were under the works and transport sector while 27 were under the health sector. 

The committee found out that out of the 65 assurances under the works and transport sector, 21 had been fulfilled, one was implemented but not satisfactorily, five were ongoing but overdue in terms of the time of completion while 38 were broken promises.

In the health sector, out of 27 assurances, only seven had been fulfilled. One was implemented but not satisfactorily and two were ongoing but overdue in terms of the time of completion while 17 were broken promises.

It was therefore concluded that out of the 92 Government assurances in the sectors of health, and works and transport from the districts of Kamuli, Buyende, Kaliro, Tororo, Busia, Nakaseke, Kanungu, Kasese, Bushenyi, Sheema, Pakwach, Nebbi, Arua, Maracha, Moyo, Gulu, Kitgum, Kaberamaido, Soroti, Kumi, Kapchorwa, Kween, Bugiri and Iganga, 55 were broken promises. This represents 60 per cent of the total number of Government assurances considered (see the annexes 1 and 2). 

There is also a table provided for the number of fulfilled and unfulfilled assurances in the selected sub-regions and districts in the sector of works and transport.

Specific Observations

Short Term Assurances

Short term assurances are those pledges, which were expected to be implemented within a year, that is, 12 months from the time they were made. The committee followed up the following assurances under this category: 

Works and Transport Sector (Short Term Assurances)

Busia District

    a)   Tarmac two kilometres of road per year in Busia   Municipality. This was pledged in 2011.
    b)   Provide a roller for the construction unit, which was pledged in 2011.

Nakaseke District

    a)  Establish a fully-fledged road unit pledged in 2013.

Arua District

    a) Tarmac a one-kilometre access road to Emmanuel Cathedral, Mvara, pledged in 2011.

All the districts are listed there for you to see.

Committee Observations and Findings

The committee found out that a road unit for Nakaseke District had been established and a roller for Busia District’s road construction unit was expected to be provided under the consignment of equipment from Japan. By the time we went there, the consignment had not yet been delivered. This report has been lying here for a long time, so honourable members can update us about the latest changes - if this equipment was delivered between the time we went there and now.

In addition, the tarmacking of Emmanuel Cathedral Mvara Road, Ediofe Cathedral Road in Arua District, grading of Asuret Road in Soroti and preparation of designs for Iganga-Kiyunga-Buwenge-Kamuli Road had been done. We were pleased with this. When we went to the field, we saw that they were done. The committee was satisfied with the progress reported on these assurances and considered them as fulfilled.

On the other hand, it was established that the tarmacking of 10 kilometres of Soroti Municipality roads was ongoing, though not within the timeframe. The committee established that only 0.9 kilometres of road within Busia Municipality had been completed during the financial year 2015/2016. The committee was informed that the available funds could not cover two more kilometres of road as promised by the President in Busia Municipality.

The committee further observed that tarmacking of the university road, the town council road and the orthopaedic centre road in Kumi District, and municipality roads in Iganga, had not been worked on. When we visited Iganga, we found a very bad situation; there was water logging in the market area. We went into the market and found our poor people who are struggling to make ends meet and their merchandise had been destroyed by rain. Therefore, the issue was not only about the roads but also the market, and the President promised to improve their condition.

The committee therefore concluded that the establishment of a fully-fledged road unit for Nakaseke District, provision of a roller for Busia District, the tarmacking of Emmanuel Cathedral Road and Ediofe Cathedral Road in Arua were fulfilled promises. You will read about the other districts which were covered under roads. 

Health Sector
Madam Speaker, in Bugiri, the hospital roof was leaking. The promises which were made to renovate the hospital were not fulfilled. The hospital was not like a health centre but a disease centre -(Interjection)- Yes, because if you go there, you are likely to contract a disease. The mortuary had open doors and they did not have fridges to preserve the bodies. We went there and found dead bodies lying in the mortuary with broken window panes and flies were going in and out. What do they spread - diseases. Therefore, the hospital has become a disease centre in that regard.

Buyende District

When we visited Buyende District, we looked at the following:

    a) Upgrading of Irundu Health Centre III to a health centre IV, pledged in 2006; 
    b) Upgrading of Ngandho Health Centre II to a health centre III, pledged in 2006. 

All these have delayed up to date.

In Kaliro District, we looked at the upgrading of Bumanya Health Centre IV to a hospital status, which was pledged in 2010 and has not been done to date.

I may not be able to read the districts one by one, honourable members. However, you should take interest in this and you can raise these issues during the debate of the motion on this report.

Madam Speaker, one very touching issue we found was in Kapchorwa. A promise was made in 1986 to upgrade the Kapchorwa- Suam Road and it has not been fulfilled to date and the people sounded very frustrated. They trusted the Government. What criteria does Government use in selecting roads to be worked on after promises have been made to the people? A promise made in 1986 has never been fulfilled up to 2018! We thought this was very bad and we would like to report to you. The reports that we got from there, and even from the minister here, is that they are organising, mobilising, designing. For how long do you design or mobilise?

Madam Speaker, the list of the pledges which have been made and the time they have taken is summarised here for Members to read. Some pledges have lasted for 12 years, some 15 years; the worst is that case of Kapchorwa which has lasted for over 30 years, from 1986 to date. Honourable members of Parliament from that region are forced to use their passports to reach their constituencies because of the bad roads. They are the only Members of Parliament who use passports to go home and come to Parliament because they have to pass through Kenya. They pass through Kenya and for you to go to Kenya, you must have a passport. They pass through -(Interjection)- They are here, they will tell us.

Madam Speaker, in Arua there was also a pledge to construct Kia Kia Bridge linking Madi Okollo, Pakwach-Madi Okollo-Rhino Camp, Obongi to Dufile. It was pledged in 2009 and up to now, it has not been done. This leaves the Nile Valley in very bad state of affairs. This road is very important. It goes up to Panyamuru and then to Pakwach, Rhino Camp, Rigbo, Obongi to Dufile. The people in the Nile valley need good roads. The President pledged, but the roads have not been done.

The list of the time lag is given to you in the report. The districts which we have considered here also include districts from the west, for example Kanungu where people are suffering because of a road which was promised and has not been done.

I would like to call upon Members of Parliament to go to the conclusion because there will be time for you to debate this report. This is the first report of this committee ever since it was created. In the past, the committee was not allowed to bring reports but we would have mere statements from the chairperson-

THE SPEAKER: What did you say? Who did not allow them?

MR FUNGAROO: The Rules of Procedure did not permit the Committee on Government Assurances to bring a report. However, Madam Speaker, you remember I came to you to talk about this and the rules were amended. That is how we have been able to bring a report this time. Members of Parliament were not allowed to debate the statement since there was no report. The rules also stated that the Leader of Government Business would respond to the statement made by the chairperson in the next sitting, not even immediately. Members of the committee were locked out; they had no input. Members of Parliament were locked out; they could not debate.

We have now amended the rules to enable you to debate. Now there is a report and there is also room for you to bring pledges from your constituencies so that they can become assurances; otherwise, public trust is being abused. Promises are made in the villages, but they are not reported here. People put their trust in the Government and wait, then when nothing is done they feel frustrated.

Madam Speaker, we thank you very much for allowing us to change the rules to enable us bring reports like this one, so that Members of Parliament can debate and the Prime Minister or Leader of Government Business can respond there and then. That is why we would like to cut this presentation short to give more time to Members to debate.

In conclusion, a democratic Government is one within which true power and the future of a society lies in the public; therefore, whatever trust the public places in its officials ought to be respected. This can be done through fulfilment of assurances, promises and undertakings made by the Government to the people. 

However, the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation notes that there are still gaps in fulfilling the promises made. This has been largely attributed to lack of funding and prioritisation of the promises made to the people. During the budget process, these pledges are not indicated as a priority. 

It is, therefore, our considered view that the recommendations contained in the report will go a long way in addressing some of these concerns and promoting public trust. We pray that the report of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation on the status of implementation of Government assurances in the works and transport sector, and the health sector in the districts of Kamuli, Buyende, Kaliro, Tororo, Busia, Nakaseke, Kanungu, Kasese, Bushenyi, Sheema, Pakwach, Nebbi, Arua, Maracha, Moyo, Gulu, Kitgum, Kaberamaido, Soroti, Kumi, Bugiri and Iganga be considered by this House and recommendations be adopted. 

I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and members of the committee on Government assurances. The nature of this report may require information from the Executive before we delve into it. I would like to acknowledge that it has been presented. A date for its debate will be appointed and the Prime Minister will be required to come and address us first on what they have done and then we debate it.

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened to your wise ruling, however I am concerned that the report is not exhaustive. We all have issues in our areas which ought to be part of this report. If we debate it some other time when the Prime Minister can give a response, I would request that you let us debate now so that we can include those things from other areas in order for the Prime Minister to make one response. Most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: I have also seen areas which I would like to talk about but I do not know whether we will do justice by debating it immediately; it has so many sectors. I will give you time to read it during the weekend so that we debate it next week.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the Member has mentioned, the report is not exhaustive. As far as some of us understand, Government assures us that they will fix whatever is not in good shape, not only what we bring across here. Any Government across the world promises to fix whatever is amiss; therefore, the report cannot exhaust everything. 

A Member has suggested that we can give Government more information about what is not going well within our respective constituencies. When the Prime Minister comes on Tuesday next week, he will give a comprehensive statement attracting its own debate. Thank you.
	
THE SPEAKER: I have not internalised the report personally. I saw one area where I would like to advice because there is information which I have about it. Also, I do not think that I am ready to speak on issues beyond health. I just wanted to advise on health because I had seen something.

MR DAVID BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would like to implore Members to take your guidance. This is because it is very important that we internalise this report properly so that we crosscheck facts from our constituencies and districts; thereafter, the Prime Minister can respond after Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please study this report; there are many areas that we may want to address. Look at it carefully and we debate it on Tuesday so that the Prime Minister can later give a response.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I totally agree with your very wise ruling. My only request is that you direct that on Tuesday, all the ministries have got to be represented on the Front Bench so that we do some exhaustive work. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This report was on selected districts and it is touching two sectors, health and works. There was nothing on education, aviation, agriculture.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleagues that the issues are so vast, to the extent that if we presented one report, it would be very difficult to debate. The reports for the other sectors are also lined up. We have given them to the Office of the Speaker and the office of the Clerk and we are waiting to present them one after the other.

If the issues which you are going to raise are on health or the transport sector, they are covered here. The gaps will be filled here with the guidance of the Speaker on Tuesday next week. However, if the issues that you are going to raise are not from these sectors, their reports are coming. 

This committee is not a joking subject anymore. If you have promises made in your constituency, which are not part of Government assurances because they did not appear here, do not blame the committee. You are supposed to first bring them here, ask the Prime Minister questions and then his answer can become a Government assurance, which we take over. We call upon you to come and give us those details. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, read the report and address issues on health and works for this debate. We shall look at the others another time. 

In the gallery, we have pupils of Lunar International Primary School, Budiope East. They are represented by hon. Dhamuzungu and hon. Veronica Babirye. You are welcome. Tusangaire okubabona (Applause)

Honourable members, the Prime Minister is here now so let us go back to question time. Please, do not give preambles; just go to the issue.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

4.15
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The United Nations (UN) passed a resolution, which imposed an arms embargo on South Sudan. We have a history of our people being victims of such resolutions when they are violated. I would like to know from the Prime Minister if Uganda is ready to comply with these UN sanctions on South Sudan.

Secondly, I would like to know what measures you have put in place to ensure that Ugandan companies and the state are not in violation of the resolution.

Thirdly, when are you going to sensitise people along the border with South Sudan so that in their dealings, they are not in violation of any of these resolutions? Thank you.

4.16
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the resolution passed by the UN Security Council on the Republic of South Sudan was specifically focusing on the arms embargo and some accompanying issues of assets and travel. 

Uganda is a member of the United Nations. Uganda respects the decisions of the United Nations and its organs especially the Security Council. Therefore, Uganda will work with the UN and other member states for smooth implementation of these resolutions.

4.17
MR LAWRENCE MANGUSHO (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My name is Mangusho Lawrence, not Seiko. I take this opportunity to ask the Prime Minister about public universities’ admissions on the quota system. 

Madam Speaker, the quota system was intended to benefit the rural and underprivileged students so that they can access public universities. This year in my district, Kween, the quota system did not benefit the rural and underprivileged students who performed well and should have accessed public universities through the system. Instead, it has benefitted the more privileged students who study in Kampala. 

Therefore, I would like to know from the Prime Minister what Government is doing to ensure that the intended purpose of the quota system is not abused. We are still struggling to see what happened but we are not getting good answers. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: As far as I know, the quota system that is being referred to works well. If, however, there is a problem in that respect raised by Ndugu Mangusho, the responsible minister will deal with this matter.

4.19
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi County North, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is a complaint from the coffee traders that for each kilogramme of coffee they sell, they are charged Shs 55 yet they are not empowered like the cooperatives. They were complaining that agriculture is not yet empowered and yet there is a target of selling a certain number of bags of coffee from the country. This is hindering some people from engaging in the business. What explanation should we, who represent these areas that depend on coffee, give to our people?

DR RUGUNDA: I am not aware of the details of what my sister is talking about. We would appreciate getting more details of this charge of Shs 55. 

We are happy because Ugandan exports of coffee have indeed shot up and we are now threatening to reach five million bags as opposed to three or so million bags that we have been exporting all along. Let me take this opportunity to appeal to fellow Ugandans to produce more coffee because its market is very good globally.

4.22
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, it is reported that under the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), Uganda currently reaps US$ 25.4 million, Kenya reaps US$ 340 million while Tanzania reaps US$ 34 million. 

What are we doing as the Government of Uganda to enhance our benefits as a country from AGOA? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Well, Uganda did all that was possible to ensure that AGOA became a reality. It is true that Uganda has not benefited as much as we would want to. That is why we are doing everything possible to add value to our agricultural products and other industrial products so that the Ugandan economy and exporters can benefit more from AGOA.

4.24
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, District Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government has released Shs 100 billion for buying maize from farmers. The farmers would like to know who the people holding this money are. From the statement of the minister, it is with the cooperative unions, but farmers have their own systems. 

Could you clarify to the Ugandans who exactly are going to buy from them that maize - maybe by region or district - so that we are in the know? How are those who are engaged in the business going to access that money? What is the procedure and who eligible to get the money? Otherwise, we may end up seeing the money in other places where there is no maize. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue of maize has become a major issue to our economy. It is true that the wanainchi responded to the call to produce more, and they have produced maize in substantial quantities, but the market has not been as good as we had expected.

In order to ensure that the farmers do not lose out and they continue producing this important crop, Government has decided to support the maize farmers, especially in marketing. It is true that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives are spearheading this with the banks. 

The idea is to have Shs 100 billion set aside to support the buying of maize from the farmers. It will mainly be through the Uganda Grain Council. It is also true that some well organised cooperatives are being brought on board. The details of this will come out in due course, especially from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

4.27
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on Friday, 3 August 2018, a double cabin pick-up car with two occupants was burnt in my subcounty in Luuka South. These people were suspected to be land grabbers.

My question is: Why have we continued having land grabbing and evictions despite the fact that the President and Government instituted a commission of inquiry into land matters? 

Secondly, why is Government not stopping these two activities - land grabbing and evictions - until the commission of inquiry comes up with a report for the people of Uganda? Thank you so much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, land grabbing, as you all know, is illegal and should be condemned and stopped. We also know that there are evictions that have been taking place and many of the victims have been innocent peasants. 

Therefore, Government is fully aware of this situation and that is why we have put in place a commission of inquiry on land matters. This was done so that we get rational-based facts on the ground, which will form a rational basis for having a lasting policy that will end land grabbing and illegal evictions of innocent people. Otherwise, we condemn evictions of innocent people and land grabbing as a well.

4.29
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to inquire from you when Government will ratify Convention C189, which is about domestic workers, now that Uganda is known for exporting the highest number of domestic workers to Asia and other countries. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I will need first of all to acquaint myself with the contents of the convention concerned, in order to make a meaningful statement on the matter.

4.30
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government has decided to phase out health centres II. However, you know that whereas we have a policy that all constituencies should have health centres IV, there is no clear plan to aggressively implement this policy. Now that the health centres II are being phased out, don’t you think that a huge section of Ugandans will be left without direct support? The Equal Opportunities Commission just came up with their report sighting this as a major issue. What is the Government’s plan to implement that?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the matter raised by the colleague is a common one. The policy of Government remains simple and straight: phase out health centres II, make sure that every subcounty has a health centre III and every constituency has a health centre IV.

The honourable Minister of Health will be coming out with a more comprehensive programme on this matter, aimed at ensuring Ugandans have access through this established system of health centres. The minister will come with a statement on this matter and I expect the minister to be ready with such a statement within the next four weeks.  

4.32
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is a Government policy, in a bid to increase accessibility and improve service delivery in the country, that every subcounty must have a Government-aided secondary school. I would like you to tell this august House what the Government’s plan is in implementing that policy. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Once again, the issue of secondary education is very important and is a concern to Government.  It is also true that Government has mobilised resources to ensure that this policy of making sure that there is a Government-aided secondary school in every subcounty is handled. This matter has been addressed by Cabinet and the minister responsible for education will be addressing this august House on this very subject, to give the required details. 

4.34
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we recently concluded elections of Local Council I (LC I) chairpersons and they are being sworn in. May I know whether Government is still committed to providing the former LC I leadership with the bicycles that they promised in the districts that did not get? If Government is committed to this, when are they going to get the bicycles?

Two, what policy guidelines does Government have in facilitating the new LC I chairpersons to start work? In my constituency, the LC I chairpersons are being asked to provide money for buying stamps and other office equipment. Is it a Government policy that they buy office equipment for themselves, yet they are political leaders? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I was still taking advantage of the wide knowledge and experience of Ndugu Tom Butime, the Minister of Local Government. He has advised that this matter is very well known. The question of bicycles is being handled by his ministry and that the guidelines will be coming shortly, not only on the issue of bicycles but of LCs as well. He has also said that the ministry has planned an orientation programme for LCs to enable them do their work effectively. However, he will be making appropriate announcements to that effect. 

4.36
MR LATIFF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why has it taken long to bring the former Inspector General of Police (IGP) to court? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as you know, the former Inspector General of Police is a very senior officer of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). He is being handled in accordance with the laid down procedures of handling such an officer. 

4.37
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two questions to the Prime Minister. One, do you really fulfil what you promise here when Members ask questions? 

Two, the people of Teso are still suffering because of poverty. We have been told that according to statistics, these poverty levels have now reached around 41 per cent, away from the national average. Government has not compensated them for the animals that they lost during the insurgency, and the same applies to lives lost and the Arrow Boys who fought for peace in this country. To remind the Prime Minister – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just focus on one issue. 

MR AOGON: That is the major issue – compensation. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Arrow Boys fought for peace in this country and Kony was given the bloodiest loss in Teso. That is actually when he exited the country. However, up to now, these people have never been compensated. What is the issue? They have not been given anything to appreciate them. They have not been given animals; so, what is the problem? This time round, will you fulfil what you promised? The commander is here; he is one of the people who fought in that war yet he has never been given anything. Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, does Government mean business when it makes a statement in this House? Obviously, it does; otherwise, Government would not waste its time or that of the honourable Members of Parliament. 

Secondly, the Arrow Boys are greatly commended for the great work they did in bringing peace and stability in this country. I am glad that the commander, Ndugu Musa Ecweru, is making a powerful contribution at the Front Bench. I must also say that hon. Musa Ecweru continues to give guidance and counsel to the category of these young men and women who made that contribution. 

Compensation depends on a number of factors. One of the factors is the availability of resources. I am fully aware that in Teso region, there has been a programme of restocking that has been ongoing. That is part of the process of ensuring that the different areas of Uganda that were affected by conflict are brought to normalcy in economic terms. 

To cut the long story short, the Arrow Boys have not in any way been forgotten. It is true they fought as volunteers and the country recognises that contribution. Where resources are available, the country will continue to ensure that they are supported to live a normal life in society. 

4.40
MR SAMUEL OKWIR (Independent, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The women fund has faced a lot of challenges. The women in Alebtong, particularly where I come from, presented a proposal for funding and it was approved. The funding was to the tune of about Shs 10 million to Shs 12 million but in the end, they got only Shs 5 million and they failed to deliver on the plans they had put in place. Returning this money has remained a challenge. What plan does Government have to ensure that whatever was promised is delivered as per the schedule? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the women fund, youth fund and other funds are part of Government’s programme to reach people who are not reached. By the way, in many areas, these programmes have done very well. There may be areas like Alebtong where they have had hitches. The administrators and the ministry concerned, including the honourable Member of Parliament, should address them so that those distortions can be removed. They should ensure that the programme is functioning very well.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Kenneth Eitunganane takes the Floor, I just want to inform you that I have told my people in Kamuli that if they are entitled to Shs 12 million and they offer them Shs 5 million, they should not accept it. They should denounce it because that is corruption. They should not accept anything less than what they have agreed to. 

4.42
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is Government policy that once a civil servant reaches retirement age, they automatically transit to the pension scheme. However, this is not happening. I have received a lot of complaints from my district. For the past two years, many civil servants have retired but they have not been paid their pension. What is the Ministry of Public Service doing to rectify this anomaly? 

It is important to know this because these people have given service to this country and they deserve to be given their due payment. They have families and school fees to pay for their children and they are suffering. I thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that men and women who have served the country up to the age of retirement should retire gracefully and get their benefits. Therefore, this matter will be taken up by my brother, the hon. David Karubanga, the Minister of State for Public Service. He will ensure that this reported anomaly is investigated and ensure that it is quickly corrected, and also bring to book those people responsible. 

4.44
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear; when a parliamentary resolution is reached, then the Executive has to provide a Treasury Memorandum after six months. 

Madam Speaker, you constituted a select committee a year ago to investigate the mismanagement of Uganda Telecom Limited (UTL) and there were very key and clear recommendations, which Parliament actually adopted. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have not seen the Treasury Memoranda being presented in this Parliament in regard to the implementation of those resolutions. When are you going to present the Treasury Memorandum on the issue of UTL mismanagement? There are key recommendations, especially on the issue of pensioners who keep on calling our offices about that issue. Could you tell us when you will present the Treasury Memoranda on the issue of UTL? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, quick consultations will be made with the ministries responsible to ensure that this Parliament gets what is due to it.

4.46
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are fully aware that in your office, there is a ministry called Luwero-Rwenzori, indicating that 42 districts were aggregated together to have focused interventions. Although Kasese is part of Rwenzori, I still wonder why we do not have even a hoe that has ever come from the Luwero-Rwenzori ministry and yet this particular Parliament continues to appropriate money for that intervention. Also, if possible, when that is corrected, can we have the arrears, in terms of interventions, going to Kasese? Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I will ask the minister in charge of Luwero-Rwenzori, the hon. Ssozi Galabuzi, to make a statement to this House on the progress of the Luwero-Rwenzori ministry. You will be surprised Kasese is not as left out as you are suggesting.

4.47
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to explain to this House and the country why, as Leader of Government Business, he has abandoned the directive which the President gave in regard to prioritising tourism in this country. In particular, I am referring to tourism roads being tarmacked so that Government can realise reasonable revenue to stop this business of begging. 

I would like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to particularly address this House on the following roads: Rugendabara, Kabatunda, Kasangali, Nkenda, Mubuku, Ihandiro and Nyakalingijo and Mweya-Kitholhu roads? Why have you abandoned the directive of the President yet you are the Leader of Government Business; he directed that these roads be prioritised.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, my brother, the hon. William Nzoghu, has asked these questions threateningly –(Laughter)– I think we could get his point without him necessarily wagging his finger. (Laughter) 

However, let me agree with him that tourism is a key contributor to the economy of Uganda today, and it is going to do even more tomorrow and in many years to come. It is also true that Government prioritises it.

Secondly, you did make reference to a number of roads especially in the Kasese area. Government has a programme to do tourism roads but in a phased manner. The time for working on the Kasese roads will also come.

Thirdly, my brother, the hon. William Nzoghu, missed out on this year’s International Tourism Day, which was commemorated in Kasese. Those of us who celebrated that day looked around for the honourable Member of Parliament from Kasese but he was nowhere to be seen. Therefore, he should stop shading crocodile tears here. (Laughter)

4.51
MR SIZOMU GERSHOM (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, whereas there are so many roads in bad condition especially in the east, there is a road from Mbale to Nakalama in Iganga, which is being excavated, and yet formerly that road had no potholes, meaning it was a very good road. What procedure is used to select which roads to be worked on? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am rather surprised that an excellent road, the Mbale-Nakalama Road, would be excavated therefore causing it to develop potholes. 

Madam Speaker, in a nutshell, the Minister of Works and Transport will give us more effective information. However, the criteria of working on and upgrading roads is very well known; traffic is one of the factors as well as production in the area and a number of other issues. However, the minister responsible will inform the honourable member about the specific rationale for the Mbale-Nakalama Road and what is being done on that road.

4.52
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I come from Nakaseke District, one of the most affected in terms of land grabbing and evictions. 

The Government put up a fund called the Land Compensation Fund. However, according to the research findings I have, the intended beneficiaries of that fund have not benefitted from it. I would like to know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister which people have actually benefited from that fund. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the land fund is a very important fund meant essentially to help people who are landless or squatters under difficult conditions. The amount of money in the fund has not been as much as we would have wanted. The idea, therefore, is to streamline the beneficiaries of the fund and increase the amount of money in the fund so that more can benefit from it. The minister responsible for lands will give more details on this matter.

4.54
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Recently, I watched a story on television when one of the stations around was launching a campaign against the use of kaveera in the country. I had thought that this was an initiative of Government. Previously, Parliament pronounced itself against polythene bags of less than 30 microns. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to know the Government’s stand on initiatives being taken to fight or to ban the use of all kaveera in this country. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the information given by hon. Allan Ssewanyana is correct. The kaveera of 30 microns and below has been banned in the country. Furthermore, National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) spearheads the implementation of that ban. 

It is also true that honourable Members of Parliament and other leaders should work closely with NEMA, Ministry of Water and Environment and Government to ensure that we get rid of kaveera of that size. This kaveera damages our agricultural land and also has many other ill effects, especially clogging our piping system and even causing floods, among other problems. Therefore, give it full support; Government endorses the ban.

4.56
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the media run a story that 4,000 guns have gone missing from the police. As a country, we have been living in fear because of insecurity, without even imagining how many guns are in circulation outside security authorities. Now that 4,000 guns have gone missing, as Government how are you accounting for the 4,000 guns and how are you guaranteeing the security of Ugandans now that we do not know where these illegal machines are? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I have seen the media reports but I do not believe them. I have, however, discussed this matter with the minister in charge of security and other security personnel. The matter is being investigated and the truth will be established. However, the security system in the country will guarantee the security of Ugandans.

4.58
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to what extent is Government committed to providing vaccines to cattle keepers whose cattle are facing numerous diseases that have almost made the population of cattle in most parts of this country, especially in Kiruhura District, extinct? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that there is a problem and there are a number of livestock diseases. It is also true that areas like Kiruhura in particular have been affected. However, the herds are still struggling and are not getting extinct.

Secondly, some of these problems are related to tick-borne diseases and there have been problems with acaricides. Government has taken extra steps to import some new formulations of acaricides in order to break the cycle of tick-borne diseases affecting our cattle. It is true there have been a few other diseases - some of them are common diseases among cattle – but the Government is again importing vaccines so that the farmers can access them and protect their cattle. 

5.00
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you much, Madam Speaker. On 22 May 2018, the High Court dismissed an appeal and ordered for the eviction of trespassers from a one Mr John Wabwire’s ancestral land at Merok village, Katine Subcounty, Soroti District. On 13 July 2018, a one John Wabwire and five others were attacked by armed men. They were severely injured and the vehicles were set on fire in the presence of the police who were just watching without any intervention. This incident was reported in the New Vision on Tuesday 17 July 2018 on page 33 and Etop newspaper reported the same on 19 July 2018. 

THE SPEAKER: What is your question? 

MR KUMAMA: My question to the Prime Minister is: Can you furnish this august House with an explanation as to why these people and the vehicles were burnt when the police were watching? Can we get an explanation about this matter and what action was taken against the officers who appeared compromised and let the vehicles be burnt and people be hacked to that level?  

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, to me that sounds like a case for the police and the courts of law. The police should investigate and bring the people responsible to face the law. I would like to advise the honourable Member of Parliament to pursue that line of action if it has not been done.

5.02
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have issues in Nakapiripirit District, especially with the prisons farms. There have been killings carried out by prison wardens. They killed a person on 16th of last month. 

One time, I brought to this House the issue of famine in Karamoja and because of the floods in the area, people have started trying to get some items from the farms. So far, 17 people have been killed; two women were raped and killed and 16 men have been killed. This is a very serious issue from my district and people are bringing this outcry to your office. What should we do? I thought if someone is a culprit, they should be arrested and taken to courts of law instead of killing them.

Previously, as Karamoja region, we used to have guns and probably, the prisons could use their guns to defend themselves. However, these are people who do not have arms, why should they kill them instead of taking them to the courts of law? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, that is very sad news. The police should quickly handle this case and bring the culprits to book.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have exceeded the 45 minutes set aside for this item. Those who want to ask questions will ask next week. We shall write down the names of those who have not asked questions today and you will be the ones to speak first next week. Those who have spoken today will not speak next week. 

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT ON THE FIRST GLOBAL DISABILITY SUMMIT HELD IN LONDON, JULY 2018

5.04
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons With Disabilities, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to present this report from here because getting to the Table is not friendly to me. I am presenting this report in accordance with rule 33 of our Rules of Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: You can sit, unless you want to stand.

MS NALULE: Madam Speaker, the UK Government and her International Development Agency (DFID), the Government of Kenya and the International Disabilities Alliance and other organisations like AmplifyChange convened the first ever Global Summit on Disability, code named Global Summit 18 in London in July 2018. 

The aim of the Global Disability Summit was to raise global attention on a long neglected area; that is disability, mobilise new global and national commitments on disability inclusion and showcase good practice, innovation and evidence from across the world.

Madam Speaker, globally, an estimated one billion people have a disability of which 800 million live in developing countries. In these, disability is both a cause and consequence of poverty and people often face significant barriers that prevent them from participating fully in society, including getting quality education and employment.

The ambition of the summit was to make world-first and landmark celebration of the achievements and the rights of persons with disabilities and one that creates renewed action, partnership and accountability to deliver long lasting change for people with disabilities around the world.

Also, the summit sought to get commitment for real change through the implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and in the delivery of the Sustainable Development Goals for persons with disabilities. 

Madam Speaker, there were four themes built around the conference:

    i) Dignity and respect for all
    ii) Inclusive education
    iii) Economic empowerment and
    iv) Technology and innovation.

There were also cross cutting issues like sexual and reproductive health rights of women and girls with disabilities.

Madam Speaker, the summit was addressed by a number of high level personalities and institutions among whom were the UK Secretary of State for International Development, UN Women Australia Aid, World Bank, UNDP, ILO, WHO and others. 

What was unique with this historic summit was that persons with disability were given the chance to be in charge. Madam Speaker, I was among the few privileged people to be given the opportunity to chair one of the sessions and also to be a panellist on two on the sessions. 

The summit was crowned by all participating states, international institutions and organisations of persons with disabilities signing the Global Disability Summit18 Charter for Change. Uganda was among the 300 governments, which signed the charter.

I would like to acknowledge the effort of the honourable minister, Janet Mukwaya. She did not only attend the summit in London but she earlier on organised a national forum to galvanise Uganda’s commitment to advance the disability inclusive agenda.

My role at the summit

Madam Speaker, I was demanded-

    i) to tell the summit whether the Government of Uganda has ever aligned the 2030 Agenda; that is the Sustainable Development Goal to the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and how Uganda was to implement the convention;
    ii) to tell how the gender and the equity budgeting provisions in the innovation, which is only here in Uganda enshrined in the Public Finance Management Act has helped the inclusion and implementation of disability needs in national programmes and budget; 
    iii) to tell the summit how Uganda was committed to the realisation of inclusion of persons with disability and to comply with the SDGs of leaving no one behind.

Madam Speaker, these were very difficult questions to handle. True, we have mass representation of persons with disabilities at a number of decision making levels, including Parliament. We have a number of pro-disability legislations like the Public Finance Management Act, Disability Act, 2006 and others. 

However, as much we have all those and the other institutions of Government mandated to ensure implementation of disability responsive programmes, a lot has not been done. Following the discussion in the summit of the SDGs and the provisions in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), I had a very difficult time to answer.

I would like to share with you some of the concerns which actually have not been attended to and were very strong issues for debate at the summit.

One of those was data on disabilities. Madam Speaker, it is regrettable to say that we do not have reliable data on disability. At the global level, the state of the world disability report on disability by WHO and World Bank provides that one in every seven of every population is a person with disability. With a Ugandan population of more than 38.8million people, the population of persons with disabilities is expected to be five million persons. However, the National Census of 2014 put the population of persons with disabilities at 12.4 per cent. That is 4.4 million persons. 

Madam Speaker, the problem we have is that when the Census and Household Survey are being done, different questions are used. At the international level, we have got a standard called the Washington Group of Questions. They are six questions but you find that when a census is conducted, they use only four and at the household surveys, they use only two. We cannot establish the exact numbers. The problem with this is that in the absence of reliable data, it is very difficult to properly plan, programme and budget for persons with disabilities of this nation. 

Secondly, the other issue of concern was on education. Education is a right to all persons and indeed, it is true. In the Ministry of Education and Sports here, we have got a Special Needs Education Department and the Disability Act, 2006 provides that 10 per cent of the education budget has to go to disabilities.

However, perennially, we have been getting an allocation of 0.l per cent. The completion rate of persons with disabilities who are enrolled in schools is also alarming. What is actually so annoying - let me say - is the inadequacy of the special needs education teachers and instructors in schools and the scholastic materials. Recently at Makerere University, blind students were reported to have been asked to read and interpret their brailed exams in order to have their exam scripts graded. This is not only torturous but it is also traumatising.

The summit was committing nations to have inclusive education and schools. Back here in Uganda, we started in 2011 to design the inclusive education policy but up to now, it has never been concluded.
The other issue was on health. Health, Madam Speaker, is a right to all but there are many challenges persons with disabilities face to access health. Maybe, the challenges range from lack of assistive devices, facilities for mothers with disabilities in antenatal and labour wards, lack of medical requirements, the sunscreen lotion for persons with albinism, lack of drugs for persons with mental disabilities and the lack of a budget vote to address all these issues. 

Madam Speaker, what you find in the Ministerial Policy Statements for Ministry of Health – the minister is here -our issues are scattered in so many areas and you find they are combined with other things. However, when there is any shock in the budget of the Ministry of Health, it is our area which is first and most affected because the health personnel normally say disability is not an urgent issue because it is not life-threatening. Therefore, I would like to request that the ministry takes this into cognizance.

Madam Speaker, the summit committed that out of the one billion persons living with disabilities in the world, they are going to provide assistive devices to half of them. Therefore, I request the Government of Uganda to take note of that and use that opportunity to make sure that persons with disabilities of Uganda can also benefit.

I would also like to request the Ministry of Health to start manufacturing these assistive devices. It is possible. I would also like to ask Parliament not to pass any more of the budgets of these ministries, which are not compliant with issues of gender and equity.

Madam Speaker, the other issue was on Information and Communication Technology (ICT). The Constitution and other laws of Uganda such as the Uganda Communications Commissions Act guarantee the rights to access to communication and available technologies. However, persons with disabilities, especially those with sensory disabilities, find it very difficult to access information. 

Microsoft was one of the companies present at the summit and they actually committed to constructing disability-friendly technology and one of them is going to be in Kenya, near us here. They are going to construct a disability-friendly ICT hub in Kenya.

Madam Speaker, the other issue was employment. All of us know the problems with employment. However, what I would like to summarily say is that in the Eighth Parliament we, Members of Parliament representing peoples with disabilities, successfully lobbied for a disability grant. That grant amounted to Shs 3 billion. However, up to now the amount is still Shs 3 billion, yet the number of persons with disabilities is increasing. 

We request Parliament and the ministry to help us and raise this grant maybe to at least Shs 12 billion. Also, when you read the Disability Act, 2006, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is supposed to give Parliament an annual report on the status of employment of persons with disabilities in the country but they have never done it. 

The biggest challenge came when they asked me at the summit about how Uganda has aligned the Sustainable Development Goals to the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and how Uganda is committed to implementing the provisions of the convention in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals.

Madam Speaker, these were very difficult questions to answer. Of course we know that we are committed to attaining the middle income status by 2020 but with all these omissions, it was very hard to defend Uganda’s position.

Madam Speaker, I would like to recommend that you appoint a select committee or come up with a practical and more viable strategy on how we can show our commitments on how we are going to handle the implementation of the SDG in relation to the other commitments we have made at international levels when we signed, for example, the UN Conventions on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Convention on Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Maputo Protocol and so many others. 

Maybe you should appoint a select committee so that they can come up with a matrix to show how we are going to relate these with the commitments and the National Development Plan II and so forth. We should then reallocate specific activities to the relevant committees of Parliament so that they can follow these commitments through the ministerial policy statements and budgets so that we can realise implementations of these commitments. Otherwise, if we do not do this, Uganda is going to continue to be embarrassed at these global conferences because of giving lip service. It is very embarrassing.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to share with this Parliament that Uganda was selected to host the 2020 Community Based Rehabilitation Conference, which is an international conference. Basically, I would like to call upon all Members of Parliament to make a provision and maybe as Parliament, we could come up with a statement on what we are doing to implement the needs of persons with disabilities.

I thank you, Madam Speaker. Now that your Table is not accessible, somebody will help me to lay the copy of the report at the Table.

5.21
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Madam Speaker, on behalf of my senior colleague, hon. Nalule, I lay at the Table a report on the First Global Disability Summit held in London, July 2018. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nalule. Of course the report raises very serious policy issues which we need to pay attention to. Let us have a few comments but after those comments, I would like to direct the Clerk to extract for each sector what concerns them: there was employment; health; education; transport, etc. I think they should first be extracted and given to those committees and we make sure that in the forthcoming budget cycle we address the issues of the report brought by hon. Safia. Let us have a few comments.

5.22
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to start by appreciating the honourable member who represented us at the summit, together with hon. Asamo –(Interjections)- You did it here and she did it there. They are doing the job –

THE SPEAKER: I think we should acknowledge their contributions. I know that they are really working for the PWDs.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, allow me to also appreciate you because you fulfil your promises. I remember there was a time when we had some event behind here and you promised that you would employ at least one person living with albinism in Parliament and it has been fulfilled. I think you rock. (Laughter) You are doing the job.

Secondly, we are talking about technology and innovation but recently we passed Over The Top (OTT) tax, which is affecting social media platforms like WhatsApp that our people with hearing problems depend on for communication because they send WhatsApp messages when they are trying to gather themselves for meetings. As a country we need to look at that. What do we do to help these people to be included in everything that we are talking about? We have now decided to exclude them when we applied taxes without having insights into such matters.

The other issue is economic empowerment. If you come to Kumi Municipality, for instance, there is no special fund given to my people, even under the Operation Wealth Creation or the women grant. They are the poorest of the poor because there is no special attention given to them. 

In the transport sector, one day we had to lift one of our mothers living with disability to a car because there is no kind of vehicle designed for them. What are we doing as a country to help our people? Really, how are we treating them with dignity if we are talking about dignity without doing anything about these people? We must double the budget. Let us for the first time be serious. 

Immediately we receive these budget framework papers, all Members of Parliament must stay alert to this question. Let us triple the budget if we can. We must stand with the people who are talking about this. These are our own and they belong to us. What are we going to do? I am ready to stand with them. The budget should be big so that we move and we are respected and we give them dignity. Thank you.

5.24
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Member for the report. It is very elaborate and the problems are clearly put forward.

Madam Speaker, I witnessed these challenges, which have been elaborated, when I went to a health facility. A lady who could not speak but could use sign language came to seek medical services but nobody could help her. The doctors tried to move around to get someone to help her but they did not succeed. It was really a challenging situation. 

Therefore, I would like to suggest that the Ministry of Health should come up with a policy to train at least two or three health workers in sign language, such that when people of that category come for medical assistance, they can be helped. I do not know if these kinds of people are there in Government health facilities but this particular scenario happened in a private health facility.

Secondly, the issue of education for the disabled should be taken as a serious matter. I remember someone was looking for a school for a deaf child. In the end, they were told that the only school that caters for such categories of children is in Ngora - This person actually prepared to take the child to study in Ngora District. Therefore, I would like to suggest that Government should establish regional schools to cater for these categories of students. Otherwise, this is a very serious issue.

Madam Speaker, some time back, a policy was issued –(Member timed out.)

5.26
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank hon. Safia Nalule for the report.

Madam Speaker, some time back, you commented about the protocols that Uganda signs but does not adhere to the recommendations that we make. I heard in the report a complaint about the same; that we signed many protocols but we do not walk the talk.

When I go to the field of education, regarding the persons with disability, it is really a great concern. Recently, I saw in the papers a grant that was given to Makerere University for students that come from poor communities. I do not know whether the honourable member has taken up the initiative to find out how many children with disabilities have been considered for these kinds of bursaries.

Many times, when we have such opportunities for students in higher institutions of learning, students with disabilities are not considered for them and yet, they should be the first people to be given such opportunities.

Secondly, on the issue of health, we still have some health facilities that do not adhere to the recommendation of having ramps to enable persons with disabilities to access health facilities. Even when you go to delivery centres for the women, most women with disabilities cannot climb the same beds like the able bodied women. Therefore, we must take this matter very seriously – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Asamo comes, I would like to ask you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of St Joseph Primary school in Bunya West. They are represented by hon. Bagiire, the Minister of State for Transport and hon. Julie Zabwe. You are welcome. (Applause)

5.29
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Safia for attending this conference on our behalf.

First of all, I would like to start with the issue of special grant, which she said is permanent at Shs 3 billion. As we talk, in this quarter, the money has been mixed with that for the old people and so, the disabled people are actually not getting the money. We are only waiting to see what will happen and in fact, we are gathering evidence to present to Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the law has been removed from the committee that approved it by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Actually, the gender ministry said that we should have a national team and Members of Parliament are part of that team. However, we have never been invited and when you ask them, they say “We do not have the money”. I do not know whether a Member of Parliament who is facilitated with a car cannot drive to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to go and attend a meeting without payment.

On the issue of students – every year, 60 disabled students are admitted on the quarter system; permanent and pensionable. The Ministry of Education and Sports is supposed to give money to these categories of students but that budget is never declared; it is on the honours of the administration of the university that gives the students maybe Shs 20,000 or Shs 100,000, depending of what they have decided. Madam Speaker, we have asked for declaration of how much money is given to the institutions but we have not got an answer.

On the issue of the Convention on the Right of Persons with Disability (CRPD), the law which the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development was looking at – we tried as a committee to align the law with the CRPD but the minister of gender ministry withdrew the law and told us that he was going to take one month to bring it back but now, it is becoming history; we have actually been told that it will be ready by next year.

Madam Speaker, I think you need to help us on how to handle this matter because it is only the law which will help us – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Baba Diri comes, I am disappointed with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development because they have withdrawn this Bill three times, and it is only the disabled whose Bills are withdrawn.

5.31
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for the report she has presented to us. Indeed, we, who represent the people with disability, feel ashamed of ourselves because we have not really helped them.

I would like to give the basic requirements for persons with disability. First of all, we need devices to move; a wheel chair now costs over Shs 600,000. Prosthesis – the artificial limb costs Shs 1,500,000. Even a belly machine costs Shs 3,000,000. You cannot get a brain paper here in Uganda; it has to be imported from South Africa or elsewhere. When you go to the schools, you really sympathise with the disabled children because they are not taught. Most schools have only one teacher who teaches about 40 blind children and it is not helping.

Madam Speaker, all our things are in theory and paper. We should be realistic with persons with disability and help them. When those of hon. Safia were going to attend the convention, we sat down as a nation and we came up with all the commitments we have – we have the book – I hope those were the things she submitted. Therefore, we would like to request the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to bring those commitments here, so that you all know what they are and then we can follow them one by one, so that persons with disability are supported.

Otherwise, I would like to thank you very much and urge that we support the recommendations here, so that they are implemented, and budget must be provided for them. Without money, we are not helping persons with disability at all.

5.33
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD Representative, Western): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to congratulate our sister hon. Safia Nalule for representing us in this global summit on disability.

Madam Speaker, the issues that have been raised are very extinctive and I do not think that they can be exhausted in this debate. Just two days ago, the Chief Justice of Uganda, Justice Bart Katureebe, was addressing a conference and he affirmed that all rules and laws concerning the rights of persons with disability are obsolete and need an overhaul.

Madam Speaker, the issue of disability is as old as mankind and it is cross cutting almost in every Government sector. Every Government sector has a contribution in addressing the issues concerning persons with disabilities. We would, therefore, request Parliament to assist us to align our issues in each and every Government ministry to ensure that there is a budget allocation in every Government ministry to address issues concerning people with disability.

For instance, Madam Speaker, the report has talked about education. There are a lot of missing links, for example, people with hearing impairment. We lack sign language teachers in schools. Children and students who are blind do not have the materials for them to pursue their education. We would request the Ministry of Education and Sports that we include in your budget a provision to have all these materials to help them. 

Therefore, this Parliament should help us as leaders of people with disability so that we have the International Day for Disabled People celebrated. This is a day that the United Nations celebrates and urges all member states to celebrate it. In Uganda, we recognise all the special interest groups; women, youth, workers and people with disability. It is only people with disability day that is not gazetted in this country.

Madam Speaker, the last International Disability Day was held in my constituency in Kamwenge on December 3rd and His Excellency the President was the Guest of Honour. This day is prepared and organised by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I can assure you that there is no presentable budget for such a day. People with disabilities who travelled from all districts of Uganda in the north, south, central and east went back hungry. There was not even a provision of lunch for people with disability on that day in Kamwenge.

These are issues, Madam Speaker, in which we need your support, particularly with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, that is helping such provisions for people with disability. We – (Interruption)

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that I sit on the Equal Opportunities Committee. Last year the Equal Opportunities Commission made a report and every Member got a copy of this report. Most of these that have been presented by hon. Safia Nalule were captured in that report. Even the Public Finance Management Act stipulates clearly that before we pass or approve the budgets, we must ensure that at least they comply with the Equal Opportunities Commission report requirement of 50 per cent.

However, you find that we keep passing the budgets of sectors that do not meet the 50 per cent requirement. We need to be very serious and push all sectors, in that they have to comply with the Equal Opportunities Commission report. That is the information I wanted to give you. Thank you.

MR KATURAMU: Thank you.

5.39
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I stand to thank hon. Nalule for this report and the observations. Just like the honourable has just said, I would like to say that issues of disability are very serious issues and are actually cross cutting.

We come from these communities where these people are. When you look at, for example, education, so many of these pupils who live with disabilities are languishing in the communities. It is only very few who actually come up to the universities. When you look at, for example, the Ministry of Education and Sports – because I sit on the committee – when it comes to training teachers for special needs to help these children, you realise that they take only two teachers in a school. You wonder how these two tutors are going to manage teaching from primary one up to secondary school. I would like to call upon the ministries to be more serious.

I would like to give another example. Recently, we were looking at a report from Ministry of Health and they were giving us a list of essential commodities that the National Medical Stores has to purchase. However, they left out glasses and lotions for persons living with albinism. We were asking them why they left these out when they know that the glasses and lotions are very essential for these persons living with albinism. Therefore, I would like to implore the ministries to be more serious on these issues. If you are living with –(Member timed out)

5.41
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Let me join colleagues to appreciate a very comprehensive report by our colleague and for representing us ably. Madam Speaker, as she was taking us through the report, I remembered a statement that Dr Leakey, a Kenyan doctor who was involved in a plane crash, made. He was at the airport to be flown for treatment. He said, “My legs have been crashed. I cannot kneel down but in my heart, I am kneeling down but I want to thank God for sparing two important parts on my body. I thank you God, for I am now disabled but you have spared my head. I thank you for my head. You have spared my private parts.” (Laughter)

Most importantly, Madam Speaker, it is the head that the Government of Uganda should concentrate its focus on. She mentions the special needs education in her report and indeed, there are Government programmes promoting education for special needs. We have Universal Primary Education (UPE). We have Universal Secondary Education. We even have the vocational training institutes. 

There is indeed affirmative action for persons with disabilities embedded in these programmes but they are not sufficient; especially if you fundamentally subject them to scrutiny about the equal access of community resources by persons with disabilities, especially education. If you go to these schools – (Member timed out)

5.43
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank hon. Safia Nalule for the comprehensive report and thank you for representing us. Issues dealing with disadvantaged groups raise a lot of feelings.

However, I would like to say that Uganda has got good policies. Even now as we wait for the Bill to come, we could still perform better but the challenges are implementation areas. I relate it to the mind-set of the people. We interact with these people. We come from their communities. How do you fail to really plan for this group of people in a ministry? If you know them, if you gave birth to them and you are employed because they are there, you fail to plan for appliances.

Madam Speaker, I have a request to you as the Speaker of Parliament that as you advocate for other initiatives, can you join us, as people with disability, to reactivate the minds of Ugandans like what you do for cancer campaign and other campaigns so that the implementers really implement and we get the services. With my colleagues, as we speak here, we are converted people but we would like the non-converted to speak for us. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, for how long are we going to speak when we have implementers –(Member timed out.)

5.46
MR APOLLO OFWONO (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nalule for the report. The honourable member really clarified on how we can make our budget. Both our current and development budget is really lacking because we are not making this budget according to SDGs. If we do not make our budget according to SDGs, a lot of things will be missing. It is because if we make the budget according to SDGs, it will attract development partners and donors to support our budget. 

So, we really need to change the way we plan and come up with the budget. What the honourable member has pointed out can be captured on this 17th goal. We really need to see how we can come up with a budget for our country. We also need to copy other developing countries because they have changed their way of making the budget. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since the Second Session, I have been asking the committees to report on SDGs in their budget reports but no committee has reported on it. I have been singing this.

5.47
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to congratulate my honourable colleague for the effective representation and the report she has presented. 

Madam Speaker, we all know what the people with disabilities go through. We can lament until tomorrow and the other day but I think, as Members of Parliament, we need to pronounce ourselves on what must be done. At the moment, when you think about education, the gadgets that the kids with disabilities use are very expensive. These are some of the things we must recommend to be offered free to these kids by Government. It is because many of them cannot afford these gadgets.

When you turn to employment and the welfare of the people with disabilities, some of them can afford to do some work for themselves. However, there is no support that is directed towards that particular goal. Women and youth are being directly supported but people with disabilities have no specific support that can improve their welfare. We need to pronounce ourselves on such support as we move forward with affirmative action.

SDGs; we need to define the way we must appraise ourselves. It is because wherever we go, at even international conferences, SDGs are key. As a country, what is the strategy and methodology that we should use to appraise ourselves? I think this is what Parliament should define in the near future so that it becomes a key output in whatever we do.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have said several times on this Floor that we would like to know the minister responsible for the SDGs in this country so that he or she can account to us every year. It is total silence. I do not know who is in charge of the SDGs in this country. 

In the Seventh Parliament, we enacted a law whereby we offered incentives to any employer who will employ the disabled. However, no one has taken it up and no one is even following it up. The law is there.

5.51
MR OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank our senior sister for the excellent report. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of inclusive education for the children with disability is a very serious one. Many of these children are just out there in the community. Incidentally, some of them are extremely bright and yet our system cannot offer them the opportunity to study. 

Madam Speaker, we have one school for the blind in Pader District, which is attached to one of the primary schools. The condition in that school is really terrible. About two weeks ago, I got a call from the head teacher and the school management that they made some request to the Ministry of Education and Sports quite sometimes back but up to now, there is no response. They were asking for support to come to the ministry to follow up some of those requests they made to the ministry.

Madam Speaker, we made very good resolutions on the Floor of this Parliament. We discussed very important issues that affect our people on the Floor of this Parliament. Unfortunately, just like you have just said, most of these resolutions and the issues we discuss seem to remain here on the Floor of Parliament. 

So, we really need to see some of these resolutions –(Member timed out.)

5.53
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The former Vice President of the Republic of Uganda, Dr Samson Kisseka once said “every one of us, in one way or the other, is disabled only that some are more disabled than others”. 

Madam Speaker, Sulaiman Madada was the last minister in charge of persons with disabilities the Republic of Uganda had. Ever since, the position is vacant.

So, I call upon hon. Safia Nalule to lobby for their person who is also disabled. When you have a minister who is disabled, at least he or she can know what you want. Sometimes, I see some ministers who are in charge of the persons with disabilities when they are not disabled. Then you ask; how would they know the pain these people go through? 

So, unless you sit down, lobby the President and get your own, you will not get what you want. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, as Parliament, we can have very good reports every time with very good recommendations but when it comes to walking the talk and following up the report; that is where our challenges are.

Therefore, unless we start following up the reports - I heard hon. Nalule talking about the Maputo Protocol, there is no one following it up. They –(Member timed out.)

5.55
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to appreciate hon. Nalule for the report and recommendations therein. On several occasions, we have received reports here with very good recommendations but we continue lamenting. One of such reports is the one on which we made recommendations about the security minister on Nommo Galley.

I am a former Member of the committee on gender. We have received several concerns about the people with disabilities. One of the issues brought forward was the Bill for people with disabilities. This Bill was withdrawn by the minister and in April, she promised that within two months, the Bill would have come back to the committee. To date, we have not seen it back neither have we seen it on the Floor of Parliament. That shows reluctance on the side of the ministry in implementing and supporting the issues of people with disabilities, yet any one of us is a candidate of disability.

Madam Speaker, sometime back in February this year, we received communication as Members of the committee that the ministry was supposed to support some people in some constituencies. We went and looked for these people and we submitted the lists but to date, they have not gotten any support. 

When we go there, some of them think that we use their plight for our own interests. They cannot believe that when we bring their concerns here and they get nothing, either those who have sent us have failed or we have failed. However, they believe that we have gained from their disability.

I would like to strongly recommend, as a leader, that when you keep lamenting and fail to provide solutions then you become irrelevant. I would like to ask Parliament not to become irrelevant but support the people with disabilities by making very strong recommendations and supporting the report and recommendations as presented in the report by hon. Nalule. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, several Members have contributed. However, as I indicated at the beginning, this requires a multi-sectoral response from the Government. We need someone who can call all the ministers so that they can address sector by sector so that the Prime Minister can come here to give a Government report as a whole.

Therefore, I am giving the Prime Minister one month to deal with this issue and report back to us in the middle of September. It is very urgent. We have not done well enough for the people with disabilities (PWDs); let us rise to the occasion. Debate is adjourned to mid-September when the Prime Minister will come to respond to that report.

Honourable members, I would like us to go quickly to item 10 because I would like item nine to be done fully together with the movers and the reply from the Opposition. Let us do it on Tuesday, together. For now let us go to item 10. 

I would like to invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs to respond to item 10 (1) in three minutes.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. MEDARD LUBEGA SSEGGONA ON THE PERCEIVED STRAINED RELATIONS BETWEEN CHINA AND UGANDA

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Philemon Mateke): Madam Speaker, members of Parliament, this is a statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the strained relations between China and Uganda.

I wish to make a statement on a number of recent reports made both within this House and the media regarding a perceived strain in relations between Uganda and the People's Republic of China.

I should make it clear from the start that the Government of the Republic of Uganda and that of the People's Republic of China enjoy very good cordial and mutually beneficial relations. I should add that at no other time in recent Ugandan history have both our countries enjoyed such strong mutual support and engagement on many issues at the bilateral and multilateral level.

These good relations are evidenced by the many high-level interactions between our leaders including the recent bilateral meeting between His Excellency President Museveni and President Xi Jinping at the BRICS Summit in Johannesburg, South Africa.

In June, Uganda hosted the Chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and the Governor of Hunan Province. These visits culminated into the signing of cooperation agreements in a number of fields, including the commissioning of the Entebbe-Kampala Express Highway. We have had many other subsequent engagements at various levels of the two governments. Next month, His Excellency the President of Uganda will be travelling to Beijing to participate in the forthcoming summit of the Forum for China-Africa Cooperation.
 
Madam Speaker, China has remained a valuable partner in many fields and particularly, in supporting infrastructure development in Uganda in the areas of road construction, electricity generation, building of health facilities and agricultural production. On the other hand, Ugandan businessmen have also found a trading hub for many years now in China and particularly in Guangzhou.

In this regard, I wish to reaffirm that our relations with the People's Republic of China are excellent and that my ministry will do our best to deepen and strengthen them further for the mutual benefit of our people.

Regarding the recent incidents in Guangzhou which have raised perceptions of strained relations between our two countries, I wish to inform you that since the reports were made, action has been taken by our Consulate in Guangzhou, the Embassy in Beijing and here at the ministry.

On 20 July 2018, our consulate in Guangzhou began receiving complaints from Ugandan traders that they had been denied access to accommodation particularly in four hotels, which are frequented by Ugandan businessmen because of their convenient location in the central business district and for their affordability.

The traders indicated that the hotel management claimed to have received a local police order to effect these accommodation denials. The consulate visited three of the named hotels where they were informed of no available rooms because of being fully booked; this explanation could not however be verified.

On 23 July 2018 the consulate met with the Deputy Director General of the Foreign Affairs Office in Guangzhou Province over this issue. The Deputy Director informed them that his office was not aware of any government order to that effect. He then made it clear that more comprehensive measures would be taken to ensure that such actions do not re-occur.

The ambassador in turn urged the Chinese authorities to get to the bottom of these unfortunate actions and take very firm action against those involved.

On Monday 31 July 2018, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs met with the Chinese Ambassador in Kampala who explained that some hotel and restaurant owners in Guangzhou had misinterpreted a police instruction to tighten their security and committed this unacceptable act. 

He added that the government in Beijing had since cautioned them and guided on how exactly they should improve the security of their clients.

My ministry, working with our Embassy in Beijing and the Consulate in Guangzhou, shall keep this situation under close watch and remain actively engaged with the Chinese authorities to prevent these unfortunate actions from re-occurring.

It is important however that we should continue to caution our citizens to be law abiding and to distance themselves from any illegal acts as they travel abroad. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

RESPONSE FROM MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. CHARLES ILUKOR ON THE HALTING OF THE OPERATIONALISATION OF SOME SUB-COUNTIES AND MUNICIPAL COUNCILS BY THE MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

6.09
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Local Government has not failed to operationalise the newly created lower local governments.

The only challenge has been lack of a budget provision for the new units as communicated by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The sub counties and town councils are created on the submission of districts backed by council resolutions from both the sub county and the district council.

Once these resolutions are forwarded to the Ministry of Local Government, it does due diligence, we go to those sub counties and town councils to carry out our own assessment of the situation.

Once the officials of the Ministry of Local Government are satisfied and working together with the department of urban development, we declare and sign an instrument creating that town council or sub county.

Government is expected to provide the required resources. However, in Financial Year 2018/2019 the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development submitted that they were not able to provide the funds for the newly created local governments.

In the short term, we have since advised districts to second staff that are already on Government payroll as caretakers of the new local governments up to when the resources to run these administrative units are provided. Municipalities are created by district councils with the approval of Parliament and that is section 72 (a) Local Government Act CAP 243.

All the 19 municipalities which were created in 2015 by the Ninth Parliament have since taken off. As you are aware, election of leaders of the last batch of municipalities have just been concluded by the Electoral Commission. I have also studied a statement of the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the two statements agree.

However, we have scheduled a meeting between the Ministry of Local Government and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to discuss further how we can find resources and fund these newly created sub counties and town councils so that we move on until the next financial year when we can have fully fledged financing of these new local governments.

I can assure you, Madam Speaker, that we shall move on together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and with your assistance so that these local councils get funded despite the impasse which has developed. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We expect a report.

RESPONSE FROM THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA)TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ANTHONY OKELLO ON THE UTILISATION OF FUNDS FOR THE CATTLE RE-STOCKING EXERCISE IN THE NORTH EASTERN REGION.

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Madam Speaker, I would like to respond to the question, which hon. Anthony Okello raised to inform Parliament that the supplier of cattle in Amolatar was issuing Shs 500,000 to each beneficiary instead of physical cattle and that there are no proper criteria used to identify the beneficiaries.

I would like to take this opportunity to inform this House about the procedure because within the framework of Peace Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) and under the Presidential Pledges Programme, the restocking programme has been and continues to be successfully implemented. 

Since 2013/2014 to date, we have delivered 57,846 cattle in West Nile, Acholi, Lango and Teso regions. In these, there are two new districts that have come up, which will be targeted more clearly and that is Pakwach and Omoro districts. 

It is clear that the objective of restocking is to provide economic well-being and empowerment to the households in northern Uganda and also promote mobilisation for development, peace building and reconciliation. 

As the criteria for restocking provides, the selection is done by the local governments based on geographical locations, poverty and socio-economic indicators of beneficiaries including households of widows, widowers and orphans; people living with HIV/AIDS, ex-combatants, former abductees and female headed households. Others are child mothers, unskilled and unemployed youth, the elderly, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable categories.

The selection of beneficiaries is done by the district technical teams mainly from the production and community development departments. The team works with the sub-county community development officers and the Internal Security Officers (ISOs) to select the beneficiaries. 

The selected beneficiaries are confirmed by the sub-county executive committees and endorsed by the district executive committees. The list is then submitted to the Office of the Prime Minister upon which call of orders are issued.

Madam Speaker, the procurement is also clear. First, the supplier has been issued a call of order. The supplier proceeds to the source districts and identifies the cattle that suit the specifications. 

The supplier then works with the district veterinary officer of the source district to ensure that the cattle are de-wormed and vaccinated against various diseases like cheek-borne disease, trypanosomiasis and anthrax. The supplier then delivers the animals to the recipient districts. They are kept in the holding ground for at least 14 days –(Interruption)
       
MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened carefully to the question that the minister is supposed to answer. The minister is focussing on the collection criteria of how the animals are delivered yet the question is about the utilisation of funds for restocking. I expected the minister to tell us that there are these activities that are undertaken and these are the activities on which the money is spent without necessarily going into that.

Therefore, is the minister in order to waste Parliament’s time by telling us the procedure yet that is not the question?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister’s answer includes the procedure so that you know. She is in order.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. After explaining the criteria, I would like to come to the answer. Colleagues, I am sure that you have now understood the procedure and the criteria. 

Therefore, in response to the query by hon. Anthony Okello, distributing money to beneficiaries to procure the cattle themselves instead of the contractor is not in our terms of reference. We have not made this contract with any contractor. Our terms of reference are clear. It goes into details to assess the type of breed, the age of the animal, live weight and general body conditions; the reproduction and general health issues of the animal, which the ordinary farmer may not be able to determine with precision. 

This is the first time we are getting this complaint. If it is found to be true, it will tantamount to breach of contract and it contravenes the restocking guidelines. 

So far, since that issue came up, we have instituted two different teams to investigate. What we have found out is that the animals this time have been procured within the districts because of the outbreak of various diseases in the districts that have also resulted into a quarantine imposed. The situation is that the suppliers were getting the Ankole type of animals from western Uganda but this time, they have not been able to.

Our second revelation is that we have a list of some names that have been given to us that have purportedly been given the Shs 500,000. We know them by village and parish, so we are going to investigate. If we find out it is true, then this is breach of the contract by the contractor. Consequent actions will be taken accordingly.
 
I also would like to inform the House that since the restocking exercise started about four years ago, some of the complaints we have received have included high costs of procurements, unsatisfactory size and quality of animal diversion and so on. Therefore, we have contracted an external evaluation to help us assess the achievements, impact, appropriateness and relevance, efficiency and effectiveness of the restocking programmes in northern Uganda.

I would like to thank hon. Okello for bringing this up because it is an oversight, which one of us should undertake. I would like to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs or that of Works. Let us go to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development.

RESPONSE FROM THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. STEPHEN KISA ON THE PURPORTED MINERAL EXPLORATION BY UNKNOWN PERSONS IN LUUKA DISTRICT

6.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not disrupt the minister. Hon. Okello is satisfied and the minister is investigating. Yes, it is work in progress. Let us go to the minerals now, hon. D’Ujanga, please make your presentations.

MR D’UJANGA: It is the Rt Hon. Speaker that is in charge of this House, I thought. 

Madam Speaker, on the 11th Sitting of the First Meeting, of the 3rd Session, of the 10th Parliament of Uganda, held on Thursday 29 July, 2018, hon. Stephen Kisa, MP Luuka County South raised concern over a group of unknown people traversing parts of Luuka District, under the pretext of mineral exploration. That is the issue.

Hon. Stephen Kisa informed Parliament that the unknown people started mobilising the unsuspecting local residents of Bukanga Subcounty to scoop soil samples and sand were to be scooped from the land to establish the presence of mineral wealth. 

He further noted the area political leadership was unaware of the activity and that there were looming fears that people’s land may be grabbed.

Hon. Stephen Kisa requested for an explanation on the following:

    i) Procedure under which exploration is made.
    ii) The involvement of area local leaders in the exploration exercise. 
    iii) How licenses are acquired and then the issuing authority.
    iv) Whether the said persons ever presented an environment impact assessment study report to the relevant authorities.

Madam Speaker, this is the response. I would like to inform the House that the Ministry of Energy and Minerals Development has granted three exploration licenses, namely: EL1687 to Beta Minerals Limited, EL1702 to BRAgro Food Industries Uganda Limited and E10971 to Rwenzori Rare Metals Limited for the exploration of gold, rare earth elements, base metals and platinum groups of metals in Luuka District.

Madam Speaker, exploration license enables the holder to explore and define the extent and determine the economic value of a mineral deposit.

Exploration work is undertaken in accordance to the approved work programme on grant of the license. This work involves methods like geo-chemical soil sampling, grab rock sampling, geo-physical surveys, pitting, trenching and drilling among others, to obtain samples which are analysed to determine the mineral composition.

This involves sensitisation of the local communities and the leaders before embarking on the above activities. The ministry is aware that Beta Minerals Limited, under exploration license EL1687 is undertaking regional geo-chemical sampling in the areas under their license like in Bukanga, Luuka District and that a number of sensitisation meetings have been undertaken as follows:

    i) District leaders were sensitised on 12 July 2018
    ii) Bukanga Subcounty leaders were sensitised on 20 July 2018
    iii) Bukoma Subcounty leaders were sensitised on 23 July 2018
    iv) The sensitisation in the other sub-counties was scheduled to the following dates: Irongo, 20th August, Bulongo 21st August, Waibuga, 22nd August, Luuka Town Council 23rd August and Nawampiti 24th August, 2018.

The involvement of the area leaders/local leaders in the exploration exercise: 
Local leadership is very important in the exploration exercise and were consulted to ease the work of the exploration companies. Letters by the Directorate of Geological Surveys and Mines were written to the district sub-counties, introducing the company in the meetings held thereof.

Madam Speaker, how are licenses acquired and who is the issuing authorities? 
Licenses are regulated under the following legal regulation framework:
    i) The Minerals Policy of 2001, which has been repealed and replaced with the Minerals and Mining Policy of 2018
    ii) The Mining Act of 2003 
    iii) The Mining Regulations of 2004

Licenses are acquired through procedures spelt out in the Mining Act of 2003 and the Mining Regulations of 2004. For example, for an exploration license, one needs to apply using a prescribed Form 2, erect beacons over the area of interest, attach a work programme and a budget and ensure that the documents are endorsed and forwarded by the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of the district.

There is need to attach prospecting returns, attach a bank statement showing the availability of adequate financial resources to carry out the planned activities and then submit to the Commissioner. 

An applicant that provides satisfactory documentation as far as the requirements under the Mining Act 2003 and Regulation 2004 qualifies to be granted a minerals right.

The entry is on first come, first serve basis. All applications for minerals rights are endorsed by the CAO, before they are submitted to the Directorate of Geological Surveys and Mines for the licensing procedure to begin, as guided by the mining Act 2003 and Mining Regulations 2004. I have attached a table and map of the licenses attached.

iv) 	Whether the said persons ever presented an Environmental Impact Assessment Report to the relevant authorities.

Madam Speaker, preliminary exploration activities including geo-chemical surveys are not destructive in nature, hence, an environmental impact assessment study is not a mandatory requirement and only a project brief is required. This was submitted and the application of the licenses reviewed, and found satisfactory as far as the proposal was programmed.

Table 1 is attached and this shows the active licenses in Luuka District as of 7 August 2018. As I said before, the license numbers are in column 1 and the companies are all shown there. 

The last column shows the minerals they are prospecting for like gold, base metals, platinum group for minerals, granite for EL1702, gold and rare earth metals among others for EL0971. We have an application, TN2729 by Agro-Food Industries, which is under review. They are exploring for granite. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I just want to know whether that sensitisation was in response to the question. Hon. Kisa is not here. On which day did he ask this? His neighbour, hon. Kibalya is there.

6.34
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula South County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have listened to the minister very well. Hon. Kisa’s concern is that the people of Bukanga saw vehicles and the occupants said they had come to mine and begin exploring the minerals around the place. They did not have any information. 

His concern was that how come people get licenses and reach a level of wishing to begin mining minerals in the area and yet the people of the area are not aware and are not sensitised. 

Therefore, he wanted to know whether you sensitised those people. Did you inform them in advance because that was the issue? 

In addition to that, I would like to hear from the minister whether he is aware of the double cabin that was burnt last week after purportedly going there to mine minerals? Therefore, is the minister aware that a double cabin was burnt and chaos is about to begin in that area? This is because they no longer wish to see any vehicle that goes there under the pretext of mining minerals.

THE SPEAKER: That is a supplementary question.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, this statement is uploaded to our iPads. On page 2, second paragraph, I named the dates and the leadership that has been consulted; the district leaders were sensitised on 12 July 2018, Bukanga Subcounty leaders were sensitised on 20 July 2018 and Bukooma Subcounty leaders were sensitised on 21 July, 2018. 

We have sensitisation programmes for Irongo on 20 August, 2018, Bulongo on 21 August, 2018, Waibuga on 22 August, 2018, Luuka Town Council on 23 August, 2018 and Nawampiti on 24 August, 2018.

These sensitisations have been done in accordance with The Mining Act, 2003 – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do district leaders involve Members of Parliament? Did you invite your colleagues, the Members of Parliament, to be part of this? 

MR D’UJANGA: Well, from the question, it seems they were not invited but Madam Speaker, according to the law that exists, the Mining Act, 2003, the consultations should have been in this format, the way I have put it. 

THE SPEAKER: But with hindsight, don’t you think that your colleagues, who represent these people, should be part of that consultation to ease your work? 

MR D’UJANGA: Yes, that is correct indeed. Now, about the burning of the pick-up, I am just hearing it from my colleague here and such an act should not be encouraged. I hope the Police are aware of that act. 

Nevertheless, we will look at our procedures and policies and try to incorporate all the stakeholders, including the Members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT TO THE URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ANTHONY OKELLO ON THE MANAGEMENT OF A STRANGE WEED COVERING LAKE KYOGA

6.39
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This statement was prepared by the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

At its sitting of the First Meeting of the Third Session of the 10th Parliament, hon. Anthony Okello, MP Kioga County, raised concerns that for the last five years, three strange waterweeds had invaded Lake Kyoga creating a thick canopy that had impeded navigation. He informed Parliament that the said weeds had caused change in the water test and had lowered fish stocks in the lake. 

The Rt Hon. Speaker referred the matter to us; the Minister of Water and Environment and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. We, therefore, wish to present this statement as requested by the Rt Hon. Speaker for the information of the House. 

I would like to give a background and I hope I am not going to be accused of being irrelevant. 

Madam Speaker, it is true that the weeds, commonly called Kariba weed and locally known as “Nankabirwa”, invaded Lake Kyoga and other bodies in Uganda around 2013. This weed is reported to have originated from Brazil and Argentina and it grows all year round. It grows rapidly and produces dense floating canopy on the surface of poles, lakes and rivers.
 
The weed was cited about five years ago in Lake Kyoga. Over the last two years, it has covered large parts of Lake Kyoga and has spread to Lake Edward and River Nile all the way to South Sudan. It has also been spotted in the valley dams constructed by my ministry. 

What have we done? 
Government, through its line ministries, departments and agencies has taken steps to address this problem along their various mandates. 

However, the Inter-Ministry Working Committee established under the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) in 2017 joins the existing institutional arrangement for the control of Kariba weed. 

A number of interventions have been undertaken over the last five years to address the problem as follows: 

    1. Mapping of the extent of the spread of the weeds in the districts around Lake Kyoga; these districts include Nakasongola, Masindi, Serere and Apac. This was undertaken by the Ministry of Water and Environment in 2013. 

The mapping indicated that many fishing activities had been abandoned due to the weed and the people had resorted to charcoal burning for a livelihood. 

    2. Further studies about the extent of the spread of Kariba weed in the Kyoga basin, Lake Albert and around Lake Victoria have been undertaken by the National Fisheries Resources Research Institute. 

    3. The communities around Lake Kyoga in Nakasongola, Serere, Buyende and Apac were sensitised by various Government agencies on the dangers of the waterweed and the need to control its proliferation. 

    4. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries went ahead to give manual control equipment to various communities around the lakes. They include 25 pieces of wheelbarrow, 40 pieces of pangas, 58 pieces of forked hoes, 40 pieces of forked spades, 30 pieces of lifejackets, deep waders, 50 pairs of hard gloves, gumboots and rakes and so much more. This was done so that this waterweed can mechanically be removed. 

In 2017, the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) imported the initial batch of salvinia weevils that are specific biological control agents for the Kariba weed. These are being piloted on Lake Kyoga before being rolled out to other affected water bodies. 

Nothing of points and non-point sources of pollution into the lake that help in flourishing of the aquatic weed has been undertaken in Nakasongola, Amolator and Apac districts by various agencies led by the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA).

Landing sites have been identified as some of the major sources of pollution into the lake due to the poor sanitary conditions in almost all landing sites and fishing villages along the lakeshores.

Various agencies and local governments under the coordination of NEMA have carried out massive awareness and enforcements on the illegal practice of carrying sand bags and poles into the lake to anchor suds and alienate the lake.

A number of people who had settled on the suds and those engaged in the practice of transporting sand bags and poles into the lake were arrested and prosecuted.

Madam Speaker, although some progress has been made, there are a number of challenges still being faced - uncoordinated implementation of the interventions to combat the weed. However, this is going to be solved by the creation of the inter-ministerial committee, which I hope will address this problem.

Inadequate human and machine capacity to address the challenges caused by the Kariba weed, lack of financial resources to buy the appropriate machinery, sensitise the local communities and enforce protection of the catchment of the lake, buffer zones and fish breeding and nursery grounds. 

We shall continue to lobby for additional resources from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as we utilise the limited available resources within our current budget. Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members, for your attention.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anthony Okello, any supplementary?

6.49
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me thank the Minster of Water and Environment for his attempt to respond to this issue of a strange waterweed on Lake Kyoga.

Madam Speaker, I happened to be in the 9th Parliament and quite often because of the ferry plying that route, this is where I pass when crossing from Namasale to Zengebe in Nakasongola. I raised this issue of the waterweeds then. 

After a critical look, there are three different types of waterweeds on Lake Kyoga. The honourable minister has talked of only one type locally referred to as “Nankabirwa”.

The country should be interested in knowing which aquatic weeds these are. Aquatic weed identification is the first step in managing them. In addition, most controlling methods are aimed at a specific weed or groups of weeds with similar growth habits.

Therefore, if we are seeing three different types, I think the ministry should be more vigilant in identifying the types of weeds that have invaded Lake Kyoga.

Madam Speaker, the attempt to intervene as stated by the minister does not even tell us the steps that Government or the ministry is trying to undertake most especially to mitigate further inflow of these weeds into Lake Kyoga in case they succeed in getting rid of the weed - he has not talked about it and neither has he given us the roadmap to rid this lake of the waterweed.

Talking about wheelbarrows, pangas and spades as equipment that the water ministry has supplied to get rid of a canopy - a very large area covered by this weed is a mockery. I do not think the honourable minister is serious. 

Mapping areas covered by this weed has taken Government five years. Even the pilot intervention approach that they have taken has taken forever - the last five years, Madam Speaker. 

The equipment that they have tried to apply are rudimentary and not appropriate – gumboots and gloves! Madam Speaker, we have not seen any progress and I do not want to believe that Government can really believe that there is progress made in getting rid of weeds from Lake Kyoga.

The response by the honourable minister is actually below the belt and completely unacceptable and I do not think it can help us in any form. I want to reject it in the strongest terms possible but also plead with you, Madam Speaker; Lake Kyoga is a big resource to this nation.

I am humbly requesting that you help us and ask Government to make appropriate intervention otherwise we are going to lose that lake. 

Madam Speaker, that resource has been feeding so many Ugandans. We have a very big landing site called Bangladesh but because of the invasion of the weed now, they cannot fish anymore. There are many children stranded and there is no food; we have Kayago. How I wish Government now provided relief to the people whose livelihoods have been affected by this strange waterweed.

Otherwise, the way the Government is behaving, I am worried that we may lose the lake. However, with your intervention, I think something can still be done. We need only seriousness on the part of the people who are in charge. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have listened but five years of knowing about the weed - then gumboots and pangas! Honourable minister, I am sorry but your interventions are inadequate. We want a real action plan to rid Lake Kyoga of that weed. Seriously, we who come from around the lake, that is where we eat, travel, that is our garden. 

Therefore, we want an action plan and I am giving you two weeks to bring an action plan on that. You have even never formed an inter-ministerial committee since 2013 until now! Honourable minister, bring us a proper action plan for the issues of Lake Kyoga. Thank you.

Honourable members, we have done quite a bit of work. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.53 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 14 August 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

