Wednesday, 29 August 2012 

Parliament met at 10.32 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanya, in the Chair) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, today is the trial date of the House; we have five committee reports and two Bills and we will be able to go through them all. So, let us brace ourselves and start on that. We are going to have to work hard and manage the time very strictly if we are to finish all these items that are before us.  

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012
II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2012/2013

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL 2012/2013

10.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. This is the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. It covers vote 011, Ministry of Local Government; vote 147, Local Government Finance Commission; votes 501 to 850, the local governments of Uganda; vote 006, Ministry of Public Service; and vote 146, the Public Service Commission. 

Mr Speaker, we have provided the honourable members with an executive summary and that is what I will take you through. We have a main report, which is quite heavy, but we have also summarised it in the interest of time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can lay the main report on the Table and proceed with the executive summary. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the policy statements and budgetary provisions of the public service and local government sectors for the fiscal year 2012/2013. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Proceed, Mr Chairman.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, we examined the policy statements of our sector ministries, the Background to the Budget and the State of the Nation Address. We also had meetings with the relevant ministers and their technical teams, and we would like to present our observations and recommendations as a committee. We will begin with page 3. 

Vote 011, Ministry of Local Government 

Observations

Creation of New Districts

Mr Speaker and members, we observed that the number of new local governments has been increasing significantly in the recent times. We have increased the districts from 79 in 2009 to 112 today. There are, at the moment, new requests for additional districts in a phased manner. 

We would like to recommend that for any district to be created, Government should provide a clear phased programme with justification, and acceptable proposals for the financing, equipping and staffing of the new districts. The Ministry of Local Government should ensure equitable sharing of assets and liabilities between the mother districts and the new ones at the time of split.

We further recommend that the draft consultancy report on the study on the rationalisation of local administration by the Ministry of Local Government be finalised not later than the end of August. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, as a committee you remember we received from you a motion opposing creation of an additional 25 new districts. We shall be presenting that in full at a later time when you provide the opportunity on the Order Paper. 

Councillors’ Allowances 

Mr Speaker, the committee notes that the President, in his State of the Nation Address, made a proposal for the facilitation of councillors at district level and LC I chairpersons by providing the Shs 20 billion in the budget. However, whereas the President made this proposal, the committee examined the budget of the Ministry of Local Government and noted that this figure did not appear. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance releases the Shs 20 billion as stated in the policy statement for facilitation of the district councillors and LCI chairpersons. The ministry should finalise the modality of payment of these funds to the beneficiaries. 

Elections of LCIs and LCIIs 

Whereas the national elections are held regularly, elections of the lower councils have not been held for a long time. This is contrary to Article 181(4) of the Constitution, which requires that all local governments should be elected every five years. The problems, which have arisen, are noted in the report. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should provide funds for conducting LC I elections at the time the Local Government (Amendment) Bill is passed into law and assented to by His Excellency the President. We say that this should be done not later than the end of November this year. 

Staffing Gaps and Hard-to-Reach Areas

Mr Speaker, the districts have serious manpower challenges, especially the new districts which have failed to attract and retain staff. This has undermined their level of service delivery. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government takes the necessary steps to fill up to a minimum of 65 per cent of the staffing structures of all the local governments, to enable them provide better services. The hard-to-reach package should apply to all civil servants in those districts across the board. We also recommend that it should be increased from 30 per cent to 50 per cent.

Vote 147, the Local Government Finance Commission

Observations and Recommendations 

Review of the Local Government Finance Commission Legal Framework 

Article 194 of the Constitution mandates the finance commission to advise His Excellency the President and Government on matters concerning the distribution of revenue between the central government and local governments, and the allocation to each local government. They are also supposed to consider and recommend potential sources of revenue for these local governments. However, the committee was informed, with concern, that the Ministry of Finance, which acts on behalf of His Excellency the President, tends not to heed the advice of the finance commission. 

We, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Finance should take seriously the proposals of the Local Government Finance Commission. This is because the Local Government Finance Commission is enshrined in the Constitution in order to improve the financing of local governments. 

Grant Allocation Formulae 

The committee was informed that despite the finance commission’s efforts to advise the sectors to ensure that all funds for local governments go through the grant system, there are some line ministries which have not heeded to this advice. We were informed that there are some funds that are not going through the grant system.  

The committee strongly recommends that all funds for local governments should go through the grant system rather than through sectors. Ministry of Finance should ensure that implementation of this proposal is done. 

Financing of the Commission

The Local Government Finance Commission is established under the Constitution but over time has been subjected to budget cuts by the Ministry of Finance. The committee recommends that this commission should be protected from budget cuts just like any other statutory institution. 

Local Government Financing Study

The local governments are crippled due to inability to collect their own revenue. District transfers have also been dwindling over the financial years. This leaves local governments fully dependent on the central Government, which greatly undermines the policy of decentralisation. The finance commission is carrying out a holistic study of local government revenue aimed at addressing this challenge. 

The committee recommends that the commission expedites the proposed study and provides mechanisms for implementing the recommendations of this study. 

Votes 501-850, All Local Governments

Observations and Recommendations 

Total Transfers to Local Governments

The total transfers to local governments this year are expected to increase to Shs 1.8 trillion as compared to last year’s budget of Shs 1.656 trillion, representing an increase of 8.9 percent. However, the proportion of total local government transfers to the national budget has seen a further decline this financial year to 17 per cent. In other words, in spite of the significant growth rate of the national budget, local government transfers continue to decline as a proportion of the national envelope. 

We recommend that since local governments are the service delivery centres, they should be supported with the resources they require to perform. Government should ensure that we match the growth in grants with the growth of the national budget. The committee further recommends that local government transfers should not be less than 35 per cent of the budget in any given financial year, and that this figure be protected and implemented in every budget. 

Wage Component of the Unconditional Grant

Under the local government payroll, the wage provision has experienced chronic shortfalls thereby not allowing local governments to recruit additional staff. The minimal increment is to cater for the salary enhancement for staff, but it is not substantial enough to enable local governments recruit critical staff. 

The committee recommends that Government provides an additional Shs 46.3 billion under the local government payroll to enable local governments recruit up to an average level of 65 per cent. 

Non-Wage Component of the Unconditional Grant

There is a similar challenge of inadequate funds on the non-wage component of the unconditional grant. The committee recommends that Government provides an additional Shs 15 billion under this grant to enable local governments run their operations smoothly. 

Equalisation Grant

The Equalisation Grant continues to stagnate at Shs 3.4 billion since its inception more than 15 years ago and yet the key parameters such as population and the number of districts, which would really qualify for equalisation, continue to increase. The committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Equalisation Grant be increased from the current Shs 3.4 billion to at least Shs 6 billion as a minimum. 

Return of Unspent Funds to the Central Government Treasury 

The committee notes that the late release of funds by the Ministry of Finance seems to be deliberate. Some local governments are reported to have received funds on their accounts as late as the 29th of June even without clear information on source and its utilisation. This has greatly undermined the implementation of programmes and results in funds being returned to the centre. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should be investigated on this issue. Where it can be verified that funds were released late, local governments should be allowed to retain these funds and use them according to their work plan. 

One Per Cent VAT for Local Governments 
The report for increase of VAT from 17 to 18 per cent was given, and it is very clear, to provide a facility to replace the abolition of graduated tax. However, the idea of Local Government Development Fund was never implemented by the Ministry of Finance. We recommend that Government should remit the one per cent on VAT to the local governments as agreed. This will ease the current revenue crisis in the districts. 

Payment of Royalties to Local Governments

The current arrangement of sharing royalties from oil, gas, electricity, national parks, minerals and other protected is inadequate and has left local governments disadvantaged. In most cases, local governments are not informed of how much has been collected and how it is being distributed. 

The committee recommends that the sector ministries disseminate information to the local governments on how much revenue has been collected in royalties. Also, their portion should be remitted to them so that they plan for it. 

Vote 005, Ministry of Public Service 

Observations and recommendations 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we wish to present our observations and recommendations as follows: 

Civil Service College 

The land title for the Civil Service College was secured in Jinja and a memorandum of understanding between NARO and Ministry of Public Service was signed. The Committee on Public Service and Local Government is awaiting the report from the Committee on Education and Sports to conclude on this matter. 

In the interim, we recommend that funds be released by the Ministry of Finance so that construction commences this financial year. The Ministry of Public Service should furnish the facility at NaFIRRI in Jinja to enable the training take place. 

National Records and Archives Centre

The project of constructing this centre has not taken off despite the loan of US$ 7.3 million having been approved in 2008. We have also established that the funds have been availed to the ministry. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service commences construction of the National Records and Archives Centre this financial year without fail rather than lamenting on the procurement issues. 

Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS) 

The Ministry of Public Service is commended for initiating the IPPS. The project is on course and it is likely to result in improvement and modernising of the personnel and payroll system.  

We recommend that this system be rolled out and finalised so that all ministries, departments and agencies of Government and local governments benefit from the system. The ministry should use this facility to end the issue of pension arrears, ease access to the payroll and avail timely personnel data in the entire public service. 

Salary Commission

The committee was informed that the proposal for setting up an independent salary commission to handle the salaries of all public officers would be submitted to Cabinet for consideration this financial year. This would assist to harmonise pay structures within the civil service. 

We, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Public Service expedites the process of establishing the Salary Commission. We hope to hear from them on this matter during this financial year. 

Pension arrears

Shs 5.6 billion has been provided to pay pension arrears. The committee is, however, concerned about the unending list of new submissions for pension arrears. The committee recommends that the ministry should take the necessary steps to end this problem once and for all.  

Salary Enhancement for Public Servants

We were informed that there were enhancements of salaries across the board this financial year as follows: 

    • U1-U3 by six per cent; 
    • U4-U6 by eight per cent; 
    • U7-U8 by 15 per cent; 
    • public universities by 10 per cent; 
    • scientists in public universities and post primary institutions by 30 per cent. 

The committee commends Government for providing salary enhancements for public servants across the board; however, enhancement should take into account the inflation levels in the country. In addition, selective treatment of personnel is likely to breed discontent in the civil service. 

Hard-to-Reach Allowance

The committee welcomes the move to decentralise the hard-to-reach allowance; however, the concern is that it is still very low. We recommend that it is increased from 30 per cent to 50 per cent.

Vote 146, Public Service Commission

Mr Speaker, the committee was fully satisfied with the presentation of the Public Service Commission. We do not have critical observations or recommendations to make.

Finally, we wish to present the budgetary proposals for 2012/2013 for the sectors under public service and local government: 

Vote 011, Ministry of Local Government 

The recurrent budget includes: 

    • Wage, Shs 6.9 billion 
    • Non-wage, Shs 7.7 billion 

The development includes:

    • Development (Government of Uganda), Shs 8 billion
    • Development (donors), Shs 260.1 million 

The total for Ministry of Local Government is Shs 22.7 billion.

Vote 147, Local Government Finance Commission

We wish to recommend the approval of Parliament under the recurrent expenditure: 

    • Wage, Shs 918 million 
    • Non-wage, Shs 3.2 billion

Under Development

    • Development (Government of Uganda), Shs 171 million 

The total for Local Government Finance Commission is Shs 4.293 billion.

Votes 501-850, All Local Governments

We wish to recommend for approval of Parliament the following:

    • Conditional grants 

Wage, Shs 947 billion
Non-wage, Shs 292 billion

    • Unconditional grant, Shs 215.1 billion
    • Development grant, Shs 397.2 billion
    • Equalisation grant, Shs 3.4 billion

The total for all local governments is Shs 1.855 trillion.

Vote 005, Ministry of Public Service

Mr Speaker, we wish to recommend that this Parliament approves:

    • Wage, Shs 2.5 billion
    • Non-wage, Shs 291 billion 
    • Development (Government of Uganda), Shs 809 million 
    • Development (donors), Shs 18.2 billion 
    • Taxes, Shs 650 million. 

The total for Ministry of Public Service is Shs 294.9 billion.

Vote 146, Public Service Commission 

We recommend the following for approval: 

    • Wage, Shs 1.2 billion 
    • Non-wage, Shs 2.5 billion 
    • Development (Government of Uganda), Shs 631 million 

The total for Public Service Commission is Shs 4.4 billion. 

The total for the entire sector is Shs 2.181 trillion. Mr Speaker, I wish to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. That is the proposal from the committee. Debate will be limited to 30 minutes to allow us handle this matter expeditiously. The three-minute rule will apply, meaning that on average that will be 10 people.

10.54
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for a very good report. 

I have three issues to raise. One is about the position of the local council elections. There is a Constitutional Court ruling to the effect that all those who claim to be on the executive of LCs in this country are there illegally. This is because these positions are supposed to be elective. Can they prove to us, the electorate, when they were voted into office and more so under the multiparty dispensation? Democracy is very expensive and since we, Ugandans, agreed to follow that path, Government should look for that money so that people are in those offices with the full force of the law. Otherwise, anybody masquerading as the LCI chairman, treasurer, using the stamp for revenue collection is doing so illegally. 

Secondly, I invite Government to adopt the Ghanaian system of district creation. In the 1970s when we were still in primary and early secondary school, we used to draw the map of Uganda and be able to clearly name all the districts. But today, even if you asked members here how many districts we have in Uganda, none of them will have a concrete answer. This is because every other day new districts are being created without any clear formula. I would have liked a situation where there is a policy on how to create districts; for example, what should be the basic minimum population size for an area to be considered a district. This would be seen as a transparent manner. As of now, districts are being created for political expediency without clear convincing reasons being given to us. 

Why do I say we should adopt the Ghanaian system? In Ghana, every county, regardless of whether it voted whoever is in power or not, is a district. From those district levels, there is what they call provincial administration, so that administrative costs at the county level are minimised. But here, with all these districts mushrooming - I saw an area with a population of 30,000 declared as a district - surely, are these small village-districts going to be sustainable? (Member timed out.)

10.57
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The chairman, in his report, which is a very good report and good summary, talks about hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay areas. I actually do not think the solution provided in the report is one that I will take. If there are areas to stay in, why then do we allow our people to stay there?
We need to bring everybody in areas where they can stay comfortably. If there are hard-to-stay areas, then you will never have people willing to work there. The solution could be to go and train those who are resident in those areas and are comfortably staying there instead of continuing to raise salaries as a way of attracting people to go and work there. If there are no schools, go and construct them there.

Mr Speaker, I wish to talk about the relationship between the centre and local administrative units. Of course, I am a supporter of federalism; I think it would be a solution to all these problems. The biggest problem now is that the centre looks at these districts as departments within ministries. So they think these administrative units continue to exist at the mercy of the centre. That is why when we have an opportunity to review the relationship between local governments and the centre we will inevitably have to bring back the issue of federalism, where the formula for sharing resources and for responsibility is well explained in the Constitution. Therefore, they will not continue living at the mercy of those who are running the government at the centre.

I also have a problem with the local administrative units and the environment under which they are operating. The committee chairperson is looking at these local administrative centres as centres of service delivery; actually, many of them are centres of sharing tax payers’ money. Most of the money we send to these units – all of us know because we live with them every day – is money that they are just stealing. However, because of politics, we come here and demand that we should send more. Sometimes you do not see tangible things these local administrative units are doing but they continue demanding for more. 

We had a problem in the infrastructure committee while looking at the Ministry of Lands. The levels of staffing and funding there are very low. So we asked ourselves –(Member timed out.)  

11.00
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for this beautiful report. 

I have three brief issues to raise. One is on the return of unspent funds to the central government treasury. We have a problem because this money goes very late to the local governments. I suggest that we create a special account where this money can be carried forward, because they lose this money yet some of the activities that were supposed to be carried out the previous year will not have been carried out. So, I suggest that an account be created or let the money be transferred.

Secondly, I would like to comment on the Civil Service College. This issue has taken too long. It was discussed in the Eighth Parliament. I understand they have now started on it at NaFIRRI in Jinja, but let the ministry tell us how far they have gone with this. How much have they spent and how much is the balance out of the money that was released to them?

Lastly, the salary enhancement for all public servants; here, the committee tells us that the enhancement was across the board. I need clarification on this because we hear that some teachers got this increment, ranging from six to eight and to 15 per cent, but some of the teachers who were supposed to have received that salary enhancement have not received it. In my constituency they were asking me whether it was segregative. Some teachers received it, others did not receive it and others received half of what they were supposed to have got. So, I suggest that we get clarification on whether it was really across the board for all public servants or it was only for the teachers. Thank you so much.

11.03
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I commend the committee for the good work done and I support this motion. 

I would like to emphasise the issue of councillors’ allowances as declared by His Excellency and as read in the Budget Speech. Now we see here that money has not been given, that it is not budgeted for. Since this anomaly has been noted in time, I would request that the Ministry of Finance, without any excuse, put this item in the budget so that we can facilitate our local councillors for better service delivery. We pronounced ourselves on this in our manifesto of the ruling National Resistance Movement party government. 

Two, Mr Speaker, I support the creation of districts but it should be well studied so that when these districts are created, they can be operational. Also we need to ensure the rationale of creating those districts, that is, taking services nearer to the people, as the committee has rightly observed. I do not want to take much of the time since I know there is not enough time.  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

11.04
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for having elaborated more in their report. 

I would like to talk about three issues. The committee has talked about the proposal to create more districts and has recommended that for any new districts to come on board, Government should justify the funding and the other modalities. I would like to inform the House that districts are not created for the sake of it like I have heard my friends allude to. It is our voters, it is us, who try to push Government to create more districts. They are not totally for nothing but they are a necessity. As I talk, I need mine to be split from Mbale to Bungokho. (Laughter) If I may elaborate; there are districts which are large enough to be spilt. There are districts where there are conflicts where people say, “No, to stave off these conflicts, let part A be on its own.” 

If I can say, we have had new districts being created but I do not see a district which is complaining that when they split from district B, they lacked money. The only thing we should do as Members of Parliament is to see to it that we follow the money which we appropriate here so that it meets the targeted goals. That is the only issue.

On the same issue, I thought that the committee would be straightforward but in the report where they are talking of the creation of new districts, they are sarcastic. Do you mean that these ones which came on board, which my friend, hon. Adolf Mwesige, read have no justification?  (Member timed out.) 

11.07
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank members of the committee for the work which they have tried to do. 

I have a few issues with the committee about the new districts. We, as leaders, must be able to guide our people because some of these districts have become tribal and they have actually fuelled conflicts. Some of them have even become personalised. So, unless Government comes up with a criterion for the feasibility of the districts, whether it is geographical or population or distance from headquarters at some districts, we are creating more problems. 

If you look at page 4 of the summary, they are saying that the staffing levels in existing districts are about 30 per cent or 40 per cent; they are not even up to 55 per cent. So, if you are going to have new districts, even those ones who are recruiting up to 40 per cent, be sure you are going to have less than 50 per cent. So, even the service delivery we are talking about will not be there. If you cannot deliver services up to 50 per cent, then you are not delivering. Actually, you will now be causing more blame. Maybe that is why NRM is losing very much, because service delivery is very poor. You should do a study on why we are losing. It could be one of the reasons.

On the Salaries Commission, I do not know what Government has been waiting for. When you look at a Permanent Secretary earning about Shs 2 million or Shs 1.5 million and you look at the Executive Director of Kampala District, who is supervised by the PS, getting about Shs 40 million as salary, that is shameful. As a government, we should have done this even earlier, before the commission or the committee comes in. 

About the LCIs, some colleagues have said that you are budgeting for an unconstitutional body that is already there. Why can’t we have the law to establish the LCs and then we budget for them? You are providing for Shs 20 billion - I do not know if it is even in the speech. So, I do not know; who do we blame for non-existent or functional councils? We are talking about giving them allowances; are they there? Has the Ministry of Finance budgeted for the allowances of the local councils? The Ministry of Finance cannot budget for what is not there. It was challenged in the Constitutional Court and Government did not even appeal. So, why are you going to recommend funding for an unconstitutional body?  Mr Speaker, I thank you very much.

11.10
MR FRED MBAGADHI (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to the voices of colleagues who have commended the job that has been done by the committee.

I really want to thank the committee for a job well done. However, I have a remark or two to make. On page 21, the committee talks about the issue of the late releases of funds to the local governments. I actually highly agree with the committee that surely, this seems to be a deliberate move by the Ministry of Finance to deprive the local governments of their meagre resources.

Ideally, the release of these funds should be done at the beginning of each quarter, - of course we have four quarters - so that should be July, October, January and April. However, you find that these releases have always been sent a little late and the major reason as to why these monies are sent back is because the monies have not been spent; but of course, what do you expect especially where monies are sent late. 

I do highly agree with the committee, especially on the recommendation that the Ministry of Finance should be investigated. Sincerely speaking, PAC in Parliament has done a very good job but on this particular issue, I think we should come out boldly to find ways of tracing these monies. So many years have gone by and most of the times we get problems from our local government leadership. They are always complaining. My district, Jinja, I think has always fallen victim of this kind of problem. 

I am of the opinion that we should actually do a follow-up of all these monies because outrightly, we expect this money to go back to the Consolidated Fund. As we move into the budgeting process, I think we need to find ways of really locating this money. If it was sent to the Consolidated Fund, we need to trace it and ascertain that surely these monies are being put to good use. (Member timed out)

11.13
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work that they have presented. It is really fine work. 

I would like to comment on the elections of lower councils or chairmen LCI. Unless we hold these elections this year - Uganda is a democracy but at the lower councils we are promoting dictatorship. Some of these LCs have been in those positions for close to 20 years and they have become semi-gods in the villages. I would beg my fellow Members of Parliament that as we are doing appropriations of the money, we make sure that we provide for elections in lower councils so that we can have a complete cycle of democracy from the lowest to the upper offices. 

As regards creating new districts, I think we are now going too far. We have stretched to the limit. Uganda is like a poor man marrying so many women and expecting to provide resources. (Laughter) Honourable members, I come from a new district called Rubirizi but the promises we have made that services would come to the people are not there. We had problems of animals, of water and they still exist. The staffing levels are below 20 per cent. You go to a health centre, it is a building run by a midwife who is doing administration and everything. I think we should stop creation of new districts until the current ones are fully staffed and functioning, not even phasing. (Applause) 

The new ones will create even more conflict. I have seen this district in Budaka conflicting with Mbale over territory. I think for proper running of our country, given the meagre resources we have, we do not need to marry more women in form of districts. Mr Speaker, that is my contribution and I urge members to support my presentation. Thank you very much.

11.16
MS JESSICA ABIBIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adujmani): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to thank the committee for the report. However, I want to add the following: 

On page 4, the committee has presented an issue on the staffing gaps in the local governments especially in the new districts. I think we should also re-focus ourselves on the administrative structures. In the newly created sub-counties, for example, we do not have administrative structures which are supposed to be used by the new sub-counties and this is causing a lot of inconvenience in running most of the activities.

On the return of unspent monies to central government, one of the issues we need to also focus on is the limited releases of monies vis-à-vis the demanded monies by the local government. I was in Adjumani District two weeks ago and my CAO told me that up to that time, they had failed to spend money released for construction of a road because the money sent was too little. So, when we send monies which are too little to accomplish the intended objectives, our local governments fail to utilise the monies and at the end it is sent back. I think we have to evaluate before we send the monies to the local governments.

On the salary enhancements, I also want to say that we need clarification. As we focus on the salary enhancements, we have a big problem which is affecting our civil servants, that is, the names of our people getting off payrolls, at times for two months. Some peoples’ names are not on the payroll for a long time and they call Members of Parliament to explain. I think we need an explanation as Members of Parliament.

Lastly, on the election for local councils, there is no way that we can be sure of what we sent, in terms of supervision and monitoring, in the absence of the establishment of these structures. Therefore, even if it requires us coming up to approve specific loans for the elections of these local government structures, I think it will be prudent for us to do that. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

11.19
MR ONGALO OBOTE KENNETH (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamiado): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this report. First of all, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and his committee for a job well done. Specifically, I thank them for recognising the role played by the LCIIIs and their councillors in running district programmes. However, I believe that not only should we push for the increase of salaries and allowances of LCIII chairpersons but for their councillors as well who work just as hard as they do but do not receive any allowances for the work they do. 

I also thank the committee for recommending the increment of packages for hard-to-reach areas from 30 to 50 per cent. However, we should take special note of special needs education. If these hard-to-reach areas are difficult to live in by able bodied people, how about teachers who actually cater for special needs education in hard-to-reach areas. I think they should be given priority.

Finally, whereas a lot has been said in opposition to the creation of new districts, I really do not believe that the solution to famine lies in killing young children. If we want to solve famine problems, we should increase production. I do not think it helps if we say, “No more producing children.” The solution to the problems we have at the local government levels lies in killing corruption in this country. If we do that, we will have enough funds to support these ill districts. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have drawn a close to the back. We have two more reports to deal with. We now move to the centre. I will have the Shadow Minister for Public Service, Shadow Minister for Local Government, the Minister of Local Government, the Minister of Public Service and the Minister of Finance. Five minutes each. 

11.21
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Roland Mugume): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to also thank the chairperson for giving us a good report. However, I have some observations to make as the Shadow Minister for Public Service. 

I am happy the committee is telling us about the increase of salaries, but in this country we have a problem. I think it is high time we came up with a minimum wage because if you see what is happening, especially in private institutions, there is a very big problem concerning salaries. I think in these private institutions - I can give an example; you find a primary school with 3,000 pupils and we are paying Shs 1.2 million for each pupil but the teachers are getting less than Shs 200,000. I think as a Government, if we set a minimum wage it will help us solve many problems of those people who are being affected.

I want to warn the government about the allowances for councillors and chairpersons. You have politicised the issue of the youth fund, but I want to ask members in this august House that we should not play with councillors. The basis upon which these local governments operate is on these people, the councillors. I am saying this because when you read the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President, he talked about Shs 20 billion, but in the budget this Shs 20 billion is not there; it is not budgeted for. So, what is it? We want the minister to come out and tell us exactly what it is, whether this money is there. We have already told the councillors, the chairpersons, municipal mayors and all LC III chairpersons that this money is there, so we want to know whether this money is actually there. 

Lastly, the Civil Service College; we discussed this issue here but we need to know why the Ministry of Public Service has continued to implement it when we told them to wait until we finalise this issue as Parliament. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

11.24
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Betty Bakireke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a job well done. I would like to only add that when it came to the issue of recommendations, the committee was a bit shy. I hope this is because it is a ruling party chaired committee. However, when you read the report in full – (Interjections) - This is my opinion. It is my humble opinion. However, when you read the whole report, you will find the true picture of local governments in Uganda today. 

This report also points to our capacity as Parliament to follow up on our resolutions. Last year, a report was read before this House and adopted. In that report, Parliament resolved that the creation of new districts would be stayed until a study is done or a policy about the creation of districts is formulated and laid before Parliament for debate. We have not been there yet but now we have a motion before us to create 25 more districts. 

I feel it is high time Uganda learns from other countries like South Africa. At one time, South Africa had more than 1,000 local governments; after some time, they had to review this and they went to 843. As we talk now, they have expanded their municipalities to eat into the hinterlands and they have about 243 local governments. In Rwanda also, they had a number of local governments but what they are doing right now is to decrease them. 

It is our suggestion, as the Opposition, that a study be done to find out if it is possible to move from the 112 districts we have today to about 50 in the coming period. I know it is very difficult for this Parliament to sit and consider such a motion because it also affects the membership of this House. However, in future, we will think about the implication of the creation of the new districts on the numbers in this Parliament. 

We propose that as we create more districts as the case is now, we should think about a district being represented by one woman MP or decreasing the number of the special interest groups in this House. The UPDF, for example, is here just as a listening post. I think two people can listen for UPDF-(Interjections) - and this should be done gradually.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this Parliament is constituted by provisions of the Constitution and its membership includes representatives of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces. They are full voting members of this House and full speaking members of this House. Yesterday, we had an elaborate contribution from a member of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces. A reference to that effect on the Floor of this House is unfair to the members. So, we would like you to withdraw that particular statement.

MRS BAKIREKE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. These are just proposals for the future but I will take your guidance and withdraw the statement. 

We also propose that it is high time Parliament reviewed the issue of Article 181(4) of the Constitution to find out if we as a country are in a constitutional crisis as far as the election of local leaders at LC I and LC II is concerned, or there is a defiance of the Constitution by the NRM Government. This is a provision of the Constitution and it is clearly stated under Article 181(4) that we shall have these elections every after five years, but –(Member timed out.)

11.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Alex Onzima): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Either ministry will agree with most of the issues which have been raised by the committee. Our position is that we should strengthen the local governments, and it is done in good faith. However, allow me to make some responses to the issues which have been raised by the honourable Members of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I want to state here and now that the Government of the Republic of Uganda has no intention whatsoever to create districts without the population asking for them. If there is any district that has been imposed on the population by the Government of the Republic of Uganda, let that honourable member stand up and tell this House -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the population has been demanding for several things from this Government, including drugs in hospital, federalism and good roads. This Government has neither provided sufficient drugs in hospitals nor provided funds for roads in the districts. Is the Minister of Local Government therefore in order to tell Parliament that whatever the population asks, this Government gives immediately?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is an opinion; it does not call upon the Speaker to rule on the opinion of an honourable member. 

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, districts are population driven. I can categorically state here that in the Eighth Parliament, a Member of Parliament took Government to court because that Member of Parliament felt that the location of the proposed district then should have been within the boundaries of his constituency –(Interjections)– I have never known of any Member of Parliament or any citizen of this country who has taken Government to court because a district has to be created –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The rationale of creating districts is ostensibly to take services nearer to the people. The honourable member holding the Floor has been rather shy to make mention of Wadri who took Government to court because creation of a district and location of headquarters by Government, which in itself was illegal and opposed to the laws of this country, had to be challenged. I successful challenged it in the courts of law. I challenged Government hands-down because it was no longer addressing the issue of taking services to the people but it was distancing the services to over six miles, to the extreme end of Terego. 

Is the honourable member therefore in order to equate these matters and imply that the person who took Government to office did it without the mandate of the people, knowing very well that the creation of the district was to bring services nearer to the people and was not true in this case? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have just said that you went to court to represent the people. The minister also said that the districts are being created on request and representation of the people. I see no violation of order in this matter (Laughter)

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, it pays to have a person who is competent to sit in that seat you are occupying. Thank you very much. 

Mr Speaker, in the last one year that I have been the Minister of State for Local Government, I have traversed many parts of this country. I have visited nearly all created districts. To be specific, I have been to Dokolo, Kaberamaido, Sironko, Bugiri, to mention but a few. Where you have local governments that are well managed, you would literary see the benefits of creating districts. However, like any other country or organisation, where you do not have quality leadership, you run into problems. 

The issue we are addressing here is how to get competent leadership for the local governments. Recently, the Government of Uganda purchased road equipment which we are dispatching to the various districts – (Member timed out.)

11.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to respond to the issues that have been raised in the discussion. I will start with the Civil Service College. The committee required us to provide the land title and also to indicate the agreement with NARO. We have met that requirement and satisfied the committee that we have those documents. 

The second issue that has been raised – (Interruption)

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I am a member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Just yesterday when we were looking at the ministerial policy statement, there was an item called UMI in the last financial year with Shs 7 billion, which was actually released. When we asked about it, we were told it was for the Civil Service College and that actually it was released. Now I hear that the Civil Service College will be in Jinja.  So, can I get clarification on that matter? Is it UMI or Jinja, and what about the Shs 7 billion?

MRS PRISCA B. MBAGUTA SEZI: Mr Speaker, the issue was that we did not have a land title and the committee required us to provide that documentary evidence of a land title, which we received and handed to the committee. The Civil Service College will be based in Jinja. We were also required to give evidence that we had gone into an agreement with NARO to use their premises as we move on with the construction and refurbishing of the Civil Service College. We were able to provide that evidence, Mr Speaker.

On the second issue that was raised about the staff who are on and off the payroll, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the payroll cleaning exercise is a continuous process. Once there are issues related to individual cases, and in most cases these are individual cases, they are removed off the payroll so that the accounting officer can certify. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: I thank you very much, my sister. The clarification that I am still following up is on what hon. Xavier Kyooma asked. Shs 7 billion was given to Uganda Management Institute in the names of the Public Service Staff College. You have gone to another issue and not cleared our minds about this Shs 7 billion. We want to know where this Shs 7 billion is. Has UMI become a bank to keep it for you and that you can go and withdraw it at leisure? What has happened? That is what we want to know. I thank you very much, my sister.

MS ABABIKU: I thank you for this opportunity. I am seeking further clarification on the statement that has just been made by the minister about people whose names get off the payroll often. I want to know whether the people are informed of the exercise of the cleaning before their names get off, so that people do not wonder and many questions are not directed to us, Members of Parliament, to answer. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the time you allow for clarification is your time.

MRS PRISCA B. MBAGUTA SEZI: I thank you. I indicated that the civil servants of different categories get off the payroll because there are queries against those names. They get off the payroll and the accounting officer is actually informed, and he or she is given a transaction report that gives the reasons why this particular officer or officers have got off the payroll. This helps the accounting officers to re-access and put them back on the payroll. 

There was the issue raised on hard-to-reach –(Interjections)- I am not aware that the Shs 7 billion was given to UMI and I am not able to respond to that because for us, the money we had was for training public officers.

On the hard-to-reach areas, there is an issue that has been raised relating to specific needs for staff. Mr Speaker, we shall consider that issue. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Parliament is now performing an important constitutional duty, that of appropriation. We also want to know what has happened to monies that we have appropriated. 

Is it procedurally correct for the honourable minister to gloss over this important issue that Parliament, as the people’s representatives, wants to know about on what happened to what it appropriated, and yet here we are having them before us to beg for money? Procedurally, is the minister right to gloss over this matter and say that she is not ready to answer? Can she ask for time so that she can come and make a reply to this, even if it is at a later time? Is she procedurally right to dodge this important question? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the question was about the Shs 7 billion and what you responded was that for all you know, the money that was given was for the training of staff. Can you harmonise these two positions and then conclude?

MRS PRISCA B. MBAGUTA SEZI: As I have said, I will inquire about the issue of Shs 7 billion and report back. There has been an issue raised for special needs teachers getting into hard-to-reach areas – (Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: I thank you. The minister is the Minister of State for Public Service but on the Frontbench, there is a minister for finance –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister for Finance is going to speak, if that is the procedural issue that you are raising.

MR MAGYEZI: Yes. I wanted to find out whether it is not procedurally right for the honourable Minister of State for Public Service to inquire from the Minister for Finance so that we get the answer about the Shs 7 billion right now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister for Finance is going to speak, honourable member. Please let us respect the time.

MRS PRISCA B. MBAGUTA SEZI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. About the issue that was raised regarding the hard-to-reach allowance to also be given to those teachers for special needs, we shall look into this matter and report in the future since it has just been raised. I think those are the issues that were raised. I thank you.   

11.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I would like to thank the committee for a very good report. We have some issues with the amounts that they are praying for. We need to harmonise them before we go into the Committee of Supply. 

You have raised the issue of late release of funds. Funds are released upon request from the respective ministries, departments and agencies. At the beginning of every quarter, the Ministry of Finance gives the cash limit and it is the ministries, departments and agencies that have to requisition for this money in accordance with work plans that have been submitted. 

On very rare occasions, the ministries, departments and agencies request for releases after the first month of the quarter and when that happens, the Ministry of Finance gives them the opportunity. Should they be unable to utilise the resources within the remaining period, they are required to request for an extension and this normally is granted when considered appropriate. Any funds that are not utilised are required by the Public Finance and Accountability Act to be returned to the Consolidated Fund, and this is available for inspection and audit by anybody that is interested in doing this.

The other issue is on the funding for the local council elections. We have recognised Shs 19 billion under the Electoral Commission for the elections of LCs this financial year. 

On the councillors’ allowances, the Ministry of Local Government has submitted a request for Shs 21 billion and this has not been recognised under this financial year.

Finally, on the issue of the Shs 7 billion that is being talked about for the Civil Service College; this funding is from the World Bank and it was not spent last financial year. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to thank the honourable members for their most valuable contributions. Most of them were in support of our report and the others were policy issues which I believe have been responded to by the honourable ministers. 

I just wanted to clarify one issue which was raised by the honourable Shadow Minister for Local Government, hon. Betty Nambooze. She said the committee’s recommendations are shy. She said this is understandable because the committee is dominated by the ruling party. I believe this statement was not called for. The committee has 17 members and of these 17, only 10 are NRM. There are representatives of UPC, DP, FDC, Independents and UPDF. Even the honourable member, the Shadow Minister for Local Government, is a member of this committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for your contributions and honourable ministers for your responses to the issues raised.

The question is that the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the policy statements and budgetary provisions for the financial year 2012/2013 be adopted by this House.  I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report Adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL 2012/2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chair, you have 15 minutes. Start by laying a copy of the full report on the Table and proceed with the presentation. 

11.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Sarah Mwebaza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to your guidance, I will start by laying on the Table the report of the sectoral Committee on East African Community Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for the financial year 2012/2013. I lay it on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Proceed. 

MS MWEBAZA: Thank you. I will start by presenting the report, and I will give a summary. 

Mr Speaker, in accordance with the provisions of Article 155(4) of the Constitution and rule 177(a) and (d) of the Rules of Procedure - The report has different sections, section 1,2,3,4,5,6 and 7, which are in the main report. This report covers Vote 021, Ministry of East African Community Affairs. 

Methodology 

i) 	The committee critically examined the previous and current policy statements from the Ministry of East African Community Affairs, analysed previous committee reports and raised issues for response from the minister. 

ii)	 It also held meetings with the Minister for East African Community Affairs and Members of EALA. The meetings were held to discuss the ministerial policy statement and other matters incidental thereto. 

Performance of the Previous Budget for the Financial Year 2011/2012
The key outputs for the financial year 2011/2012 are outlined on page 2 to page 5 of the main report. The planned proposed activities or programmes are listed from page 6 to page 9 of the main report. 

I will go to the amount of funds appropriated for the financial year 2011/2012. There is a table which shows the appropriated funds for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for the financial year 2011/2012. The approved funds were Shs 15.382 billion. The release as at June 2012 was Shs 15.257 billion and the funding gap was Shs 0.125 billion.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I will go to the underfunded priorities in the financial year 2011/2012 as outlined on pages 9 to 11 of the main report: 

Uganda’s Implementation of the East African Community Common Market 

Upon the launch of the EAC Common Market in Uganda, the Ministry of East African Community Affairs developed an EAC Common Market implementation plan for Uganda. The plan identifies different areas of commitment within the Protocol with their timelines and what needs to be done to realise the freedoms and rights enshrined therein. The responsible ministry, departments and agencies to champion the different action areas are clearly spelt out. An institutional framework for realising full implementation of the Common Market is clearly spelt out from the officers’ level, through the Permanent Secretary’s level up to Cabinet level. 

The committee learnt that other Partner States are also completing their implementation programmes. The recently concluded Cabinet retreat agreed that the Minister of Finance and Economic Development should issue a certificate of financial implications for the implementation of the Common Market so that the plan is presented before Cabinet for consideration. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the current provision in the budget is nil. The total required provision is Shs 0.599 billion and the funding gap is Shs 0.599 billion. 

The committee observes that a certificate of financial implications to enable the implementation of the EAC Common Market has not been provided by the Ministry of Finance. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance should provide the certificate of financial implications to enable the implementation of the EAC Common Market and further avail the funds required. 

The Ministry of East African Community Affairs Communication Strategy 

The ministry has developed a strategy that guides the implementation of one of the ministry’s core functions, that is, sensitisation and public awareness. It targets a broad spectrum of Uganda’s population. The funds allocated every financial year to carry out this activity are inadequate; therefore, the Ministry needs additional resources to efficiently and effectively carry out sensitisation and public awareness on issues of East African Community integration. 

The current provision in the budget is Shs 0.500 billion. The total required provision is Shs 1 billion. The funding gap is Shs 0.500 billion. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Shs 0.500 billion be provided to bridge the funding gap.

Office Space

The committee was informed that office space has also emerged as another challenge. As a way forward, there will be need to acquire more space on Postal Building due to an increase in staff levels. It is also important to note that even the current budget allocation for rent is insufficient for the existing office space. More so, the terms of payment of rent require that payment is done in US dollars, which currently is greatly affected by the fluctuation of the exchange rate.  

The committee learnt that the arrears for financial year 2011/2012 amount to Shs 0.170 billion and the cost of the extra floor is Shs 0.193 billion. The total funding gap is Shs 0.246 billion. The current provision in the budget is Shs 0.333 billion and the total required is Shs 0.579 billion. Therefore, the funding gap is Shs 0.246 billion. 

The committee further observed that the ministry requires more space for rent yet they already have rent arrears of Shs 0.17 billion. The committee therefore recommends that Government should desist from renting office space and either mortgage or acquire a permanent home for the ministry. 

The Government of Uganda Development Budget

The committee was informed that an allocation of Shs 200 million under the Government of Uganda budget, which facilitates the ministry in acquisition of office furniture, office equipment and transport equipment, is inadequate. The increasing number of staff necessitates an increase in demand for these facilities.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the current provision in the budget is Shs 0.400 billion. The total required is Shs 0.500 billion, leaving a funding gap of Shs 0.100 billion. The committee therefore recommends that Shs 0.100 billion be provided. 

Financing of Uganda’s Attendance of East African Community Meetings through Travel Abroad 
Mr Speaker and honourable members, travel abroad is a core activity for the ministry since negotiations at the regional level are by consensus. Within the next financial year, the East African Community will be chaired by Uganda. This implies that the ministry shall be represented by more officials than usual. In summary, the commitment arising from the expanding scope of cooperation and the chairing of all East African Community meetings and processes implies that the resource requirements for travel abroad will increase. 

The current provision for this item in this budget is Shs 0.842 billion. The total requirement is Shs 1.342 billion and the funding gap is Shs 0.500 million. The committee recommends that allocation of more funds amounting to Shs 0.500 billion to this budget item should be done.

The summary of the budgetary provisions, amount required and total funding gap is as follows: Total current provision in the budget is Shs 2.075 billion; the total required provision is Shs 4.020 billion; and the funding gap is Shs 1.945 billion. 

Mr Speaker, the committee made some general observations and recommendations found on pages 11 to 22 of the main report as follows:

Appointment of the Minister of State for East African Affairs

The committee notes with appreciation that the Minister of State for East African Affairs has been recently appointed. This has elevated Uganda to a similar level with other Partner States that already had ministers at the East African Community. The committee is optimistic that if approved, this appointment will expedite and strengthen the functionality of the ministry.

Since I am left with little time, I will not go into detail on the rest of the observations. The second observation is on impact and benefits of the integration. The third observation is on laws/policies that require harmonisation with the laws passed by the Parliament of Uganda. I will talk about this one. 

The committee noted that there are a number of laws and policies that have been passed at a regional level that require harmonisation with the laws that have been passed by the Parliament of Uganda. The ministry informed the committee that these laws are to be laid before the House by the minister. 

The committee went ahead and had meetings with Members of EALA. The list of laws, which are supposed to be laid on the Floor or to be harmonised with the laws of Uganda, are found on page 13 of the main report. A table indicating the status of other laws is on page 13 and 14. 

Mr Speaker, the EALA-Uganda Chapter met with the committee and informed the committee that they enacted 34 laws. These are listed in the main report as Annex 1, for information of members. 

According to Article 65 of the Treaty, the minister is supposed to table these laws and protocols adopted by the Council Of Ministers on the Floor of Parliament. Therefore, the committee recommends that the ministry should adhere to the provisions of this Article and presents and tables all relevant debates of the meeting to the Parliament of Uganda.

Funding Gap of EAC

Mr Speaker, we were informed by the EALA members that the EALA meetings depend on donor funding, which is up to 72 per cent. The committee observed that the over dependence on donor support compromises the autonomy of the EAC, compelling the Partner States to serve donor interests ahead of the interests of the people of East Africa. 

We, therefore, recommend that the Minister of East African Community Affairs should urge the Council of Ministers to revise contributions by Partner States upwards in order to desist from relying heavily on donors. 

Sensitisation about the EAC Integration

The committee made observations on this. The committee went on to recommend that the ministry should enhance its sensitization programme targeting different sections of the public. The ministry should further involve the Members of Parliament and the EALA-Uganda Chapter MPs in order to broaden the level of awareness.

Existence of Non-Tariff Barriers

The committee recommended that the ministry should coordinate with other relevant agencies to eliminate non-tariff barriers at border posts and along other trade routes. 

Status of the Formulation of the National Policy on the EAC Integration 

This has affected the integration in Uganda. The committee recommended that the government expedites the formulation of the National Policy on EAC Integration to serve as a reference point in the implementation of the EAC integration agenda in Uganda. 

Challenges/ Fears in the EAC Political Federation. 

These challenges and fears are given in the report. The committee recommended that the ministry should update Parliament about the findings of the team constituted to study the fears, challenges and concerns of the EAC political federation. 

The following are the proposed allocations for vote 021, Ministry of East African Community Affairs: 

    • Recurrent Expenditure - Shs 19,091,090,919
    • Development Expenditure - Shs 480,000,000 

The total is Shs 19,571,090,919.

I now move that Parliament approves the estimates of Vote 021, Ministry of East African Community Affairs of recurrent expenditure, Shs 19,091,090,919; development expenditure, Shs 480,000,000; a total of Shs 19,571,090,919. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Honourable members, the issues are clear as exposed by the chairperson of the committee. I was going to propose that we allow the shadow minister, if you are ready, to make a comment on this and then allow the minister and then take a decision on this matter. These matters are quite straightforward. 

MR GUDOI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Chair of the East African Affairs Committee. Madam Chair, I have seen Annexure II but I am failing to correlate it with the report. Could you throw more light so that I can move at the same pace with you? 

12.15
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My comment is from page 5, 4.1 (c), the supplementary appropriation that was not granted to the tune of Shs 1. 84 billion; this was specifically Uganda’s contribution to the East African Community Secretariat. Bearing in mind the importance we are giving the East African Community, I would have expected this amount, which was supposed to be a contribution but was not honoured in the supplementary, to have appeared in the arrears on page 6. 

When you look at the figure for arrears, it seems to be less than the amount that was requested for. When you relate it to what is budgeted for on page 8 (e), the Shs 4.89 billion seems to be the annual contribution for this year, meaning that the arrears are not remitted. Now, bearing in mind that we are the country chairing the Assembly, are we safe? Why wouldn’t we be a good example by clearing these contributions in form of arrears? 

12.16
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make my contribution in form of a clarification from the Minister. Mr Speaker, on page 19 and 20, the committee makes several recommendations concerning the teaching of Swahili in this country. It has also been observed that Uganda is lagging behind the rest of the East African countries in the use of Swahili. If you visit the other countries in the region, you find that the Parliaments there deliberate in both English and Swahili. 

Article 6 (2) of our Constitution provides that Swahili shall be the second official language in our country. However, it goes on to add that Parliament may by law prescribe how it shall be used. I wonder why the Ministry of East African Affairs has not come up with a Bill for Parliament to come up with an Act of Parliament about the use of Swahili. Before we come up with recommendations like these ones, that starting from 2016 Swahili shall be taught in primary schools up to P.4, shall be taught in technical colleges, in universities and then we shall have a national Kiswahili council, I am of the opinion that we should start with the Act. After the Act, we can then come up with these institutions. 

Secondly, there are some communities in Uganda, for example, here in Buganda, where Swahili is viewed as a language of violence. The only words we know here in Swahili are words of violence like “tooka”, “ntapiga wewe”, “lala chini”, “fungua mulango”, “toa pesa”- (Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank my sister, hon. Nambooze, for giving way. I come from the region she has talked about and in no way have we taken a stand that this is a language of violence. So, is it in order for hon. Nambooze to say that the people of this region are violating the Constitution and even imposing her own imagination on all of us from this region? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the point of order is not understood by the Chair. The honourable member shall conclude. 

MRS BAKIREKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise guidance you have given this Parliament. What I was trying to emphasise is that we need to popularise Swahili as a language. We know where we have come from as a country and we know where we would like to go. If we are to teach our children, if my children are to be taught Swahili, they should first be made to understand that it is not a language for the Army, Police and people who come to terrorise them at night. That is my opinion, Mr Speaker, and I think I am entitled to it. 

We are saying that as we integrate with the other countries in the region, are we moving together, as Ugandans, towards integration? Recently, when I was in my constituency, somebody asked me why we had decided to elect hon. Margaret Zziwa the Speaker to replace Rt Hon. Kadaga. People did not know that they were electing the Speaker for EALA. People do not know the roles and duties of the EALA MPs. They are not recognised in different fora; they are not even invited. How can they go to some constituencies, participate in communities to make people realise that we are moving towards integration as East Africa.

Lastly, can we successfully integrate as a region without solving the challenges we are facing as individual countries? I know the transport minister might not like this one also, but –(Member timed out.)

12.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Oryem Okello): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report well prepared, and I thank the chairperson for articulating it very well. The East African Community is a very important entity. The Government of Uganda has a substantive minister in charge of the East African Community and is doing everything possible to sensitise Ugandans on what the community stands for. It also works hard in implementing the policies and projects that the Community stands for. We urge the country to take advantage of the Community as a market which provides well over 200 million people access to those who want to trade.

The matter of Kiswahili as a language is one that is in progress. The ministry responsible for bringing a Bill or a policy in line for Kiswahili to be taught in educational institutions is the Ministry of Education. We work together with them, and we also work together with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which is responsible for the council involved in this subject matter. 

Kiswahili is a disciplined language. I speak very fluent Kiswahili myself because I made the effort to learn it. There is no reason why somebody should not make an effort to learn Kiswahili just as we did when learning English. Kiswahili is a disciplined language in a sense that the discipline you see in the Army, the Police and other security forces is because they use it as a medium of communication. 

I urge everybody in this country to make the effort to learn Kiswahili. The Ministry of Education is soon bringing a Bill here so that all our educational institutions begin teaching Kiswahili. I am sure that in a few years’ time, we will all be speaking Kiswahili. I do not believe what my shadow colleague was saying, that Kiswahili is a language used for violence. 

On the sensitisation and awareness needed for people to become aware of what the East African Community stands for, this is not unique to Uganda; the entire region is making effort to sensitise people on what the Community stands for right up to the grassroots. We implore our EALA MPs to always make an effort to traverse the country and create awareness whenever they are back in the country. This will enable more and more people to get to know the advantages of joining the Community. The East African Community is so attractive that we even look forward to South Sudan joining it soon so that they can take advantage of being a member of this unique organisation. 

As I earlier said, the President has named a Minister of State for the East African Affairs. I hope that this will enhance the efficiency of that ministry as he assists the Minister. (Member timed out.)

12.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Sarah Mwebaza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Gudoi wanted clarification on Annexure II of the report. This annexure represents the schools that were visited by the officials from the Ministry of the East African Community Affairs and they formed Kiswahili clubs to promote the language and also sensitise the students about the integration.

Honourable members, thank you for your attention and contributions. I request that the Ministry of Finance fills the funding gaps in the Ministry of the East African Community Affairs since a lot of things are at stake and the funding gap is big. I request this House to approve the report of the committee, which has got the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates. I beg to move.

12.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We agree with all the figures that the committee chairperson has requested for approval. (Applause) The arrears contribution of Shs 1.71 billion has been paid under this financial year.

Finally, on the issuing of a certificate of financial implication on the East African Community Common Market, we received it and we have replied to the ministry responsible. We indicated that once funds are available, it will be handled appropriately. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the question is that the report of the sectoral Committee on East African Community Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the Ministry of the East African Community Affairs, financial year 2012/2013, be adopted by this House. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report Adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL 2012/2013

12.30
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Sam Lyomoki): Thank you, Mr Speaker. During the first session, the Ninth Parliament decided to unbundle the Committee on Social Services to specifically create the Committee on Health that would enable Parliament to provide effective oversight to the health sector and thereby enhance the quality and quantity of health service delivery to the citizens of Uganda. This is the first report of the Committee on Health in accordance with the Rules of Procedure.

Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the main report of the committee. This committee handles a total of 22 votes that include: 

    • Vote 014 - the Ministry of Health headquarters; 
    • Vote 161 - Mulago Referral Hospital; 
    • Vote 162 - Butabika Referral Hospital; 
    • Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute; 
    • Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute; 
    • Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Services; 
    • Vote 116 - National Medical Stores; 
    • Vote 134 - Health Service Commission;  
    • Votes: 163-176, Regional ReferralH 
    • Votes: 501-851, Local Governments - Primary Health Care.  

Mr Speaker, the terms of reference of this committee are clearly spelt out on page 4 and the methodology of work is also on the same page of the main report.

The committee, in handling the policy statement of this sector, looked at the key challenges affecting health service delivery in Uganda. These were identified as being crucial: 

1. 	The first one is inadequate health workers. There are disturbing statistics in terms of the doctor to patient ratio, nurse and midwife to patient ratio and others. This staff shortage has been compounded by absenteeism and inability to retain critical cadres even when health workers have been recruited. 

2. 	This is coupled with poorly remunerated and de-motivated health workers. This has resulted into health workers transferring their services to neighbouring countries, moonlighting or taking up other jobs, absenting themselves from work and to some extent, stealing medicines and being rude to patients.

3. 	There is an additional challenge of inadequate plans and salaries to attract, motivate and retain super specialists to provide specialised health services in specialised health units such as the Uganda Cancer Institute and the Uganda Heart Institute.

4. 	Health facilities in the districts, some of which are of questionable quality, which were constructed with huge sums of money with the aim of bringing health services closer to the people and to decongest referral hospitals, remain non-functional because there are no health workers to man them.

5. 	Underfunding of the referral hospitals leading to dilapidation of health facilities and equipment, and an inadequate maintenance budget to service even donated equipment and buildings, leading to the functional capability of these referral hospitals being dead.

6. 	Underfunding of the health sector.

7. 	A big proportion of the health budget being supported by donors. 

8. 	Marginalisation of disease prevention and health education promotion with a lot of focus on treatment and curative services. 

9. 	A seeming failure by the sector to implement even clearly workable health interventions with the result that a high number of mothers die giving birth. There is a very huge burden of preventable diseases and deaths mainly caused by malaria, HIV/AIDS and TB. 

There are many other challenges that are enumerated in the report such as quack doctors, mismanagement of funds in health projects and programmes, challenges of deployment, placement and efficient supervision and others. Mr Speaker, the challenges are clearly enumerated in the report. 

The committee noted that at the beginning of the budget process this year, the committee had recommendations that were passed to the government. There was a total of 18 recommendations which were enumerated and which are clearly spelt out on pages 6-12. However, the committee notes with disappointment that all these recommendations were never taken up by the Executive. I just want to comment on two; the rest are clearly enumerated in the report. 

The first one is the issue of ill-motivated health workers. The committee observes that the ministry had continually highlighted the inadequate and ill-motivated human resource as a key binding constraint to the health sector in general but also specifically, the cause for the shortfall on seven out of eight PEAP indicators. 

Further still, the health facility deliveries dropped in 2011/2012 to 30 per cent compared to 33 per cent of the previous year. This was due to human resource gaps, and 16 pregnant mothers continue to die every day due to preventable causes.

Routine expanded programme on immunisation coverage was declining due to non-functional outreaches as health workers are inadequate to conduct these outreaches. Uganda is now among the worst 10 countries with the lowest immunisation coverage in the world.

Efforts to construct, rehabilitate and equip lower level facilities without a simultaneous increase of the financial remuneration as well as a concentration of skilled, motivated and supervised health workers continued to result into wasted investment and additional white elephants. Whereas the Abuja Declaration enjoins Government to invest 15 per cent of the national budget in health, and Parliament has a standing resolution to effect this declaration, the allocation to health has been regressing. 

The committee has, for several years, consistently recommended that emergency measures be instituted to address the crisis in gross understaffing and absenteeism facing the public health sector that is impeding an effective response to critical health priorities in Uganda, including preventable maternal, new-born and infant mortality. The committee is disappointed that this recommendation seems to be ignored. This was given at the beginning of the budget process. The committee noted that this had been ignored.

The committee, therefore, reiterates that in the financial year 2012/2013, there is a must for an adequate reallocation of funds to increase the absolute number, the equitable deployment, as well as the remuneration of priority and critical cadres of health, for example, nurses, midwives and medical officers in critical areas. This is in order to insure that the national goals and targets, especially regarding reducing maternal and infant mortality, are met. 

This allocation shall go for salary enhancement of all health workers, or at the worst for enhancement of duty facilitating allowance for skilled health workers in general hospitals and health centres II, III and IV. This is to increase attraction, retention and motivation particularly in rural areas where absenteeism is highest. 

A total of Shs 260 billion should be found to cater for this unfunded priority. Any allocation to the sector without this provision shall be unacceptable to Parliament. It is a very strong view of the committee that the above mentioned provision of Shs 260 billion is the bare minimum and is critical for the functionality of health services. 

Mr Speaker, the committee noted, again, that if the above provision is not made as a new resource to the sector, the committee shall be forced to recommend that this provision be realised through a reallocation within the ministry, targeting new infrastructural works, vehicles and non-productive expenses.

Additionally, a non-practice allowance should be introduced within the next three years, initially for medical officers or doctors and gradually rolled out to the other cadres of staff, to solve the challenges arising out of health workers concurrently working in the private and public health facilities. That is dual employment. 

Mr Speaker, another recommendation, which I thought I would talk about- the others are clearly spelt out - is the one on page 9, medical treatment abroad. The committee observed that the rate of referrals for medical treatment aboard was high and costly, taking up the resources that would otherwise be invested in our health care system. Some referrals could be handled within the country if only our health facilities were equipped. 

The National Medical Board approves referrals even for cases that could be handled within. The unfortunate part is that individual Government departments hold funds for such treatment under their dockets and are quick at funding treatment abroad even if it may not be necessary. Worse still, poor Ugandans who do not fall under any department have no way of accessing these funds. There is need to tap into the resources available to departments in this respect and channel them into the health care system within the country to be rationally managed by the National Medical Board. 

The committee recommended that funds earmarked for medical treatment abroad falling under the different Government departments should be transferred to the Ministry of Health. These funds should be rationally managed by the National Medical Board so that they are accessible even by the poor patients who are not in public employment. The National Medical Board should consequently, be granted a vote status and its own funding to help it perform its tasks effectively.

As I already noted, those two recommendations were part of the recommendations that were not taken on board. That means, in this particular case, the poor people will continue not accessing the referral abroad while the people in the government departments are the ones who are able to access this fund.

The report clearly spells out, from page 12 to 18, the budget performance for the previous year. Because of time, I will not go into the details. It also clearly spells out priorities for the sector on page 18 and 19. Because of time also, I will go to the general observations and recommendations.

Infrastructural Developments 

Before I handle that recommendation, I want to note that as I have already observed, all the recommendations that had been made at the beginning of this budget process contained in this report should be taken and read as part and parcel of the recommendations-(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Five more minutes.

DR LYOMOKI: General observation on infrastructural development; the committee takes note of the strides that Government has made in improving the health service delivery in the country. The committee appreciates the achievements made in expanding health infrastructure and facilities. However, the committee observed that although  health  infrastructure  has  expanded, the  vast  majority  of  health  facilities  are  not  fully functional, lack equipment and are poorly maintained. 

The committee recommends that Government should view health services as a function of an interface among the human resource, the infrastructure, equipment and other facilities, with the human resource as the most critical and driving force. Accordingly, there is urgent need for well-motivated and facilitated health workers to provide health services in the health facilities. Otherwise, the health centres built will remain white elephants and to say the least, death traps.

Medicine Supply

The committee appreciated the improvements made in the area of medicine supply including embossment and distribution and other aspects as commented. The committee, therefore, recommends that National Medical Stores (NMS) needs to review and regularly improve the essential medicines and health supplies, basic kit to take care of emerging issues in the operating environment, disease burdens and patterns, and health facilities specific needs.

National Medical Stores should also increase its level of transparency by publishing credit lines for districts and health facilities in the media and public notice boards. The committee further recommends that National Medical Stores should always provide copies of drugs distributed to hospitals and health centres to the Members of Parliament for follow-up. 

Additionally, there should be more regular interface between NMS and other health sector administrators to pro-actively resolve administrative challenges in drug administration. There is also need to ensure that investment in drugs and other medicinal supplies optimally translates into positive measurable health impacts.

Preventive Health

The committee observed that on paper Government takes primary health care seriously but on the ground, as clearly elucidated in the 11 areas starting from page 21, the reality is different. 

    i) Immunisation

The performance in immunisation is not as anticipated, and a lot of analysis has been done on page 21. The committee, therefore, recommends that counterpart funds of Shs 7 million to attract GAVI funds should be availed. Secondly, Shs 4 billion should be availed to prioritise routine immunisation outreaches instead of expensive national immunisation campaigns. Thirdly, Shs 1.7 billion should be availed to UNEPI as its operational funds.

    ii) Malaria Prevention

The committee recommends that indoor residual spraying should be rolled out in a phased manner, region by region.

    iii) Village Health Teams (VHT)

The committee recommends that a VHT should constitute two persons. The committee further recommends that each person on the team should be paid an allowance of Shs 25,000 per month.

    iv) Less Focus on Health Promotion and Disease Prevention 

The committee recommends that disease prevention should be prioritised by the health sector. Accordingly, activities for health prevention and promotion should be heightened with corresponding progressive increase in the budgetary allocation.

    v) Marginalised Role of Health Inspection 

The committee recommends that health inspectors as a cadre of health workers should be prioritised. The ban on recruitment of health workers should be lifted to enable the recruitment of health inspectors, among other critical health workers that need to be recruited.

    vi) Reproductive Health Services 

The committee recommends that all health workers - midwives, nurses and doctors - should be well trained and skilled in the provision of family planning services. The committee further recommends that family planning commodities used by men, especially condoms and surgical kits for vasectomy, should also be procured.

The committee further recommends that training in comprehensive nursing should be reviewed in light of its disadvantage towards maternal health promotion. Training in midwifery should also be re-prioritised.

    vii) Mama Kits 

The committee was informed that URA had imposed 28 per cent tax on Mama Kits in this financial year. 

The committee recommends that Government should increase the provision for Mama Kits by ensuring that every expecting mother receives the kits. This will contribute to the increase in the number of deliveries in public health facilities. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, summarise on the conclusions.

DR LYOMOKI: The committee therefore, recommends that tax on Mama Kits should be abolished immediately to enable procurement of enough kits for all delivering mothers.

The other recommendations are on the following issues:

    • Low allocation to local governments. 
    • Health insurance. 
    • Low level of staffing and absenteeism. 
    • HIV/AIDS prevention. 
    • Low funding in the health sector. 
    • Challenges of fragmentation of health service delivery. 
    • The referral health system in Uganda. 
    • Quack nursing and paramedical schools and questionable capacity of Ministry of Education to supervise.  
    • Unregulated and unguided health practitioners and quack doctors. 
    • Poor ethics. 
    • Private wings in public hospitals. 
    • Appointment of medical specialists in management positions. 
    • Laws
    • Mismatch of sector priorities, activities and allocations. 

The recommendations of the above are clearly spelt out in the report.

The last recommendation is strategic and is important for this House. The committee, after examining the challenges faced in the health sector, came up with a conclusion that there is a crisis in the area of human resource for health. The committee is convinced that the major challenges within the health sector revolve around poor remuneration and inadequate motivation of the health sector. 

The absence of an adequate motivation package has resulted into poor attraction of doctors and midwives to public hospitals, and the situation is worse in rural hospitals; dual employment by health workers; and migration to other neighbouring countries. Without addressing the issue of health workers, whatever investment is made in the health sector shall not yield the expected results. The non functionality of health facilities, the failure to improve health indicators, the deaths of mothers and children; all these will continue under the current crisis.
 
According to WHO, a country with less than three health workers, that is, doctors, mid-wives and nurses only, per 10,000 population is regarded to be in a severe shortage of health workers to meet its health needs. Uganda has 1.5 health workers per 10,000.

The committee is of the strong view that if the crisis cannot be addressed through budgetary allocations this financial year, then in the alternative a motion to declare a “human resource for health crisis in Uganda” should be passed by this august House. This Parliamentary resolution could act as a rallying trumpet to empower and embolden other actors, other than Government, to move in and mobilise the much needed critical resources to salvage those mothers who would have been denied the right to live an additional day. To this end, the Committee on Health will be ready to spearhead the said crisis motion.

The committee, therefore, recommends and urges Parliament to address the human resource for health crisis by appropriating an extra Shs 260 billion to enhance the consolidated allowance for health workers. To enforce the implementation of this recommendation, the committee proposes that passing of the sector budget and indeed the entire budget be deferred until this matter is addressed.

In conclusion, the committee painfully recommends that without the provision of Shs 260 billion, the budget for the health sector should not be approved as it will not address the crisis of the health service delivery. 

To salvage the worsening situation, the committee recommends that recruitment of more health workers be undertaken, and secondly, the welfare of health workers be improved otherwise all the health infrastructure being invested in will remain un-functional and a waste.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move and pass this report to the House for debate. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are the figures you are recommending for us, honourable chairman? What figures? 

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, the committee came to the conclusion that the issue of resolving the crisis is important and did not go into the figures. The committee was of the view that this provision is wastage to the sector. After a debate on that particular important matter, we shall be able to debate the figures as clearly provided on pages 31 to 33. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, that is the report of the committee. I thank the chairman and members of the committee. 

12.53
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the report, the chairperson has mentioned votes 163 to 176, which are referral hospitals. One of the referral hospitals is Mubende, which also serves my constituency. This hospital had been earmarked for construction using funding from the World Bank but after all the plans were made and submitted, this hospital was struck off the list. 

Before we pass this, I want to know from the minister how he intends to fund the construction of Mubende Referral Hospital. I participated in the approval of the loan from the World Bank for the other funding from which Mubende was struck off. I want to know the circumstances under which Mubende was struck off. 

My second submission is on service delivery in the health centres. Whenever I visit health centres in my constituency at around 11.00 a.m., we do not find staff in the units. How does the ministry intend to motivate staff to begin attending to service early? 

I had earlier on proposed to Government to at least carry out a study and see what is stopping our civil servants from attending to work even when we increase their salaries. When will Government come up with a study to inform it about why civil servants are not attending to work, especially in the health sector, despite the increments in salary? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

12.56
MRS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute. I would like to join my colleague to thank the Committee on Health for the report and the recommendations. 

The committee has noted that among the key challenges affecting health service delivery in the country is marginalisation of disease prevention and health education promotion, with a lot of focus on treatment and curative services. This is true. I want to give the example of Namutumba District. When we were hit by malnutrition last year, the ministry came in with a lot of effort to make sure that children were treated. Indeed, they did it. However, at that time they did not look at what the cause was in order to handle it. I expect the ministry to come up with mid-term and long-term measures in such circumstances so as to handle the cause.

Among the priority activities, which have been mentioned, nutrition is not mentioned at all yet according to the preliminary report on the Uganda demographic household survey 2011, 33 per cent of children under five years are stunted. This is as a result of lack of awareness about better nutrition. (Member timed out.)

12.59
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Issues of health services delivery are eating up this country. I call upon my colleagues to support the committee and look for Shs 260 billion not only from the budget of the health ministry but from the entire budget.

Funding in health services has gone so low that some ethics are no longer observed in hospitals and health centres. The minister here is aware; before she became a minister, she was Executive Director of Mbarara Referral Hospital. In that district, there is a health centre called Bwizibwera Health Centre where male patients and female patients share wards, the TB patients and non-TB patients share wards, and the newly-born and pregnant mothers share a ward. All those patients are in one ward. So, I want to know from the minister the steps she is taking to provide more funding to Mbarara Local Government - if she cannot do it directly - to reverse that terrible situation. (Member timed out.)

1.00
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also wish to thank the committee for this report. 

Adding on the issues that we face in this country regarding health, I would like to mention the dilapidated structures that the health centres have in this country, and specifically in my region, Kyenjojo. I can say that over 80 per cent are housed in poor structures, and that is where the medicine is kept. In some of the health centres, the medicine is kept on the floor. Therefore, I would request that the Minister of Health at least takes charge in reaching out to all health centres in the whole country instead of sending only the district teams. They only stop at their supervision role and do not deal in construction and related activities. I request the minister to follow up on health centres and the dilapidated structures which the districts have. 

As the honourable member from Kashari was saying, the maternity wards are also poor. One mother has to wait for the other to leave a bed before she can also use it to give birth. We are still doing very badly in terms of health facilities specifically in Kyenjojo. 

I also want to know why there is understaffing in health centres yet we have a lot of graduates in the country. I also wanted to hear the committee’s stand on how the country has handled deadly diseases like Ebola and others, because I know there has been some success. We need to give credit where credit is due. 

There is also a problem of drug delivery. Drugs go for long distances; at times, I have heard complaints that by the time the drugs are delivered, they are affected by the sunshine and the heat within the cars. I want to find out if this is true and what the solution to this is. 

1.04
MR WILSON ASUPASA (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for this report. The committee has succeeded in frightening us through this report. They have actually fallen short of declaring that the Ministry of Health collapsed. 

Mr Speaker, we would like this ministry to give us some hope. If we are among the 10 worst performing countries on immunisation, where is the hope for the children of this country? Let the ministry come up with hope that something will happen.

In the budget, the ministry does not even plan to recruit health workers in the next financial year. I do not have a single doctor in a whole district. My health centre IV has had a theatre locked for the last six years. The theatre is full of cobwebs. I applied for a doctor but no one is willing to give us one. Let the minister give hope to the people of this country, especially my people.

There are preventable diseases like malaria. Through the Committee of Social Services, we visited Rwanda. Rwanda has managed to tame malaria through spraying. We have talked about spraying year in, year out; what is so hard about spraying? How can a whole country fail to spray mosquitoes? 

Mr Speaker, we have the problem of quack doctors everywhere. There are even those who call themselves professors. You find a man selling some herbs on the street calling himself professor so and so. How can we regulate these people? Because of the corrupt medical services, these people have filled the gap and they are ruining things; they are claiming everything –(Member timed out.)

1.07
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the committee for the work well done in presenting this good report. However, there are some issues that I have not seen. One is the issue of beds in hospitals. I remember last year the ministry said they would secure beds for all health centres. Up to now, there is nothing, and they have mentioned nothing in this ministerial policy statement. So, before we approve the budget, we want to see money for beds being provided to avoid people sleeping on the floor. 

The other pertinent issue they have not dealt with well is the issue of drugs. For the last one year, I have been on PAC and all hospitals that we met have issues with expired drugs. National Medical Stores gives them drugs that are about to expire, those that have two months to expire or just one month to expire. Is it the policy of the ministry to buy cheap drugs or are you getting them free from India so that you can distribute to our people?

Mr Speaker, the biggest issue we are facing now is that to do with personnel in hospitals. I will give an example of Rubirizi. With the support of donors that I invited, we have been able to construct health centres, but Government has even failed to provide a nurse. When you go to the ministry, they tell you the wage bill cannot allow them, but they are able to get money to create new districts when they cannot even recruit a single nurse. To me, that is abrogation of justice. Even if it means getting a supplementary, we are ready to support the Ministry of Health as long as it is about recruiting personnel in the hospitals. 

We also have to look at the epidemics. People are dying of typhoid in all places and it is not being counted as a major threat. My people have died of typhoid, in Mbarara people are dying, and the ministry is not bothered. Last time, the minister told us that he was giving priority to Hepatitis B, but the report is here and nothing is said about Hepatitis. When will our Government run away from donors -(Member timed out.) 

1.10
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): I thank you, Mr Speaker. My observation is that in future, we need to look at the reports of some committees before so that we can get time to analyse the issues within the report. 

First and foremost, I want to thank and congratulate the Ministry of Health for controlling Ebola in this country. The other time, we thanked Kiprotich for the gold. This time, I think we should thank the health workers for what they did for this country. I am also happy with the committee for recommending scrapping of the parking fees in the referral hospitals. 

I want to caution members to be careful with this private wing in public hospitals. I know it is somehow not good to have these private wings but we should consider the situation of our doctors in this country. Now that the health committee is a new committee of Parliament, I propose that these countries surrounding us, like Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania, should be visited by the committee to see exactly what is happening there. 

We are tired of seeing all prominent persons in this country running to the next country for treatment and yet they are in the East African Community. We need to be serious about it. Let this committee visit those countries. Yes, you are going to scrap, but they will remain doing it quietly there behind the curtain. So, this committee should be serious and go and see what is happening there. Why are we seeing our doctors moving to those areas? We want to know, and then at a later stage we can solve this problem. 

You find a whole President dying from another country – a legitimate President –(Interjections)- I am just giving an example –(Interjections)- or an MP or another person; take Malawi, for example. So we need to see what we can do especially now that this is the East African Community.

Lastly, we have health statistics. I want to ask the Minister for Health about how far they have gone with this programme. My constituency, Rukungiri Municipality, is new but we right now do not have any health centre IV. I am raising this issue because the health sub-district which we have in Rukungiri has a problem with -(Member timed out.) 

1.14
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. I have three concerns; I need to know from the minister what hospitals and health centres are to be renovated this year and in the near future. How did you select the first hospitals to be renovated? 

The other issue is to the Minister for Finance; why are we not able to reach 15 per cent of the budget support to health facilities? Is it health that has failed to budget to that tune or is it your ministry that is not willing to give the health sector up to 15 per cent of the budget?

The other problem that I realised is the question of decentralising the recruitment of the medical personnel. The problem of doctors in most hospitals, I think, would be solved if all the doctors where centralised, so that it is an issue of the central government to handle the recruitment and payment. This is because some local governments, for example Abim District, cannot motivate the doctors to stay there. We have just concluded the report of the Ministry of Local Government, which shows the incapacity of the local governments to recruit and retain. I would suggest that most of the doctors be centralised. I thank you.

1.16
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the job well done. Whatever measures we may take, whatever structures you may make, if we do not address the issue of human resource in the health sector, we are just wasting our time. Take the example of Kitagata Hospital, which is in my constituency, - one of the famous 22 hospitals - it is absolutely dilapidated, almost non functional. The human resource is 25 per cent strong as of now. There are six midwives out of 25 per cent. You hardly get a doctor; they come in but after three months, they are gone because the district that looks after the hospital cannot even afford a top-up. 

I am now tempted, together with our leaders, to say that this hospital should go back to the Ministry of Health and should be managed from the centre because the district does not have the capacity to manage this hospital. The hospital has CD4 machines, a scanning machine and a working x-ray machine, but there are no staff to operate them. There is one staff that goes around four hospitals and if you want scanning or x-ray services, you have to wait for the one day that is allocated to Kitagata Hospital. 

There is brain drain to the neighbouring country. A doctor now gets about Shs 700,000 or Shs 1,000,000 after seven years of training. Even if we implemented this 286 per cent increase – call it 300 per cent - it would be about Shs 2 million. But go across to Rwanda, a doctor will get the equivalent of Shs 5 or 8 million or set up a private clinic where he or she will get Shs 5 or 8 million. There is no way you are going to have these well trained young people in these hospitals and health units at that rate of pay. Even if it was my own child, I would find it difficult, after paying so much at university, for him to get Shs 700,000 and stay at work.

We also need to emphasise the prevention area of health - good nutrition, hygiene, sanitation and clean water. Since we cannot manage the hospitals, at least we can stem those who get sick -(Member timed out.)

1.20
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also want to join my friends in thanking the committee for the detailed report. 

I want to echo what the committee has put forward. I want to start with a point on infrastructure development. I want to agree with their observation that when you move around, you really see so many health centres, as I even mentioned the other time, but when you go down to see what is in these facilities, we actually realise that there is a lot that they require. 

In my constituency in Kween District, we have a health centre IV which has a theatre that is not functional. I belong to the Committee on HIV/AIDS. Last year, we went to some districts and the health centre in Iganga also had the same problem. There are theatres that have been constructed but are not functional. They tell us that the models that were used were not what was required. So, this theatre has been there. They told us that they were going to work on it but up to now, it is now three years and it is lying there not functional. 

I really want to call upon the ministry; as we pass this budget, we should look into this because we want it functional. Recently, there was a doctor who was posted to this health centre IV in my district but he is not working because the theatre is not functional. 

I also want to echo the matter of health workers. When you move around, there are hospitals, there are health centre IIs but when you go deeper, there are no health workers. I want to encourage Government to lift this ban so that we recruit these health workers, and we should also look at their remuneration because much as we can take drugs there, there are no people to administer these drugs. I call upon the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Finance to look into this and review the funding so that we have people working there. Like the honourable member said, we are seeing most of our professionals going to nearby countries. (Member timed out.)

1.22
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the good work done. The committee has given us recommendations but they have not given us strategies on how they are going to improve the health sector. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that there is need for an overhaul of the health sector. I do not see anything good going on with the health sector. I will give an example from my district, Buyende, where there is no doctor, there is no equipment and there are no maternity wards. I think we need an overhaul in the health sector. 

The other sectors have resisted the creation of new districts because they have seen that they cannot handle new districts. The Electoral Commission saw no reason why new districts should be created. I think we should borrow a leaf from such sectors because the health sector is facing the same problem. You find that in the newly created districts, they are not interested in providing services. In the last financial year, for example, they provided ambulances to some districts and left out others, and there is no provision to avail ambulances. 

In addition to that, UWOPA gave us a chance to move around with the health personnel to visit our districts and see how the health sector is working. Mr Speaker, I want to inform you that we had failed to go to our districts simply because the ministry had failed to provide fuel to health personnel and Members of Parliament to visit the health sectors in our districts. (Member timed out.)

1.25
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, PWD Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to add my voice in thanking the committee for the work well done. 

My focus is mainly on the orthopaedic unit in Mulago Hospital. This unit is in a very bad state. Even when Mulago Hospital was rehabilitated, that unit was never rehabilitated. It is a national referral hospital that should take care of everybody throughout the country. Production is very low and what is produced is not modern. What they produce is extremely expensive; for example, a wheelchair that cannot be folded is about Shs 300,000. My people cannot afford this. If I could ask how many Members of Parliament want wheel chairs, you will see their hands raised. The need for wheelchairs is extremely high but our people cannot afford them. 

I want to appeal to the Minister of Health; why don’t we build a bigger rehabilitation centre, where orthopaedic issues are handled in a department in that centre, so that we help our country. I invite you to go to Old Mulago wards; you may not even see any disabled person there. You will see boda boda riders who have broken their legs in accidents. This means that this unit is not only for people with disabilities. That is why I am appealing for a bigger rehabilitation unit that can help the whole country. 

Look at the Cancer Institute now and look at what happened in the past; you will note that cancer patients were not receiving sufficient support previously because it was just a department within the hospital. However, from the time it became an institute, the Cancer Institute is now supporting our patients. 

My appeal is, kindly plan for a bigger rehabilitation institute in this country. Many donors will be able to support us, so that we make modern facilities for persons with disability, including all those who may need rehabilitation. As you grow older, the patella becomes weak and you may need to replace it. You were not a disabled person but at that age, you will need to replace it. If we have a bigger and modern rehabilitation institute, this will help all of us. (Member timed out.)

1.29
MRS VICTORIA BUSINGE-RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to express my lamentations on cancer in women especially cervical cancer, although breast cancer is also a hazard. 

I had an opportunity of lobbying UWOPA to come and screen for cancer in my district. I made two radio announcements and women flocked in from Kamwenge, Kyenjojo, Bundibugyo, Kasese – we even have a recording which I can share with Parliament. Over 10,000 women came and some slept overnight in Kabarole. Instead of getting appreciation, I instead got curses from many women who had lined up and were never screened. 

It is one thing to screen for cancer but it is most important to treat it as well. I do not know why the Ministry of Health has continued treating cancer only at the Cancer Institute at Mulago. Our referrals are not equipped to treat cancer. So, even the 29 women who were screened, out of the 410, have never got treatment because they cannot afford to come to Mulago and cannot afford all other attendant expenses such as feeding, among others.  So, it is my plea that the Ministry should look at regionalising or equipping the referral hospitals with equipment to treat cancer. 

Mr Speaker, it beats my understanding because I have inquired – Right now I have a message on my phone from my district health doctor saying that a Pap smear is very easy and many nurses, if trained, can perform it even within a week. Screening for cancer would be easy, on a daily basis as women go to the hospital, if the hospitals are equipped with the chemicals, which she says can be accessed in Uganda. These women could be screened as they come for treatment.

Secondly, I do not know why the Ministry of Health cannot borrow a leaf from the Ministry of Education. Teachers are inspected on a daily basis and reports taken in order to take action on teachers and head teachers who are not performing. With health, it is as if they are free from routine inspection. So, it is my prayer –(Member timed out.)

1.31
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, District Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Health for a very good report. I have three issues to raise and I hope I will finish them in time. 

One, I think it has been Government policy to see to it that districts have district hospitals. The criterion has been that if you have a population of over 200,000, you are entitled to a hospital. There are some districts, including Koboko, which have now surpassed that population. The population of Koboko is 232,000. We also border Congo and Sudan and you cannot discriminate that this is a Congolese or this is a Sudanese and so they should not take drugs. We provide services to them and as a result, the population of people who come to get services from Koboko Health Centre IV is big. 

I have been urging the Ministry of Health and Government to provide a district hospital for Koboko District. I would like to inform you that Koboko is the only district in the West Nile without a hospital. At least Maracha has a missionary hospital but Koboko has none. Because of this population, we do not have enough services. We have two ambulances and since we are not a hospital, they cannot give us fuel. The doctors are not enough. We have theatres that are not operational because we have no trained anaesthetists, so we are not carrying out even a single operation. 

Koboko is really in dire need of a hospital. If a hospital is not forthcoming, at least you should increase the number of staff. We have had these scanning machines for the last five years lying there because we do not have the personnel to operate them and yet we need these services. Mr Speaker, I really beg Government to provide a hospital for Koboko District as an urgent issue. 

The next issue is the National Medical Stores. We, as members of UWOPA, went to see them. Medicines are very many there but the method of distribution is lacking. They distribute only once in two months and the drugs taken are not enough to cover the two months. (Member timed out.)

1.35
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I want to thank the committee for the work they have done, although they are saying that we should not pass it without the Shs 60 billion. 

I will deal with the issue of human resource. I do not know when Government will listen to the cries of the medical workers. When you look at the considerations in Government, health services are not taken as priority. If you compare the salary earned by the Executive Director of Kampala, which is about Shs 40 million, to a graduate doctor who gets Shs 700,000, then this executive director in Kampala, who is doing administrative work, can pay up to 50 doctors. So, why then do you cry that you do not have doctors? 

Secondly, I want to inform Government that all these medical workers are actually on strike. There are very many forms of strikes. Some of us are management consultants and we know this. Someone will go to the office, attend to one patient and go home. So, does the ministry know that doctors and health workers are actually on strike? You have heard many Members of Parliament lamenting - there are buildings but there are no doctors. Doctors are there but you may not see some of them because they are at their homes and you are paying them very poorly. So, why can’t you pay them and they appear?

Mr Speaker, I have a health centre IV in my constituency and they have never seen a doctor or a medical assistant. So, is it a health centre IV or III? What is a health centre IV if it does not have a doctor or nurse? Can it qualify to be a health centre IV? Can a referral hospital be one without a consultant? 

I have found that most of the consultants and specialists have abandoned their careers and profession; they are now going into management. We, on the Public Accounts Committee, have seen that most of these referral hospitals are managed by consultants, and very poorly. They know nothing in accounting but they are good in the hospital wards, but they are bringing them to do the work. 

Even the appointing authority should be looking at these ministers who they are appointing into political jobs. Why do you say that we have no doctors and yet you appoint a Minister of Health who would actually be doing something together with someone who would be doing that management? So, I am telling the appointing authority that when appointing these doctors, you should be mindful of the scarcity of these doctors. (Member timed out.)

1.38
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to say that all of us in this House agree that there is a problem with the Ministry of Health, and I am happy to see hon. Lyomoki, an activist, is now chairing this committee. I hope next time you will demonstrate within the committee and not alone. 

He is seated next to the minister and the minister is seated next to the Minister of Finance. The problem of health is finance. Why don’t we upgrade the Ministry of Health to be treated like the Special Forces, like the Presidential Unit, because it is protecting the life of the President? Why don’t we also let the Ministry of Health get that special care so that they protect the lives of our people in this country?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I want to suggest to the Minister of Health that focusing on Mulago Hospital alone is not enough. A lot of resources go to Mulago but who benefits from Mulago? While hon. Lyomoki can fly from Kampala to get better treatment abroad, my peasants in the village cannot come to Mulago, because it is equivalent to actually flying abroad. They do not know where Mulago is and they do not know which hotel they will be booked in. It is a very big complication. Therefore, we want to call upon Government to upgrade the referral hospitals, to equip the referral hospitals with capacities to handle our rural population. 

In this respect, some of us are willing and are doing lobbying abroad; we have friends abroad who are willing to ferry in equipment and other things. Can the Ministry of Health help us in this particular area, to allow this equipment come because it is coming to government health centres and government hospitals? So, hon. Omach, I hope next time this issue comes up from the Minister of Health, you will not even hesitate to waive off these taxes so that this equipment can support our people. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I have worked with the Ministry of Health on a number of areas and they have very competent staff. They are committed and they are ethical, but however ethical you are, you cannot work on an empty stomach. If your neighbour offers you a job, you will definitely go. If we continue looking at the Minister of Health – because nobody has talked about corruption. My understanding is that there is corruption in Uganda but I think that the least corruption is in Ministry of Health. (Member timed out.)

1.41
MS KEVINA TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for presenting this report. I do not know whether the problem is under the Ministry of Finance or somewhere else. As the population increases, planning should be done well. As we are adding on the number of districts, we should know that each district must have at least a hospital or a health centre IV.

We have been elevated to the level of a municipality in Busia. We are a border district and we treat people from Kenya and all over the place, but we only have a health centre IV. In that health centre IV, there is only one ward, which is shared by both men and women. We do not have a ward for the children and yet it is the children and the women who normally fall sick. I would, for that matter, like to thank UWOPA members who came to Busia and saw what is happening there. We were told that the Maama kits are free, but they are being sold. 

The major problem is that when there is an epidemic in Kenya, it easily spills over to Uganda. So we are treating people from Kenya as well. We normally do not have drugs in the health centre IV; there are no malaria drugs. The DDHS said he made a requisition of Shs 64 million for the drugs but only got drugs worth Shs 29 million in May. Since then, there are no drugs in the health centre. 

A member mentioned that much as we have scanning machines, you have to know when the operator will be in a given area, let us say, Mbale or Bugiri, so that you can go there for scanning, however minor the problem may be. I would urge that this ministry be given sufficient human resources and their salaries should be considered. Thank you very much. 

1.44
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I thank the committee for this report. However, I would like to ask a question; everybody is aware of the problems we are facing in the health sector, the solution is: how to get out of it?  

Have you looked at the example of Cuba’s health sector - how Cuba addressed the problems of health service provision and the statistics of Cuba health indicators before and after the Cuban revolution? This now goes to the Prime Minister; your revolution – the revolution of the NRM - and the revolution of the Cuban people, do they have something in common? Why don’t you borrow from the Cuban example? Cuba has the best health indicators; in Cuba, every 170 people have one doctor. In the interest of time, I suggest you find out more about Cuba.

I suggest that we do away with pride - being big – and let us kneel before Cuba and borrow doctors from there. Doctors from Cuba can work in remote areas at a lesser pay than ours. I am not saying that increment of salaries is bad for our doctors - the salaries of the doctors in Uganda should be increased - but in the current situation, let us borrow doctors from abroad. You could ask for help because Cuban doctors are being supplied to the UN. Cuba has been in a tighter situation than us. We have been receiving aid -(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Cuban situation majorly centred on primary health care, which we are recommending. In primary health care, you are talking about the human resource, - more workers on the frontline - you are not talking about drugs and infrastructure. So, they put more on promotion and those related activities.

We, as a committee, have tried to benchmark. Last year we could not because the cost of going to Cuba was high, but we have been using some of the consultants who came to Rwanda. So, the point here is the approach. Do you go for more drugs, do you go for more structures or do you go for promotion, which involves workers and other people to do this work? That is the difference with our case here.    

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for that information. What is very important are the results. Whether you come from Obongi through Gulu or you come via Arua, as long as you reach Kampala, that is what matters. We would like to improve the health indicators for our country. What the government has failed to do over all these years is to get an appropriate way of solving these health problems. 

Mr Speaker, I looked at the recommendations in the report for this year; they are not in any way different from the ones of the previous year. If you look at the previous years, they are the same as these. This means we are mark timing, wasting time as Ugandans are dying. (Member timed out.)
 
1.48
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. My main concern is on the increasing number of health practitioners in Uganda who are operating freely without being supervised. Much as they are doing good work because they have brought services nearer to the people, they are killing us. I am majorly looking at private clinics, which are more interested in making money than safeguarding the lives of the ordinary people. 

Recently, in one of the clinics in Kireka where I reside, there was a boy who had just qualified as a clinical officer and was offered a job in that clinic. This boy was exercising his professionalism, which did not amuse the owner of the clinic because he was prescribing the right dosage to the patients.  The owner of the clinic told him, “You are making little money. Why don’t you give more medicine to these people? I want a person to pay at least Shs 50,000, which is okay for me”. But because this boy is professional, he said, “No, I cannot do this; I cannot force medicine on a person just because you want to make your own money.” So, he left the clinic because he did not want to kill people. The owner of the clinic is a primary school headmaster. So, you can imagine how these clinics are being operated by non-professionals. I call upon the Ministry of Health to inspect these clinics because they are mushrooming everywhere –(Member timed out.)

1.51
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for its report. The day we passed the loan to do with maternal health from the World Bank, the whole country got excited and they had hope in this Parliament that we were concerned about the maternal health of Ugandans. 

However, when I read the report on page 11, my heart began to bleed; it says, “The Ministry reported to have gone back to the World Bank to negotiate intervention priorities out of which some of the areas identified by Parliament were not accepted.” 

I do not know what to start with; do we first receive resources before we negotiate or what do we start with? In fact, I feel that whoever negotiated this loan should apologise to the country because we are not seeing value for money as of now. The committee says they need monitoring and updates but there is no progress, so far, registered. What are we telling the country, when mothers are dying? A lot needs to be done. 

On this note, I want to disagree a little with my brother, hon. Okumu, who says there is no corruption in the Ministry of Health. When it comes to the social health insurance scheme, they are reporting that Shs 1.8 billion could not be accounted for and Shs 1.7 billion that was appropriated has never been traced or accounted for; Where did it go? The health minister, why can’t you explain to Members? What is the money we are dispersing doing? 

When we move to planned activities for 2012/2013, I do not see Iganga and Bugiri hospitals appearing, yet we were told that we had gotten resources for upgrading on page 18. Iganga Hospital has been enlisted on several occasions. It is strategically located; it is on a highway; and it handles so many cases and also handles 10 districts. In fact, it is a self-styled referral hospital, but –(Member timed out.)

1.54
MR JOHN BRIAN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues who spoke before in thanking the committee for giving us an elaborate report, which in any case is representative of a sick health sector, whose revamping can only come if we attract finances. I am happy that the health committee this time round – although they have come up with similar recommendations like those of last financial year – this time, they are tagging the approval of this budget on conditionalities. And we have two issues in need of a thorough explanation, short of which, like the committee recommends, we shall not have a way forward as far as approval of this budget is concerned. 

The committee observes on page 29 that, “Without addressing the issue of health workers, whatever investment made in the health sector will not yield…” And towards the end, the chairperson reported that, “If we do not appropriate Shs 260 billion to this sector to address this issue, we should not pass this budget.” I, therefore, demand that the Minister of Finance, who is here, stands up and clarifies to this House whether this money is available. If it is not available, then we pass the committee recommendations as they are. 

Time and again, we have spoken about the issues of salaries and human resource that are instrumental in the health sector and we have always come here only to leave it hanging. No wonder somebody said we are here marking time.

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether the Health Sector Strategic Plan is still being followed. I am happy that the current Minister of Health came from management of a referral hospital. The other time we were lamenting because we thought those who were at the helm of management of the health system did not have practical knowledge of whatever pertains to the health sector. Now that we have a minister who has been part of the management of this sick situation; Can she tell us whether Government is still implementing the Health Sector Strategic Plan? Is Government still going by the health sub-district management? As I speak now, we are adding on more constituencies, but the initial plan was to have a health sub-district for every constituency. But today we seem to have run away from that. Unless that is alluded to, I will back the committee recommendations to the effect that if Shs 260 billion cannot be found, then all of us should unanimously agree that we leave approval of this sector’s budget pending –(Member timed out.)

1.58
GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI (NRM, East Moyo County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before the Prime Minister came in, I had already asked you to ask a question – which I think may not contradict anybody or even the Prime Minister. And that I am going ahead to ask the committee chairperson, as they were deliberating to reach that decision, whether they have taken into account the effect of their recommendation? If so, why didn’t they tell the House that much as they are making that recommendation, the following are the effects of their decision so that the House is given two options; that if you pass this recommendation, these are the effects on innocent people who are expecting attention in all the hospitals in this country. 

As the Member of Parliament representing workers, you come and say, “Do not pass the Ministry of Health vote.” That to me will have very far-reaching consequences, whether the minister is aware or –(Interjections)– if they discussed, why didn’t they tell us? And if they did not, why didn’t they discuss?

2.00
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am holding the position of the Shadow Minister of Health, who is not in here today. But before I say anything related to that docket, I am glad that the Members in this House have now seen the reality in their constituencies. So, they have had eyes to see what is happening in their constituencies – the issues we have been talking about on this Floor. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, before I forget, what really touches me is when I see on TV and in the papers, advertisements on children who have got holes in their hearts, and appeals to the public to donate so that these children are sent either to Kenya, South Africa or India for treatment, and moreover we have a Ministry of Health. And the Ministry of Health sponsors people who are able to go for private treatment. Why can’t Government come to the rescue of these unfortunate Ugandans? They are Ugandans and they pay taxes. Why can’t Government take up these children who have got holes in their hearts, brain damage - Ugandans who cannot afford treatment?

Mr Speaker, I have got a reply of the Shadow Minister of Health which is about 18 pages, but I will not be able to go through everything. I will just pick out a few issues highlighted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we discussed that issue at length yesterday. What you are speaking about is the report of the committee not some reply from someone. Please.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: No, but as a shadow ministry, we have got to make a reply.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we discussed that at length yesterday. You were not here. So, do not take us back there. We are discussing the report of the committee now.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I will talk about the health sector, Mr Speaker. The health sector policy arena is highly guided by different policies developed over time for the delivery of services that include the national health policy, the national health sector strategic plan and now, in its third phase, an overall national development plan. 

The main challenges in the Ministry of Health 

Whereas the sector challenges differ from one area in Uganda to another, there are common challenges that have bogged the health system under the NRM Government and which the NRM Government has failed to fix. 

The remuneration of health workers still remains a big challenge and has led to substantial brain drain, causing the doctor to patient ratio of one doctor to 24,725 patients. You can imagine! What is the problem? We have got doctors, but they are in South Africa. They are in Namibia. They are in Rwanda, and they are in Kenya. They are in Botswana, And for these ones who remain here, are attending to 24,725 patients per doctor. Those are doctors. 

Midwives

One midwife attends to 11,000 women who are to deliver. Can you imagine? We have got all these people and we have got money, and yet we see money being stolen left and right. Why can’t we pay our health workers so that they deliver health services to our people? Ugandans are very bright people. Everybody knows that. But they keep going away. You can imagine a doctor getting Shs 700,000 and his rent is Shs 500,000 a month. Rent alone for just a two-bedroomed house is Shs 500,000. What about feeding? What about dressing? What about his family? And how do you expect that doctor to remain in Uganda? He will go off to Rwanda and get $2,000. He will go to Namibia and get $4,000. 

These are some of the issues we should address. The health sector is very important to Ugandans. If we did not have money, this would have been a different issue. But the money is there but it is being stolen. It is quite important that we fund these people so that they remain in the country. 

The wage shortfall that Government talks about - the budget, the money given to the Ministry of Health -(Member timed out.)
 
2.05
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will begin by saying that the Ministry of Health in particular, but the Government of Uganda in general, has hope for this country. (Applause) I want to say that we have had tremendous achievements in the past years. 

First, our maternal mortality rate has reduced from 505 in the 1990s to the current 310 per 100,000 live births. This is more than 40 percent reduction and this puts us on top in all the East African countries. We are the lowest in maternal mortality rate -(Interjections)

Two, we have also had reduction in infant mortality rate from 122 to the current 54 per 1,000 live births. This is also more than 45 percent reduction and this is a great achievement for my ministry.  

We also have achievements in the area of immunisation. Our coverage of immunisation improved from 42 percent in 2006 - (Interruption) 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Can the honourable minister tell this House how many women die when they are delivering instead of just jumping ahead to tell us what you have achieved because -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Order, because she jumped on and she is not telling Ugandans how many women die every day when they are producing. Is she in order?

THE DEPPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, proceed.

DR ONDOA: I would like to respond to the shadow minister that this maternal mortality rate means the number of women who die per 100,000 live births. (Interjections) 

I want to also say that we have improvements in immunisation coverage. Our immunisation coverage for DPTC is now 72 percent and in the recent immunisation mop-up campaigns, we were able to achieve over 90 percent coverage in Measles, in Polio and other immunisable diseases. 

Our country is getting more funding from the GAVI Alliance and beginning this year, we are going to introduce the Pneumococcal vaccine for all children in Uganda. Next year, we will also be able to introduce Rota virus for diarrhoeal diseases and also the Human Papilloma virus Vaccine for Cervical Cancer. This is a great achievement for this country and I am happy to announce this. (Applause)

We have also had a great improvement in management -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, I have made clarifications on this subject many times. The decorum of the House requires that if you are cheering a Member - honourable minister, please sit - you are allowed to stamp your foot at the wooden panel behind your seat. Clapping of hands is prohibited. Clapping of chairs is even worse! (Laughter) Honourable minister, proceed.

DR ONDOA: Our fourth area of achievement in the Ministry of Health is in the area of handling epidemics. The World Health Organisation and the Centre for Disease Control have applauded the Ministry of Health and the Uganda Government in the recent handling of the Ebola outbreak. And because of that, we have also been asked to go and help with the Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo. This is because of the capacity we have built over the years in this country. We are able to handle the outbreaks and we were able to confirm the virus within the country. The laboratory we have now is one of the state of the art laboratories in East and Central Africa. This is a great achievement for us.

I also want to make general comments, but first the recommendations in the report. I received this report just this afternoon and I have not had enough time to make the written responses, but I will make that in due course.

The Ministry of Health budget for the headquarters as recommended in the report projects that those allocations clearly are not only for the health headquarters. Out of a budget of Shs 844 billion, only Shs 13.1 billion is for the Ministry of Health headquarters, which translates to only four percent of the total health budget. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two minutes to wind up.

DR ONDOA: Thank you. Issues of human resource for health and dilapidated health facilities, underfunding and others came up. I would like to inform the House that according to the Health Sector Strategic Plan and Investment Plan of 2006 to 2014, we now construct health facilities according to population size and not according to districts, and this information will also be available to you shortly.

Secondly, we are now embarking on improving the existing health facilities other than making new constructions. Our main aim is to make the existing facilities all functional so that before we make new constructions, these old ones are more utilised.

The improvements of health facilities that we have in this financial year 2012/2013 include hospitals along the highways and also the health centre IVs that serve these hospitals. Two of the regional referral hospitals including Mubende are among these and one of the honourable members asked why Mubende was scrapped off. Mubende benefits from JICA which is a Japanese International Agency and as I talk now, one block in Mubende Hospital which is meant for improvement of the out-patients facility for emergency care and for reproductive health facility is completed by JICA. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you wanted to raise some issue before I call Finance.

2.14
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought I would raise a matter that is very important in order to make sure that the motion or the debate we have is within the ambits of the law.

Of course, we appreciate the fact that we have very limited time to conclude this debate and, therefore, we have quietly on our side accepted that even when we receive reports before the debate, we will go ahead and debate. Ordinarily, we should receive the reports, read them and respond comprehensively. 

What happens in Parliament is that when we are talking about the budget, it is a combination of what I could call technicality and democracy; the democracy here in Parliament and the technicality from the technical officers so that we have clear answers to certain questions. But because of the time limit, we appreciate what is happening.

I am rising on a point that I hope can cure what I see as a defect in this debate now relating to recommendations of the committee, because the committee is recommending that the provision for Ministry of Health be raised by Shs 260 billion. When I look at our Rules of Procedure, rule 113, and the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 93, it appears to me that this recommendation actually offends those provisions. Of course, the Constitution is very clear that, Parliament shall not without the consent of Government debate; it shall not consider, it shall not proceed upon a Bill or a motion that in effect imposes taxation or a charge on the Consolidated Fund unless as rule 113 clearly states -(Dr Lyomoki rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you will have an opportunity to respond as chair, please.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: As rule 113 sub-rule (2) states, “Unless introduced on behalf of Government, the House shall not proceed upon a motion the effect of which would be that...” So, if Mr Speaker, you are inclined to that interpretation of the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure, I thought that the only way we could cure this is - even if we took note of the good points which the committee is making to remove that additional requirement of Shs 260 billion, and then we debate the rest of the report - because as the minister nearly told you, if she had not been caught by time, she would be presenting to Cabinet a Cabinet memorandum on the question of remuneration for health workers. So, this is not the way to handle it. We will handle it the right way, which is, she will come to Cabinet, Cabinet will consider this then we will come to Parliament. 

My recommendation, therefore, is that we remove that which renders the debate and this motion defective so that we go on with the good report, pass the budget and we will come back to Parliament as an Executive precisely to handle the question of welfare, especially the remuneration of staff. Thank you.

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. This year’s budget totals to about Shs 11.3 trillion and the requests we received from ministries, departments and agencies exceeded this by over Shs 1 trillion. We requested each of the ministries, departments and agencies to prioritise within what was available, and the Ministry of Health has been allocated slightly in excess of eight percent of this, and the prioritisation has been done by them.

We pray, as the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has also indicated that we pass this report of the committee and we harmonise the issues dealing with the allocations during the committee of supply stage. We have given what  we have, and because of too much pressure from various areas, we are not able to handle this for everybody, as the partnering agencies and ministries would want –(Interruption) 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you minister, for giving way. I stand on a point of clarification. We appreciate the role of the ministry in the process of providing money and in the process of getting money through taxation. But I am begging for a clarification from the minister regarding the recent imposition of a 28 percent tax on Mama Kits and the reflection it gives about the health care system of the country regarding what we are trying to improve. Thank you.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, this issue was raised by one of the Members of Parliament about the 28 percent tax on Mama Kits; 10 percent in excise and 18 percent on VAT. This happens to be an issue of the East African Community Management Act and we as Government are handling this at that level to ensure that these are not taxed. We received a letter from the Minister of Health in this regard and we are responding to it, but the baseline is that all items under the Mama Kits which are medical will not be taxed, but for any other which could easily fall under other areas, we will have to look at it and ensure that they are exempt like all others which are under the Ministry of Health.

We have also, in regard to issues which were raised by hon. Reagan Okumu, that pertain to importation of equipment; where they are taxable, we have made non-revenue tax within the budget so that they are paid for and the people who are importing do not have to suffer from taxation. 

We take serious concern about health issues as the Prime Minister has indicated. Where there is need for further consultation at Cabinet level, we shall do the needful. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman, you have one minute to make a final statement and ask the House to take a decision. One minute.

2.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Sam Lyomoki): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, the comments made by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister about the Rules of Procedure, rule 113 do not apply to the budget because if you look at Article 155(4) of the Constitution, the question is very clear that, “At any time before Parliament considers the estimates of revenues and expenditures laid before it by or the authority of the President, an appropriate committee of Parliament may discuss and review the estimates and make appropriate recommendations to Parliament.”

If we take the view point of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are going to take away the powers of the Parliament to review the budget and scrutinise it. Reviewing of the budget is not a mere ritual where you just come here and get a rubber stamp. I think reviewing of the budget means that Parliament has a right to make certain changes within the budget because we are not saying we are going to bring in additional monies; we are saying within the budget, we cut from whatever department. I think it would be suicidal for Parliament to pursue the line that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is raising. 

I take cognisance of the comments of my sister, the honourable minister. Definitely, there have been improvements and the committee recognises that, but in terms of maternal mortality, we had a decline, but it has started rising. Clearly, right now as we talk, we have been here for the last four to five hours. Already, every two hours, we have three mothers dying. Already, six mothers have died -(Interjections)- because of our effect here and they are dying – eight percent dying from preventable causes. These 6,000 mothers who are going to die this year have hope that this Parliament will do something for them. [HON. MEMBER: “Here, here, tell them.”] Clearly, honourable colleagues, why should we sit here and do nothing while people die? 

I know we took a decision to put more money in infrastructure, roads and energy, but the 6,000 mothers who are looking at us will not even have hope of using those roads -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. [HON. MEMBERS: “Let him finish, one more minute.”] Honourable members, how many Speakers do we have in this House? (Laughter) 

Mr chairman, thank you very much. Article 155(4) is clear. This Parliament has the mandate to review the budget but also, Rule 143 is clear about what happens when we come to the Committee of Supply. This process we are engaged in leads us to the final moment when we do the supply; and the rules are clear; you can only reduce. If by reduction you have been able to generate some money somewhere within the budget, possibly you can think of reallocating it somewhere. But the rule is clear that when you are at Committee of Supply, you can move a motion to reduce a particular vote by a stated amount of money. So, the rules are clear. We are not going outside the rules. I would not be presiding over a process which violates the rules.

The question, honourable members, is that the report of the parliamentary Committee on Health on the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Health Sector for the Financial Year 2012/2013 be adopted by this House. I put the question.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

Honourable members, this House is suspended to 3.30 p.m. to continue with business.

(The House was suspended at 2.28 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.45 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome back. We are doing very well in terms of time and coverage of business. Next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

3.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Stephen Kasaija Kagwera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our report is ready. However, because of limited time, I have a summary and I beg your indulgence. If Members want to follow, I have one of the members of the committee to guide them through the bigger report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairman, you would start by laying a copy of the bigger report on the Table.

MR KASAIJA KAGWERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Ministerial Statement and Budget Estimates for the Tourism, Trade and Industry Sector for the financial year 2012/2013. 
Our mandate is from Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and the Rules of Procedure, Rule 177(a) and (d). 

The Scope

We cover: Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Vote 110 - Uganda Industrial Research Institute; Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards; Vote 022 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage; and Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board. 

The report covers the sector mandate, the budget performance, sector achievements, planned activities, funds requested and the committee’s observations and recommendations. 

Mr Speaker, I will start with the budget performance, 2012/2011. The tables are in the main report and I hope Members are able to follow. On the performance, the committee recommends that in future, special consideration should be given to areas mentioned in the budget. The proposed budget is another item. 

Then, we look at the different agencies, observations and recommendations on each of the agencies. One is the UDC, Uganda Development Corporation. The committee notes that Government paid heed to the recommendation of Parliament to revive the Uganda Development Corporation as the investment arm of Government and transferred Shs 15.55 billion for the three projects of Soroti Fruit Factory, Luweero Fruit Processing Factory, and Kalangala Infrastructure Project. 

However, there are some pending issues still standing in its way to fully revive it, such as legality of the corporation. According to the advice of the Attorney-General, as quoted from section 13(1) of the interpretation Act, it provides that “Where a statutory instrument revokes another statutory instrument, the revocation does not revive anything that is not in force or existing at the time of revocation.” 

Therefore, the revocation of number 43 of 2011 cannot revive the Uganda Development Corporation Act since it was repealed under section 35 of the Act. 


The committee recommends that due to the above advice from the Attorney-General, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should take the advice and expeditiously start the process and seek the approval of Cabinet for a Bill to be drafted to revive Uganda Development Corporation.

The other issue is on tax on imported sugar. The committee notes that in the last financial year, there was a shortage of sugar supply in the country by the manufacturing factories due to various reasons, among them, the closure of some factories for routine maintenance. Government then through the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives licensed some interested traders to import sugar duty-free and, therefore,  placed an 100 percent temporal tax exemption on imports of sugar allowing 40,000 metric tonnes of sugar into the country, which reduced the price of sugar from more than Shs 7,000 to Shs 2,800 per kilogramme. 

However, the committee has been informed that Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) is now asking the traders who still have the duty-free sugar in their stores (warehouses) to pay duty on the sugar. 

The committee recommends that the Commissioner General:

    a) Carries out an audit in the respective stores of the importers who benefited from the tax exemption and allows them a grace period to dispose of their stock.

    b) Allows the importers to re-export the sugar if it cannot be consumed in the local market.

The other issue is about trade negotiations and facilitation. The committee has observed that over the years, the government has not invested enough in trade negotiations and facilitating stakeholders in the same. Stakeholders such as Private Sector Foundation Uganda, Uganda Manufacturers Associations (UMA), and Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA) have always been left out of important trade negotiations in regional trade forums like EAC, SADC, EPAS and COMESA.

In the neighboring countries like Kenya and Rwanda, the practice is different and the stakeholders are usually involved in such negotiations because their participation aids better lobbying and advocacy for key sectors of interest as well as reduce blame on decisions made at such levels.

The committee further observed that there are opportunities under World Trade Organisation where there are 112 categories of Trade in Services that are to be opened up for negotiation and government should take advantage of. While under the EAC and COMESA, Uganda is currently negotiating for only categories in Trade in Services sector.

The committee recommends that in order to achieve strong negotiation positions, Government should do the following:
    a) Set aside some funds to facilitate the trade negotiation matters. For example, in this financial year, no funds have been provided for trade negotiations output, and in the last financial year, only Shs 50.7 million was provided for such an enormous activity.

    b) Involve stakeholders in trade negotiations at all levels.

    c) Invest in training of trade negotiation experts.

    d) On the side of Parliament, set up a permanent committee on the negotiating team to follow up on the issues of trade negotiations, and the team should comprise of both technical staff and Members of Parliament.

Department of medium, small and micro 

The committee has observed that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is in the process of creating a department of medium, small and micro enterprises yet there is no policy guiding these operations. 

The committee further notes that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in its Memorandum of Understanding with Enterprise Uganda Foundation Ltd is passing on the mandate of finalising and implementing the MSMEs National Policy to the second party. The committee recommends that:

    a)  Cabinet finalises the process of creating the Department of MSMEs in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to centrally manage the activities. 

    b) Government finalises and implements the National Policy on Medium Small and Micro Enterprises and this should be passed on to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

Savings Credit Cooperative Societies (SACCOS)

The committee observed that the issue of SACCOs needs to be sorted out as soon as possible, for example, the lack of a law on the operations of Tier IV (SACCOs) that fall under the ambit of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has led to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to illegally classify it as a microfinance institution because it takes deposits from the organised rural poor. 

The committee further observed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in trying to control the microfinance institutions, is taking the mandate of the Bank of Uganda as provided for under the Financial Institutions Act and the Microfinance Deposit-taking Institutions Act.

The committee recommends that:
    a) Government fast-tracks the process of bringing a Bill to Parliament to establish a regulatory framework for the Tier IV segment of Uganda’s microfinance industry that will be cost-effective in protecting the savings of the poor and in ensuring that weak microfinance institutions do not undermine the stability of the financial system.

b) The Tier IV segment should have categories to separate the big SACCOs like Wazalendo, which runs and controls large sums of money, from SACCOs of the rural poor.

c) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should desist from taking on the responsibilities of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and Bank of Uganda.

Uganda-South Sudan Traders

The committee notes that South Sudan is a very important trade partner of Uganda and, therefore, all needs to be done to ensure that a harmonious relationship exists between the people of the two countries to foster good trade by removing the impediments that exist such as the security of the Ugandan business community in South Sudan and improving the road infrastructure between Gulu and Nimule.

The committee recommends that:
    a) Government supports and protects Ugandan traders in South Sudan; and 
    b) Government commences with the construction of the Gulu-Nimule Road to improve on the road network.

Transfer of Training Institute, Kigumba

This is about the co-operatives. The committee has observed that in the past few years, institutions that fell under the respective ministries have been reverted back to their sectors. However, the committee notes that Uganda Cooperatives College, Kigumba in Masindi, Kiryadongo, which now doubles as the Petroleum Institute, has not been handed over to the ministry.

The committee was informed that the land of the former Uganda Cooperatives College has been divided into two to cater for the needs of both institutions; the petroleum and cooperative trainings.

The committee recommends that with the revival of the Cooperatives Movement as the core sector in cooperatives development, there is need for the ministry to take full charge of the college and use it to train cooperatives’ officers. However, it should be noted that this move does not mean dislodging the Petroleum Institute.

African–India Institute of Foreign Trade

The committee notes that with the need to train and develop capacity of trade negotiators, Government should support the creation of the African–India Institute of Foreign Trade that was supposed to have started in 2011. But due to lack of a home to house it, it has failed to kick off. However, the committee has been informed that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has held discussions with Uganda Management Institute (UMI) and the Indian High Commission, and UMI have agreed to host the course. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, five minutes more.

MR KASAIJA KAGWERA: [HON. MEMBERS: “Go to Recommendations.”] 

Mr Speaker, there was pre-verification on conformity. 


Pre-Verification on Conformity (PVOC)

Observations and Recommendations

The committee notes that due to the termination of the contract of JEVIC Automobile, a company that was contracted as a sole company to do pre-verification on conformity by Uganda National Bureau of Standards, has resulted into the company taking the Government of Uganda to court and we are losing money. 

I will rush to the Ministry of Tourism.

On the Ministry of Tourism, we have observations and recommendations on compensation of human-animal conflict. 

The committee observed that there is a project in the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage on mitigation of human-wildlife conflict, which started in the financial year 2011/2012 with a budgetary allocation which I have indicated and has been increased. It should be noted that funds allocated for this project are too meagre to have any impact on the rampant destruction caused by wild animals in the affected areas. 

On UWA and the communities, UWA is giving out some money, but the way that they are doing it is not correct and we feel that the local governments should partner with UWA so that the face of UWA is seen and the communities appreciate it. 

There are border conflicts been UWA and the community where UWA has enforced and at times where the communities have encroached. The recommendation is that Government should come in to solve this.

Contribution to tourism by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs

The committee observed that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in an effort to promote and market tourism abroad, has in the financial year 2012/2013 allocated from its budget Shs 212,606,638000 to the Presidential Initiative on Sustainable Tourism (PRESTO) for its diplomatic missions abroad.  After studying this budget, the committee wondered from which budget line these funds were derived since they do not appear in the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It was further noted that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs does not have the mandate to carry out tourism activities.

The committee further notes that the ministries of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage and Foreign Affairs, are working out modalities on how to swap officers in missions abroad in order to promote tourism on the principle of secondment, as is the practice in many countries in the world, in order to minimise the usage of the limited resources. 

We recommend that:

a) 	the funds allocated by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Presidential Initiative on Sustainable Tourism (PRESTO) – the figure that I have just read - should be stayed, and time be given to the committee to investigate the matter and report to Parliament. 

b) 	More funds should be allocated to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage for the posting of tourism and commercial attachés in the 10 missions that have been identified by the ministry, that is, Juba, Pretoria, Geneva, Brussels and the rest.

Presidential Initiative on Sustainable Tourism 

The committee, in its interaction with the managers of Presidential Initiative on Sustainable Tourism (PRESTO), observed that the initiative is a good venture, which is aimed at promoting tourism. However, the concern of the committee is that the creation of this initiative is a duplication of the mandate of Uganda Tourism Board (UTB). Secondly, its budget of Shs 12.9 billion, if put under Uganda Tourism Board, would have greater impact on the promotion and marketing of tourism. The committee further noted that there is no legal instrument creating the Presidential Initiative on Sustainable Tourism.

It was further observed that whereas ministries struggle to get funds, Presidential initiatives get fully funded, yet some of them are duplicating the work of existing bodies. For example, PRESTO’s activities are the same as those being carried out by UTB.   

It was also noted that Presidential initiatives have become a source of getting public funds sniffled out because there is no formal structure of reporting and accountability. Examples include, AGOA and the Presidential Initiative on Bananas, which have had issues of accountability. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many more minutes do you –

MR KASAIJA KAGWERA: Kindly give me five, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go to the specific conclusions.

MR KASAIJA KAGWERA: Mr Speaker, on page 46 –(Interjections)- that is what they are telling me. 

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives 
Mr Speaker, the total amount here is Shs 36,933,542,000. 
Vote 110 - Uganda Industrial Research Institute 
The total amount is Shs 13,939,733,000. 

Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards, which is Shs 16,750,594,000. The total is Shs 67,593,859,000.
Vote 002 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage, which is Shs 11,842,995,000. 

Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board, which is Shs 1,911,194,000. The total is Shs 12,754,187,000. 

I beg that the House approves this budget. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for using your time very well, and for combining the reports of two ministries –

MR KASAIJA KAGWERA: Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on Table the letter from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that was requesting for Shs 212,606,638,000 to be given to PRESTO. This letter originated from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and it was addressed to the Chairperson Principal Private Secretary to His Excellency the President and also the Chairperson PRESTO, State House Entebbe. If you may allow me, Mr Speaker, I will read the letter:

“Forwarding PRESTO Budget:

Following the approval of the Presidential Initiative on Sustainable Tourism (PRESTO) terms of reference, our diplomatic missions have developed activities and budgets whose implementation will also be supported by the ministry headquarters. 

While some of the materials will be developed in Uganda with the support of relevant Government agencies and the private sector, most of the planned tourism promotion activities will be executed by our missions. 

The proposed activities and budget from various missions have been harmonised into a single budget of Shs 212,606,638,000.

This is, therefore, to forward the harmonised budget for PRESTO for your consideration.”

Written by Ambassador James Mugume, Permanent Secretary. I lay it on Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the date of the letter?

MR STEPHEN KAGWERA: The letter is dated 3 July 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that letter dated 3 July 2012. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, the report is out. We will debate it now. The rule is three minutes and the time allotted is 45 minutes.

4.10
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for this report. My submission is going to be based on some questions, responses of which I have not heard from this report, maybe because it has not been given ample time for you to complete it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rule is three minutes. 

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, we are aware that we are presently in the East African Community and one of the tenets of the integration process is trade creation so that the country can benefit from the benefits of trade therein. I believe the line ministry should be interested in telling this Parliament the amount of trade that has been created from the integration process, the benefit for Ugandans, what trade has been diverted, and the net benefit of trade in the integrating process. I hope we can get a comment or an answer on the volume of trade, if any.

Secondly, on page five, I would want to know what this Vote 0604 - Trade Development, involves. On page five, we can see the releases and the differences. The committee should be in position to tell us what we lost in terms of trade development and the activities therein once that budget was not supported to the fullest. 

On page 11, we would also need to know what part (c), support to trade promotion and negotiation, meant or what it is going to meet in this financial year. 

As Parliament, we would want to explicitly know what support to trade promotion and negotiation as outputs is going to be because we need to know how this is going to support trade. What are the activities in terms of trade promotion that would need to attract a budget? What does it mean to the common man? What are the expectations? (Interjections) I am talking about the expected sector outcomes and outputs on page 11 -. Expected output, part  (c); support to trade promotion and negotiation. If this is one of the outputs that have been realised before, what has been the benefit from it? And what is going to be the benefit out of it to the common person who is engaged in trade, whose interest we want to promote, so that we can prepare ourselves to get benefits out of it. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

4.13
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like also to thank the chairperson for the comprehensive report, but I will go straight to the issues. The issue of trade is very important for any country, but trade must be carried out in a very conducive atmosphere. Presently, we have got a lot of our businessmen doing business between Uganda and Sudan, but the way the South Sudanese Government is treating traders from Uganda is bad. I want to find out from the ministry what they have done about it because it has reached the extent of killing our people. Our people have died in Southern Sudan.

I also want to find out from the chairperson and the ministry what the ministry - the Uganda National Bureau of Standards - has done on the improvement of items on the Uganda market. We get fake and expired items on the market. What has the ministry done about it?

I will go to tourism; early last year, we were talking of Uganda being the first destination for tourists, but we know that to reap from the tourist industry, you have got to put in money. Our neighbours have put in a lot of money in tourism and that is why they have attracted tourists to their countries. When you land at Nairobi Airport, you see numbers lining up to get into Kenya, but this country has put in nothing. Kenya puts in $10 million to attract tourists to Kenya; Rwanda I hear puts in $5 million a year, but Uganda puts in less than a million dollars. What is the ministry doing about it?

The chairperson talked about the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development and AGOA, and the other thing is coming in as the Presidential Initiative on Sustainable Tourism where Shs 212 billion is to be sent to missions to promote tourism. The chairman criticised it and asked this House that the Presidential Initiative on Bananas Industrial Development failed, and they want this House to approve Shs 212 billion to be given to the ministry to promote tourism. How is this going to be done? 

I agree with the recommendation that trade officers and tourism officers be sent to missions abroad so that they can carry on tourism in these places, but the problem we have is keeping unprofessional people. You see what happened and what is going on in our missions abroad. You know what has happened in London because of unprofessional people. So, we want professionals to be sent to missions –(Member timed out.)

1.16
MRS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. The issue of cooperatives is one on which we have lamented and it is high time we effected it, and if I am to relate it with Kigumba Cooperative College, we visited that college in my capacity as the shadow minister, to try and establish facts around it. It is true that the land of this cooperatives college has been divided into two, and part of it has been taken by the petroleum college established there. We recommend that the petroleum college so established should look for its home so that we promote that college in totality for cooperatives, bearing in mind that Kigumba is one of the food baskets of this country. We cannot afford to mix it up with the rich oil petroleum college which actually, daringly looks different. Even the students in Kigumba Cooperative College - the school is dilapidated and actually, we could even see through the walls, which is terribly traumatising to those students. It is urgently needed that you separate these schools and the petroleum college looks for its own home.

On the issue of the Sudan-Uganda trade, it is desirable. but it must be regulated. We cannot afford to see our Ugandans traumatised, mistreated and restricted to do business in Southern Sudan while in Uganda we put red carpets for them. I grew up from the Kitgum border knowing that all Sudanese and Ugandans cross the border and do trade. We know that right now, foreigners, including Sudanese, own properties in Uganda and they enjoy the services of education and health, and actually as a result, we also have sicknesses crossing borders while on the opposite side in Sudan, we cannot enjoy the same. At the airport, you are given a warning that “Our land, our oil.” We want our government to quickly protect Ugandans in Southern Sudan.

Mr Speaker, I also want to take note of tourism that  –(Member timed out.)

4.20
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to raise a concern on SACCOs and particularly to re-echo what the chairperson said. SACCOs have mushroomed all over the country and they are basically exploiting the women who do not have collateral, and who have sought remedy in these SACCOs because they cannot access bank facilities. The fact that we have kept silent about these SACCOs has kept the interest rate very high compared to the commercial banks. They have taken advantage of the poor women who run to borrow money from the SACCOs to pay school fees for their children and to support agricultural productivity because most of them borrow money to go and buy seeds to plant. So, the Ministry of Trade should come up with a policy and put up guidelines particularly on the high interest rates that are exploiting the poor people, but more specifically the women. 

I want to find out from the committee how this Presidential Initiative on Tourism is linked to the mother industry, the Ministry of Trade and Tourism. How do they cooperate? Do they work together or it is a separate entity? Are they, as said, duplicating services? Is that the reason why we have poor funding for the tourism industry and, therefore, we keep on hitting on the tourism industry that it does not perform to our expectations? I want to find out from the committee and the ministry how this issue is handled. Thank you.

4.21
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Still on SACCOS, the government introduced SACCOs in every sub-county throughout Uganda, and in early 2009 to 2010, Government was very busy launching SACCOs at sub-county level. I personally participated in joining the microfinance ministry and specifically the situation that dealt with SACCOs in delivering empty safes. We delivered several empty safes to sub-counties and we were calling them SACCOs. I really want to find out from the committee whether they are aware about these empty safes that were delivered to sub-counties that we called SACCOs. I wonder what Government plans to do with these empty safes. I want to ask that the committee uses its mandate to go and get back those safes if Government is not committed to develop their own initiative. 

Enough is enough to Ugandans who always hear about launching of programmes which Government is not committed to following up and developing. I want to request the committee to take particular interest in SACCOs that were launched already. Why would you go and deliver empty safes to a community which has no knowledge at all about how SACCOs are run? 

My honourable sister here has just alluded to the fact that our communities are being exploited by NGOs - small SACCO units which charge high interest rates because they are doing it as a business and yet Government had initiated units of its own to empower its people.  What happened to them? 

I would like to thank the committee for their observation about small and medium-term enterprises on page 15. The observation of the committee is very right and I would like to request this Parliament to take it as a very important point because the only way to go in this country if we want prosperity for all is to go small and medium-term enterprises -(Member timed out.) 

4.25
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I commend the committee for the work done and I have the following contribution to make. My first concern is on the SACCOs. The Ministry of Finance or Government has delayed to bring the legal framework, and people are being cheated in SACCOs. In my district, I have one of the most successful SACCOs but also unfaithful SACCOs which have been disorganised. I have asked a forensic audit of such SACCOs but I don’t know who will take action since there is no legal framework to run these SACCOs. I beg Government through the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance who are here to bring the Bill that regulates SACCOs so that our citizens may have confidence in the SACCOs. 

Secondly, shortly after CHOGM, there was a programme most probably advanced by the Ministry of Finance about rural financial centres. They identified land and built some structures in some areas though some are incomplete, but I don’t know what could have happened to that project. You could bank money with them and be able to access it on your account in the bank. We would like some clarification on that project.  

Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) should step-up its efforts because we have a lot of counterfeit materials on the market. I am very much concerned especially as the Chairperson of Physical Infrastructure about the fake cement on the market which is leading to the collapse of many buildings. If need be, they should recruit more staff to check for counterfeits. 

Lastly, what is the fate of the land for the Uganda Museum? We hear that it is going to be relocated somewhere. What is the progress? What will happen to our museum? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

4.27
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. On page 4, we are given the objectives of the ministry. Among others is “The promotion of standard and quality infrastructure to improve the competitiveness and safety of Ugandan products.” A few months ago, NTV reported that Ugandan sugar has iron filings - in fact there was a Member complaining about it - and now we are talking about safety of our products. I would like to find out from the minister how they are handling the issues of safety because it is a serious matter? When other countries hear that our sugar has iron filings, we shall definitely lose market. 

On page 19, the issue of weigh bridges is very serious. I come from a district where marble or limestone is mined by Tororo Cement mainly in Tororo Sub-county. The people of Tororo Cement overload their trucks with limestone which is stones, and this  should be partly the reason why our roads in Karamoja are very bad. They create a lot of potholes and it is a nightmare to travel on those roads during the dry season. The trucks block the road; they cannot give way for small vehicles. There is need for the ministry to liaise with the Ministry of Internal Affairs so that we are given traffic officers to monitor the loads of these vehicles. I thank you.

4.29
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have three issues; one is to do with promotion of tourism abroad by –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you a member of this committee? 

MR MBAHIMBA: Yes, Sir. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kindly, resume your seat. 

4.30
MR ABDI CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. What I would like to express here concerns issues pertaining to sugar. I expected an annexure in the report giving us details of all the importers who were permitted to import sugar or if the list is not there, maybe the minister could table it because we need to know these importers who were given exemption on sugar importation. 

The report has also talked about the question of sugar in some of the stores and Uganda Revenue Authority saying they should re-export it. No, that should not be the case. These importers should be forced to put this sugar on the market because they were given an exemption. You know, this is a plan where people hoard sugar in order to fetch higher prices later on. That should not be entertained at all in this country in order for us to prosper. We were talking of sugar problems, why should we again re-export the sugar when we can sell it in Uganda? 

Secondly, on the issue of compensation, which relates to the question of human-animal conflict. I am really saddened when we talk of Shs 650,000 being compensation, which has now been increased to Shs 1 million. This is a surprise and it is dismal to this country. How can the whole of Uganda be paid Shs 1 million as compensation? Is that the reason why people are being killed around the national parks with impunity? Is it because of lack of training of these park rangers? If we had a lump sum, not what has been talked about, like increasing it to 1.5 billion -(Member timed out.) 

4.33
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would first of all like to thank His Excellency the President, who is a good promoter and negotiator on the tourism sector in this country. Given the report that the committee has presented on page 14, that the negotiation for trade and the concern for Uganda is very low. I think our biggest problem is poor attitude of professional ethics. If we could we would instil in the professionals the need to exercise their professional ethics, then we would go a long way - we can plan for the money and do other things; but if the poor attitude remains, people will continue looking for allowances and other monetary benefits. To be more proactive would be more helpful.

The second issue is on Enterprise Uganda, which appeared on page 15. Enterprise Uganda has done a disservice to our youths with regard to the Youth Fund. I do not think it should be one of the enterprises to be promoted; if it is de-registered, we would save more money, because as we speak now, our youths have spent a lot of money in opening bank accounts, which are not in operation.

Another issue regards the human and animal co-existence, and destruction of property and the compensation that is alluded to. I think the ministry should include the use of nature in controlling the problems. For example, if there are many wild animals like elephants, we can have people practice apiary farming. This way both the community and Government benefit; it can be a source of honey and other products of honey.

The other thing I wish to comment about is the trade link between Uganda and South Sudan. We do not only have one route – there is another from the east, passing via Agago through Kitgum to South Sudan. This route can be exploited so that it can help in building the trade link and increase revenue to our country. (Member timed out.) 

4.36
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for its report. On page 8, the committee says that Government has extended the conditional grant of Shs 7.2 billion each for DCOs in 15 districts. First of all, I do not know what the DCOs are – are they the District Commercial Officers? But we have a problem; the President asked us to go and sensitise our people on the importance of producing cash crops such that they can earn about Shs 20 million annually. As I speak now, people in Lira District have produced a lot of soya beans, but I do not know the vision of the commercial officers and the trade ministry. People are now stranded with their produce and there are some people who are exploiting them. I am asking the Minister of Trade what their vision is on some of these things. Do the farmers have to produce and keep their produce in their houses? There is no education on value-addition and neither is there proper market for them. In fact, they do not know what to do with their produce. 

I think it is high time we came to the rescue of our people because they have suffered a lot. At one point they were producing cotton and we stopped them; but now soya beans have a number of products. Why don’t you go down and help them in forming small industries and also locate some market for them?

Another issue concerns the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. I do not know whether I have to re-echo this, but the Ministry of Trade should act because fake goods are flowing into the country. We have a situation whereby Ugandans can no longer sell their products because there is free entry and exit of products. What are your plans for the people of Uganda?  Please save us the situation. Thank you.

4.39
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very good report because it has recommendations on even areas that are being encroached on. When you talk of Presidential poverty alleviation, this is a development that is actually going to hinder the work of ministries. We have poverty alleviation by the Presidential initiative, but on the ground, it has affected NAADS and other activities. Now it is encroaching on tourism. Tomorrow it will encroach on education; and later on health? What is this issue of the Presidential initiative for poverty alleviation? From which budget is it being funded? 

We are talking of marketing our tourism, but I have seen that this year’s budget has been reduced. If you want to promote an organisation, marketing should take the highest percentage of resources. But now you have reduced it from last year’s budget of over Shs 2 billion to Shs 1.9 billion, and you are talking of promoting tourism. Where is our focus? 

I think it is our duty, as Parliament, to make sure that we are moving upwards and not downwards. Because, the value of our currency is reducing and we are reducing the budget, yet we want to promote tourism – how is that possible? Look at the borders of our national parks; if you went to Lake Mburo National Park, for instance, I doubt if it still exists because it has been encroached upon by people planting bananas and grazing cattle. This is because the area is on a flat land unlike the one in Ruwenzori which is in the rift valley. 

Regarding trade along borders, our people have been suffering like those in South Sudan. –(Interruption) 

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, Lake Mburo National Park is in my constituency and it exists; there are no bananas being planted in it. Is the honourable member in order to tell lies to the nation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are factual matters not within the knowledge of the Speaker. I am, therefore, unable to rule on the order. (Applause) 

MR TAYEBWA: Mr Speaker, he is talking of a different issue – I am talking about encroachment taking place around Lake Mburo National Park, although it exists on paper. Nevertheless, I was talking about our traders being harassed on the border, especially those operating in South Sudan. (Member timed out_)

(Hon. Kawuma rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you a member of the committee? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes!”] Let us have the Member from Bufumbira East. (Laughter)
4.43
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I want to thank the members of the committee for the good work they have done. I have some few issues.

On page 16, when you talk of protection of Ugandan traders in South Sudan, what kind of traders are those? Are they in banking? Are they in insurance? Are they in manufacturing or are they these fake traders who are selling onions and nsenene? How do you expect nationals not to trade in nsenene and as Ugandans you go out to trade in nsenene and you think you will be allowed? It is like we in Kisoro, we do not like seeing Indians selling local things - retailing. So, in order for Ugandans to be protected they must go into manufacturing. 

We contributed to the liberation of South Sudan but Uganda is not there. Is there any bank in Sudan from Uganda? It is not there. What is there? What is there is that we want to protect them because they are taking some onions and some Irish potatoes. I do not think we should waste our time, Mr Speaker.

It is a pity that Uganda is a free-for-all country. Recently, we went to do some business in Tanzania; and honourable members, unless you get local content or get a local partner, you cannot do business in other countries. So, why should we allow all those people to come here and do business without even partnering with us? So, it is us at fault. 

When you look at PRESTO, it has an estimate of over 224 billion, which is actually bigger than votes 1 and 2 of State House and the President’s Office. Where are they going to get this money from? 

Mr Speaker, if it is allowed, we would investigate the source of this letter that the Chairman has put on the Table because the PS of Tourism has no mandate to either appropriate or even propose the budget to a different ministry. So, when you go to tourism promotion, in Uganda the department of tourism has been feeding us on wrong statistics. When they get some people coming from the DRC to come and buy sugarcane from Kitoro Market, they call them tourists. That is why even our planning is very poor. We should get real tourists and we should get proper statistics. We have not evolved in our immigration to know whether these are tourists or these are just relatives visiting each other. (Member timed out.)

4.46
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the Minister of Finance owes this House an explanation as to why on page 5 we have high budget cuts on these crucial areas of industrial development at 37.8 percent, and cooperative development at 48 percent. Otherwise, on page 9, I would like to propose that what has been done for Karamoja should also be done in other areas. 

Those of us who come from coffee growing areas are looking for coffee seedlings and they are very hard to get. I would like to say to the honourable minister that you should not expect to reap where you do not sow. So, Uganda Coffee Development Authority should be empowered to supply coffee tree seedlings. 

On page 13, there are issues of tax on sugar. I would like to request the honourable minister to shade light on the Income Tax policy on contraceptives because contraceptives that are not imported by Government attract a tax of 18 percent with its implications of maternal health and on poverty in this nation. Can we have clarity on that?

On page 16, I see an unfortunate precedent where the committee is embroiled in wrangles between two ministers in 16(c). I think these wrangles should be sorted out in Cabinet and should not appear in Parliament’s committee reports. 

Finally, I would like to ask the Minister for Cooperatives, honourable minister, can you give us step by step efforts that you are making to revive cooperatives in this nation? We do not see you on the ground. We request that you work with the Ministry of Agriculture and the other relevant ministries to ensure that we grow sufficient produce in our areas that can then form cooperatives to the level that will benefit this nation. I thank you.

4.49
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): I thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the committee chair for the elaborate report. I have only three issues. One is on the fruit factory for Teso region. This facility was transferred to the Ministry of Trade. So, we would like an update on when we are going to get this factory in place. 

When I look at this report on page 20, the Uganda Industrial Research Institute has already put up a fruit juice facility in Namusanke in Mpigi District. It has also built a peanut processing factory in Lira, a mushroom training and resource centre in Kabale, Kisoro and Ntungamo, and a multifunctional industrial facility for mango juice processing, meat and milk in Arua, West Nile. Now, the one for Teso has been getting budgetary allocations of Shs 5 billion every financial year for the last four years. What is the problem? This time you have the resources. Why is it not taking off? Even the land is there. 

Two, Mr Speaker, I would also like to know from the Ministry of Trade; this Parliament allocated Shs 1.7 billion at one time to build a market in South Sudan. When I travelled to Juba about three weeks ago, I did not see any semblance of such a market. So, what happened to this money? 

Three, is on SACCOS. I would love the Ministry of Trade in future to give us an update on the performance of these SACCOS because as far as I am concerned, some of them took loans - in fact about 80 percent of them took very big loans from Microfinance Support Centre, but to date, they have failed to pay these loans. So, can you give this Parliament an update of those who were given money; how much they were given; those who have paid; those who have failed to pay; and the way forward? I believe to date, we have not received a legal framework that should guide the performance of these SACCOS, and it was supposed to have been presented. So, when are we getting all that? 

And as I conclude, Mr Speaker, I would really want - this is a budget season but in future, the minister should come up with this schedule to present to the House on the performance of SACCOS under their docket. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.51
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for a job well done and I want to thank the ministry for highlighting what activities they are carrying out in various areas. To me, these activities look as if they are not from the ministry which is supposed to be national. The activities presented seem to be for individuals or a section.

I am glad the ministry is carrying out some research, although I am not feeling this research. - if you look at page 20, the mushroom training and resource centre has been fully developed and is now in production. It is benefitting a significant number of women groups in Kabale, Kisoro, Ntungamo. I wanted this sentence, if possible, to be completed that they are ready to replicate this, particularly in areas like Maracha, which have got problems of land. Mushroom growing would be a very good project if only they could replicate it in such areas.

Then on the same page, they talk about a multifunctional industrial facility for mango juice processing, meat and milk processing in West Nile, Arua. I have not seen that area, but I do not know what they meant by, “… this is at different stages of development but should all be operational by December 2011”. I thought they should talk of, “It is now operational and is benefitting people.” –(Interjections)- it is written 2011. Maybe I have not read it well. I need to be reassured what they mean by this. Thank you very much.

4.54
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and the committee. I will start by requesting the Ministry of Trade, the National Bureau of Standards and URA to stop killing the export of fish by allowing trading in illegal fishing gear. The punishment the innocent fishermen are now getting is burning of those traded items through the Government of Uganda. I will not explain because of time. I hope you have got my point.

Secondly, Uganda is meant to be the best destination of tourism through lip service. We should stop being hunters and gatherers. We want money from tourism. We are competing with Rwanda and Tanzania has good policies and they are moving very fast. How do we intend to attract tourists? The tourism circuits are not there. I have just been checking the Vision 2040; they are talking of a different road altogether and not the tourism circuits. 

The road from Kisoro through Kanungu through Bundibugyo to Buliisa is an important road which by now should be an integrated inter-ministerial - to do project with Albertine planning. We do not have that in place and you are expecting to be a tourism destination; by osmosis or by a miracle? It is not possible. 

Can we use the NEMA sensitivity mapping to avoid the oil companies moving very fast to encumber the future and potential of tourism in that area. 

Let me also request the committee and Parliament to support both Kigumba Cooperative Institute and the Oil Institute; actually, to a fully-fledged multi-disciplinary university because Kigumba is at the centre of Uganda and it will serve the whole country whether you come from West Nile or whether you come from the East. It is just next to Lake Kyoga and it would serve everybody and we must support it. 

For us as park neighbours, just last week, I lost cows because of too many hippos in Buliisa. I am burying people every year because of crocodiles. Can you help us address that problem instead of continuously spending money in surveying boundaries? Can you open pro-people boundary roads so that you save our people from remoteness by giving them roads which will even promote eco-tourism? 

I would like to also emphasise that it is very important that as we talk about tourism being a new ministry - which is positive - even during IPU, I raised a point here in Parliament. We failed to use IPU as a moment to market ourselves. The answer I got from the then minister, now in water, was that there was no budget because it is a new ministry. How could we miss such an opportunity of using IPU where the whole world was here for marketing Uganda as a tourism destination? (Member timed out.)

4.57
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. I have three observations.

Observation one is on page 16, where they say that the Minister of Finance usurped the powers of the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, and that of Bank of Uganda. I would like to know how they usurped those powers.

Secondly, on page 18, you talk about Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry having owned some two properties and they were later sold under unclear circumstances. You go ahead to recommend that any transaction relating to the sale of these properties be stayed. What do you want to stay when the properties have already been sold? I would rather you initiate an investigation into the sale of these properties.

Thirdly, on the same page, the last paragraph, you indicate that the committee further observed that much as the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce is affiliated to Government on matters of business and trade, there is no law binding the operations of the two bodies since they were privatised. Here, what was privatised? Is it Uganda National Chamber of Commerce? I need a clarification on those. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Ikwera Negris School for the Disabled from Kwania County, Apac District represented by hon. Ayoo Tony and hon. Ajok Lucy. They have come to observe the proceedings. (Applause)

5.00
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report they have made. However, in their report, they have talked about tourism, but they have not talked about the people who neighbour the tourist destinations like national parks. For example, in Bunyaruguru, I border Queen Elizabeth National Park by 38 kilometres and every day, the population of elephants increases, and the grazing land is Bunyaruguru constituency. They come, eat tonnes of people’s crops and there has never been any compensation. 

Whereas we are happy here that we are getting money from tourism, there is no money to help those people that are being affected by those animals. When the animals that are edible stray to people’s gardens and they are killed, the people are imprisoned. 

Therefore, I am suggesting that next time, consider erecting a fence around the national parks. The President has said this several times. Unfortunately, it is only Lake Mburo which has no elephants that eat people’s crops that has been fenced. For us who have elephants, there is nothing done.

Whereas we treasure the tourists, for me to even go to Jakana, they want to force me to pay and yet I have got people who are staying there. There are lakes in the park where they do not allow the common man to go fishing and those are the issues that the committee should be seeing. As you are promoting the Whites, please have the Ugandans who are voting you into office at heart. 

Lastly, we got donor money of over $30 million to help the communities that surround national parks and it is on record that that money was swindled. A report was produced by Justice Kanyeihamba. Unfortunately, up to now, no action has been taken on the culprits because some of that money was supposed to fence off those areas and help the communities like Bunyaruguru that are affected by animals.

The minister should take this report into consideration because the vulnerable people of Bunyaruguru asked, “They sent us money to fence off, the money was swindled, what action have you taken?” Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.03
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have three comments. One is on page 19 on weigh bridges and axle loads vis-à-vis gross loads. It is true as is observed by the committee, that this is a big problem. The problem emanates from lack of enforcement. I think my advice to the ministry is for them to liaise with the relevant ministry, the Ministry of Works, to ensure that axle loads are controlled including even using mobile weigh bridges. But ultimately, the problem of movement of goods will be solved by a robust railway system.

Today, the railway system is dead. You cannot talk about the Kampala-Kasese line. It is not there. You cannot talk about the Tororo-Packwach section of the railway. It is dead. It is not there. We have continued to dream of extending the railway line from Packwach to Sudan. This has remained on paper. I urge Government to wake up. No economy can survive without a robust railway system.

Secondly, I visited Lake Mburo recently; I am a friend of animals and I noticed the intermingling of zebras with cows. Why is this happening yet we have a Ministry of Tourism? I would like to inform my brother from Nyabushozi that this is happening. Whose cows are these? Do these cows belong to the Uganda Wildlife Authority? (Interjections) Whose are they? Why should cows or domestic animals be allowed in the park? I would like an answer from the Minister of Tourism.  

Thirdly, and finally, -(Interjections)- I want to comment on the plan by the line ministry to introduce stop-overs for tourists. On page 37, the committee recommends a public/private partnership approach. I want to inform the committee and this House that we do not have guidelines for this. We do not have the enabling legislation for us to engage in a PPP. I want to challenge Government to bring the necessary legislation here. We are talking about PPP on roads, PPP on tourism, PPP to revamp accommodation for Police -(Member timed out.)

5.06
DR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Mr Speaker, I would like first, to call upon the Minister of Trade to pay attention to the marketing of agricultural produce. Right now, as I speak, in the Lango and Bunyoro sub-regions, the peasants and small farmers – I can witness from Kiryandongo up to Otuke – are stuck with soya and sunflower. They have no market for them. Unscrupulous traders and businessmen are collecting this agricultural produce on credit. Last year, they did the same and the farmers were never paid. This year, they are doing the same. The peasants and small-scale farmers are being exploited and this is really a grave situation. These simple people cannot get money for their produce. They cannot pay school fees for their children who are in higher institutions, secondary schools, tertiary institutions and universities. Children are staying at home. I call upon the minister to take drastic measures, especially to organise primary societies, to organise cooperative societies and to organise cooperative unions so that farmers can market their crops and the common man benefits from his sweat.

Secondly, I would like to comment on tourism. Tourism in Uganda is very expensive for the locals. We, the indigenous people, cannot enjoy the products of tourism. Hotels which are established or being run around national parks are too expensive. They are not affordable for the average Ugandan. I am, therefore, calling upon the minister to try and invest or borrow a leaf from Kenya where indigenous investors are given a substantial amount of money to invest in construction of hotels around ecotourism areas. This would enable the indigenous people to invest and also to enjoy the products of tourism.

Thirdly, I would like again to comment on the problems being experienced by these people who are living near the national parks. Their crops are being destroyed, their properties are being destroyed, but what we find out is that these people are never compensated. I have witnessed this in Kiryandongo, in Oyam County, and in areas like Nwoya County. These are the areas I am acquainted with. 

The common people are crying out that the Uganda Wildlife Authority is not taking care of their needs and, therefore, I call upon the minister to -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have exceeded the time we had assigned for this debate. I have two Bills, which will still attract debate. We had hoped that we would deal with them because they are short Bills. If we could create time to deal with them, it would facilitate our timelines for dealing with the budget by the 31st of this month, which is two days ahead. Two Bills are ready, but I am going to – with your indulgence, please allow me to allow only one Member make the contribution and that is for the special reason that he has  his constituents in the House, the hon. Tonny Ayoo, Kwania County. Then I will come to the front and we close, and we start the debate on the Bills. 

I have noticed I had already marked Nyabushozi County, Bokora County, Moroto District, Ssembabule District. If you are still interested in the debate on this subject, we will start with your general debate on the Bills. I already noted you. Please bear with me so that we can make progress on these other matters. 

So, the honourable member for Kwania County, then we come to the front. 

5.11
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to get one clarification from the Minister of Trade, arising from the concerns by fellow honourable members on the marketing of agricultural produce. 

Actually, when you look at page 11, number eight, the ministry is talking about access to markets. I want to know what the ministry is doing because you realise that with agriculture, during the time of harvesting, the produce is in much supply and the prices are low. When you look at the concern about soya and sunflower, you will find that like in America as we talk, they have got higher demand for soya beans for animal feeds and other things. Is our country doing anything to ensure that such produce and the farmers are guided to supply or export such foods to America because they may not know how to go about it? I think this is where the ministry should come in directly to help such farmers.

The minister has talked about improving and building border markets. I also want to know from the minister; some time back, the country had launched construction of an inland port in Busia so that it could be easier for Ugandan traders to clear their goods other than getting stuck at Mombasa which is very crowded, and also being part of revenue for the country. Up to now, this process has not started yet this would be very good as we enter into integration for making business easy for the country and also making it easier for us to make some revenue. I think the minister will have to answer this.

And on page 25, I see a loss incurred by Government of about Shs 1.5 billion, that is about $600,000 due to mismanaging of offices and failing to do things well. The report goes ahead to say that the former Minister of Trade contracted some two companies to do the same work and there is a feeling that very soon, they are also going to get into litigation. 

I feel this shouldn’t just go like this; somebody should take responsibility. The committee has not yet completed work on this, but I ask that they make a proper report on this so that the culprits are brought to book because we are losing a lot of money in this kind of work. 

Finally, on the report of the Auditor-General on tourism, the report indicates that Uganda Wildlife Authority has failed to remit revenue to local governments and yet to our tourism sector –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I will give the chance to the shadow minister from the Opposition and then the Minster of Trade and Tourism and then Finance. You have five minutes each. 

5.15
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Kevinah Taaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Leader of the Opposition and the shadow minister for two ministries; tourism, Wildlife and heritage; and then Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

Mr Speaker, I ask for more time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give you three minutes then -(Laughter)– five minutes, honourable member. 

MS TAAKA: Mr Speaker, and all Members of Parliament, tourism and travel directly and indirectly impacts on the wider Ugandan economy. The tourism sector in Uganda has the potential to earn the much needed foreign exchange, create jobs and finance priority development programmes. 

Uganda’s being voted as the number one tourist destination of 2012 by the International Travel Guide Publisher, “Lonely Planet” did not come as a surprise since Uganda boosts a variety of tourist attractions on the African Continent, which range from fresh water bodies like lakes and rivers, mountains, forests, numerous flora and fauna found in the different areas. 

Uganda as a tourist destination has a variety of game stock and habitats, as well as green beauty, which is endowed with numerous outstanding attractions in the lakes, rivers, forests, ecology and on the ice-capped mountains of the Rwenzori. 

The tourism sector contributed $1,954.6 billion, which is 4 percent of the GDP of 2011. Although the sector has enormous potential and is projected to grow to 3.7 percent in 2012, Government has not made key strategic interventions and investments to reap from the gains. 

Tourism has a potential to earn $1 billion annually, which is approximately 22 percent of Uganda’s current expenditure budget. Uganda lies at the bottom of ten of the global 2011/2012 country brand index coming in at No.99 down by eight places from 2010. 

The global study measures country brand strengths across key attributes of awareness, familiarity, preference, consideration, advocacy and active decisions to visit or interact with a place. 

In the East African region, Uganda still lies below Kenya and Tanzania. I have a table below on the ranking. It is shocking that Government yet again in the 2011/2012 financial year failed to produce a tourism master plan and marketing strategy. These plans are supposed to follow up the national development plan developed in 2010. The sector minister, in a statement to Parliament last year committed Government on these key policy instruments. However, we are yet again fed with more endless promises. This is unacceptable; the sector should not operate without a policy and direction. Without a well thought-out plan and tourism competitiveness, positioning Uganda will continue to spread dark hope to attract some wandering tourists –(Member timed out.) 
 
5.21
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Rt Hon. Prime Minister and colleagues, thank you for your contributions. I will begin with commenting on the value of trade in the East African Community, Sudan and COMESA. In 2011, in the East African Community, the imports were US$ 692 million and the exports were US$ 503 million. As far as Sudan is concerned, in 2011, the imports were $3.3 million only and the exports were US$ 502 million. Please note that there is a lot of informal trade that goes on across borders that is not being captured in some of these figures. 

In COMESA, 2011, imports US$ 996 million and exports only US$ 746 million. These are commodities like cooking oil, construction materials, foodstuffs, grains, sugar and also includes services. 

Honourable members, you wanted to know whether the budget cuts had any impact on our trade development. We cannot implement the MSME Directorate which is supposed to create backward and forward linkages with all the MSMEs and other government agencies. We cannot subscribe to the international bodies that we share membership with; we cannot monitor our industries; we cannot monitor our cooperatives sufficiently; and we cannot access statistical data on some of these trade arrangements we have. We are not able to attend trade negotiation fora abroad and regionally because of the cut.

On the Ugandans in Sudan, it is true that we have had several dialogues with government officials in Sudan. We recently had the Minister for Trade and Commerce here and we are pre-organising an inter-ministerial meeting on 13 and 14 of September to be able to cover or discuss the challenges that are faced by our traders. But in the meantime, the President suggested that we could consider at least compensating some of the smallholders who have suffered so much, but that is still under consideration. [HON. MEMBER: “Clarification, Madam Minister.”] As far as SACCOS are concerned and [HON. MEMBER: “Clarification.”] 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member has declined. You have shouted four times and she has not accepted. Let her proceed.

MRS KYAMBADDE: As far as SACCOs are concerned in the budget, we only got Shs 79 million and this is not sufficient to monitor all the cooperatives and SACCOs. Interest rate is an area that is determined by the Ministry of Finance and so SACCOs are mainly under the docket of the Ministry of Finance, while for us we license and monitor.

On Kigumba, it is currently under the Ministry of Education and we would like to seek support of MPs to revert it to cooperatives. 

On sugar, we have been authorised under East African Community to import 40,000 tonnes of sugar -[HON. MEMBER: “Clarification.”]– but now we have another 30,000 tonnes imported. We wrote a letter to the minister –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for the responses that you have given on this matter. I think that in the interest of time, let us have tourism.

MR MUKITALE: Procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR MUKITALE: I am happy that we are proceeding this way and we are able to cover as much business as possible. I would like to seek your indulgence. As you earlier advised during the State of the Nation Address that these important responses from the ministers including data should be captured and brought to us in writing since three minutes is not enough for a minister and yet the questions we have asked are so important and we want the answers, can we again request for your indulgence that you direct the Leader of Government Business and the sector ministers to bring written responses for all this, otherwise it is becoming meaningless if we do not get this? [MR WADRI: “Further guidance, Mr Speaker.”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I directed that indeed these responses that cannot be covered within the time provided - just like the reports of the committees, the chairperson would have taken two hours and not even finished presenting this report, but he used 15 minutes, and he laid the big report on Table. This should apply to the responses of the ministers. We need to move and I am sure you understand where the Speaker is coming from so that we can gain some time and deal with these processes.

So, honourable members and ministers, those who have text and your time is up, lay the rest of it on the Table for consumption of the Members.
 
MR WADRI: Guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Guidance.

MR WADRI: I thank you very much. This morning, I did allude to the fact that in this appropriation process of the budget, Parliament is fulfilling its constitutional duty and that we must do it thoroughly. As people’s representatives, we must question ministers so that we know what is happening, but repeatedly, ministers are becoming evasive and do not even want clarifications or to take our questions. What are we doing here? Honestly?

At the time when we were debating the State of the Nation Address, we were assured that some of the concerns will be answered when we come to consider policy statements, but now these members of the Executive are glossing over issues and at the end of the day, what do we really have to take home? What do we do? There are serious issues that the Executive has consistently avoided making us “impotent” as a Legislature. What do we do with such kind of attitude?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the use of such words for future readers of the Hansard – we will need some clarification on what you really mean -(Laughter)- whether you are actually saying -(Laughter)  
         
MR WADRI: I know, Mr Speaker, that you as a lawyer and social scientist are very knowledgeable about the usage of the word, impotence. The context in which I am using it is not the biological one –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: It is the one which makes us irrelevant as a Legislature. It is not the biological one, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Government Chief Whip.

5.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): I want to thank you for this opportunity and also assure this House that there is no minister who has stood here to dodge answering any question. It is the time constraint. Mr Speaker, you rightly advised us from the beginning that the time we have left to pass this budget within the constitutional timeframe is so little. You advised us that all the responses should be noted and will be made in writing. 

When the honourable member stands up and says that the ministers are dodging rendering Parliament “impotent”, it leaves so many questions. It is like the Member is saying that he can as well go home. I do not know whether that is not enough for you to declare the seat vacant for the Electoral Commission to do its work –(Interjections)- because in essence, the Member is telling you that when you were saying this, the Member was not around and he is now even at the same time telling us that he cannot ask what happened and read the Hansard, but he is just lamenting. I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tourism.  

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Tourism) (Ms Agnes Akiror): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I appreciate all your support to the sector and wish to also thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting the committee’s report. The time given is quite limited and I am going to try to answer some very pressing issues.

My sister, the shadow minister, hon. Kevinah Taaka, I want to reassure you that the promises were not empty. We have just finished publishing the Tourism Situational Assessment Study and I think that I will give you a copy next week. We believe that that will build on our masterplan. 

On the museum land, I want to reassure Members that the ownership of this land is not being transferred; it is safe and there is no threat whatsoever to that land. We are very passionate about conserving for generations. 

Encroachment is one of the major problems affecting conservation. The pressure on protected areas arising from increased population pressures needs to be addressed and that can be addressed by all of us. We have taken note of the accommodation that the honourable member talked about. We have actually been discussing with our other stakeholders on how we can provide budget accommodation that will cater for the needs of the middle income tourists; and so the plans are already being worked on. 

The commission of inquiry into the alleged misuse and mismanagement of the PAMUSU funds 

The ministry presented a paper to Cabinet and Cabinet set up a technical committee under the stewardship of the Head of Public Service, who is secretary to the Cabinet. This committee is to generate the Government White Paper and it is to report back to Cabinet by 1st September. That is being handled. 

On the issue of the human-wildlife conflict, it is a challenge, but we have been dialoguing and engaging the communities around protected areas. At times, people kill animals and at times animals destroy crops, and at the worst scenario, persons have been killed. 

The ministry totally agrees with the committee’s recommendations that a long-lasting solution should be found to this serious problem. We have tried to budget for fencing, and we have also created barriers and sensitised communities.

A number of trenches were dug last financial year, and this financial year we hope to continue. We also hope to pilot electric fencing for Lake Mburo National Park. The ministry has embarked on opening up boundaries as a way of addressing this problem. [MR CADET: “Information.”] Honourable member, given the time allocated, maybe you can come to my office and then we shall –(Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I want to assure honourable members that UWA has already embarked on opening up boundaries so that we try to mitigate these boundary conflicts. 

The ministry will focus on the following areas for financial year 2012/2013: Amending the Wildlife Act; the Museums and Monuments Act; finalising the Museums and -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Would you like to lay the rest of the response on the Table? 

MS AKIROR: Mr Speaker, most of it is handwritten. We got this report when you reconvened the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Alright, then you will prepare and lay it on Table at a later stage. Thank you very much. 

5.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, this report on page 15 and 16, singles out two issues which seem to be cross-cutting and overlapping. One statement I want to make is that where this may be taking place, we shall engage the various sectors so that we can iron it out once and for all. But before I go off this point, because there is where it is mentioned that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is taking over the responsibility of Bank of Uganda. Minister of Trade, I want to tell you that as far as the Ministry and Bank of Uganda are concerned, we are not aware that we are trying to take over the responsibility of Bank of Uganda. 

The question of the tier IV; Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance are working on the framework, just as mentioned in the report. So, this is being taken care of. [MR WADRI: “Clarification.”] provided, Mr Speaker, you give me more time to finish my points.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no such a thing as more time, honourable minister.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: The Speaker says there is no time. I would like to conclude by informing this House that we have sent corrigenda to the budget and I am requesting the chairman and the committee, to take note of the following: 

For the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, we are making an adjustment to the following figures. For the recurrent, we shall be reallocating more money to take care of the AGOA activities which had been slashed very seriously. Therefore, we shall end up as follows: Recurrent expenditure - Shs 5,647,901,000; and development expenditure - Shs 31,597,868,000; which comes to a total of Shs 37,343,769,000. 

For the Ministry of Tourism and Trade, because of budget cuts, we discovered that they have a problem of rent arrears and, therefore, we have made adjustments within their budget and it will be as follows: Recurrent - Shs 8,371,198,000; and for development - Shs 3,540,715,000; which brings us to a total of Shs 11,911,913,000.

Finally, on the question of funding tourism, I just want to make one general remark. Tourism is served by many sectors. For example, roads, the hospitality standards, cost effective promotion, conservation, environment and wildlife –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, your time is up. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Am time barred?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have responded to the substantive issues for Finance. Thank you very much. 

Mr Chairman, you have one minute to repeat your request to the House.

5.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Stephen Kagwera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg the House to approve Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the figure that has been improved on by the Minister of Finance?

MR STEPHEN KAGWERA: Mr Speaker, the total amount we have for the entire Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is Shs 67,593,869,000. For the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage, we have Shs 12,754,187,000. I beg the House to pass these amounts. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The other figures will be reconciled at the stage of supply. That is when we will harmonise the figures. 

Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Tourism, Trade and Industry sector for the financial year 2012/2013 be adopted by this House. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCE ACT 2006 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

5.44
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance Act 2006 (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded by the same ministry? Can we have the Government Chief Whip or the Minister of State for Trade? Honourable minister, you have five minutes to summarise the object of the Bill.

MRS KIWANUKA: The object of this Bill is to amend Cap.32 of the Finance Act, 2006 to vary the rate charged on engineering plants and other related vehicles. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairperson of the committee, you have seven minutes. 

5.45
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The substantive chair is on duty and I am only representing him. I will go to the effect of the Bill since the minister has read the object of the Bill. 

Page 2; the rate charged on de-registration of engineering plants and other related vehicles reduced from Shs 12 million to Shs 500,000.

The salient features of the Bill 

The  Bill has two clauses; one gives the Bill retrospective application as at 1st July 2012; and clause 2 seeks to amend the first schedule by varying the rate charged on de-registration of engineering plants and other related vehicles in paragraph 30(h) from Shs 12 million to Shs 500,000. 

Committee observations

Commencement date

The committee observed that clause 1 gives the Bill retrospective application. This retrospective application applies to all tax related Bills which all commence on 1st July of every financial year. This retrospective application is an assumption of Parliament’s prospective approval of all proposals without any amendments. 

The committee notes that the Taxes and Duties Act, Cap. 348 gives the minister powers to make orders imposing or varying taxes and duties, and certain allowances at the beginning of every financial year before parliamentary approval. Section 3 of Cap. 348 provides for refunds as follows:

Any tax or duty paid in compliance with an order made under this Act, which is in excess of the tax or duty payable immediately after that order ceases to have effect, shall to the extent that it is not refunded under any other law relating to such tax or duty, which authorises refunds of that tax or duty be refunded. The Act, however, does not address situations as in the proposed amendment where Government loses revenue as a result of reduction of rates. For example, the rate of tax charged on de-registration of engineering plants and other related vehicles is now reduced from Shs 12 million to Shs 500,000.

While the committee is not convinced that this is justifiable, this provision has legal effect as at 1st July 2012. The committee is concerned that the ministry did not make any research into how much revenue will be lost to Government or an indication of how much foreign investment would be attracted.

The committee, therefore, makes the following recommendations:

    i. Amend the Taxes and Duties Provisional Collection Act Cap. 348 to provide for situations where Government loses or is to regulate tax revenue collected which does not finally get parliamentary approval as a result of an order under the Act.

    ii. Urgently pass into law the proposal in clause 2 of the Public Finance Bill, 2012 which provides that the minister shall on behalf of the President present the annual budget of the financial year to Parliament by 1st April of the preceding financial year and other Bills that are necessary to implement the annual budgets. 
    iii. As an interim measure, The Finance Act 2006 (Amendment) Bill, 2012 should not have retrospective effect. Commencement should be the date of publication in the gazette.

Clause 2(2); varying the rate charged on engineering plant and other related vehicles

Clause 2 seeks to amend the first schedule by varying the rate charged on de-registering engineering plants and other related vehicles in paragraph 30(h) from Shs 12 million to Shs 500,000. The move is intended to encourage foreign investors who import heavy machinery to be used in Uganda temporarily. The committee makes the following observations: 

    i. There are several local investors who have invested heavily in this sector who suffer to be paid as a result of irregular payments. The ministry should be encouraging foreign firms to hire from the local market as opposed to temporary importation, which consequently leads to the need for de-registration of the machinery.

    ii. The measure is intended to encourage foreign companies who repatriate most of their money. It is important to note that these companies do not come to donate services to Uganda. They come to execute contracts and most of them do come along with personnel. 


    iii. The ministry did not provide research conducted on the effect of the economy nor a formula used to arrive at the variation. The loss of revenue as a result of the measure is not anticipated by the ministry. The committee recommends that the ministry presents this information to Parliament.


    iv. The committee further notes that Shs 12 million was set in 2006. The net present value of Shs 12 million is equivalent to Shs 21 million. The committee, therefore, recommends that the rate charged should be increased to 20 million.
 
Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson and thank you, honourable minister. Honourabale members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The Finance Act 2006 (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read the second time. I propose the question for debate and the short debate is a one-clause amendment. We are discussing the principles of the Bill at this stage. 

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate that we are discussing the principles, but I rise on a point of guidance. The guidance that I seek is that as we consider this matter, some time back on the Floor of this House, together with the chairperson of UWOPA, I raised a concern of introducing a certificate of gender equity to accompany the budget and all policy frameworks. We were told that we were raising it an earlier stage and that we should wait when considering the Finance Act (Amendment) Bill. Now, the indulgence I am seeking is, At what stage are we going to raise this matter? Because when we raised it earlier, we were informed we should wait at the stage of the Finance Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the particular Bill is not this one. The particular Bill is the one repealing the Budget Act and also repealing the Public Finance and Accountability Act, and it is called the Public Finance Bill. That will come at a later stage and this one is different. That is the one which will bring those provisions. 

MS KAWOOYA: May I again seek your indulgence; since we have been on the Floor of this House for some time now, and when we went through most of the policy statements and it was on the Floor of this House, all sectors mostly lacked provisions for issues of gender mainstreaming. May I seek leave of this august House, Mr Speaker, to allow the Committee on Equal Opportunities and UWOPA to move a motion to introduce the issue of a certificate of gender equity? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, our rules do not allow us to debate in anticipation. There is already a Bill before the House covering that subject. So, bringing a motion would not be proper. But you would wait up to the time when that Bill comes for discussion and then you bring that amendment. It will be entertained.
 
MS KAWOOYA: Much obliged. 

5.54
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this report and to say that I agree with most of the observations that the committee has made. Certainly, we are constrained in terms of revenue and the ministry does not present to us where it will cover the shortfall from. 

Secondly, in this country, we have local contractors. Local contractors have generally been observed to be very weak and one thing that could help in strengthening their capacity is to help them access engineering equipment. And so, if we discouraged de-registration, it would mean that we would be discouraging the exportation of this plant and equipment. As a result, we have a good chance that this equipment would stay in the country having been bought by local contractors. 

So, rather than reducing the rate charged on de-registration, we should actually be thinking about increasing it. And so, it would be reasonable to consider that since a number of years ago the rate charge stood at Shs 12 million, we should have the equivalent today. I would like to support the proposal by the committee that it stands at Shs 20 million because it is scientifically determined. I don’t see the science behind the determination of reduction from what the charge stands at today to Shs 500,000. I beg to support the observations and recommendations of the committee. Thank you.  

5.57
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For the first time, I wholeheartedly receive this report of the committee and I have nothing useful to add to it. I support the recommendations. 

5.59
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also support the report, but after being educated on one clause, where we are saying its application shall be retrospective. I don’t know the legal implication, since laws cannot be applied retrospectively; can I be clarified on this? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The prohibition on retrospective legislation applies to criminal - penal legislation; any other legislation is permissible. And in this particular circumstance, the gap that should have been problematic is covered by the Taxes and Duties Provisional Collection Act. So, this is just adding. 

In fact, we would have just taken it on from the date of approval and moved, but they have decided to give retrospective application which is one way of dealing with it. But the Act covers the period of the retrospection. So, the Act can start working properly, but the retrospective application is of no consequence at all. 

5.59
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report that they have just presented. As we were reading through, there are a number of questions that came to our minds. First of all, why do you want to amend such that the amount of money reduces from Shs 12 million to Shs 500,000 and yet we are after the money, which we use to run a cash budget; and most of the engineering plants and other vehicles that we see in the country have duty free number plates?

I stand to support the presentation from the committee that we don’t amend in view of what has been put in place. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourble minister, would you like to justify why.   

6.00
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Regarding the engineering plants, we proposed the reduction from Shs 12 million to Shs 500,000 under the Finance (Amendment) Act. The justification is that the 12 million was a disincentive to entities that bring or import temporarily engineering plants to carryout construction business in this country.  

I would like to inform the House that this plant is not available in Uganda and in fact tends to move around the world from country to country in search of such jobs - large contracts like road and dam constructions, and then they re-export it after the completion of the works to another country. (Mr Amuriat rose_) Honourable member, I am time barred, unless the Speaker gives me more time. Let me finish. 

The purpose of this fee is meant to be a fee in documentation; it is not revenue-raising. Over the last two years, the revenue collected from this category is Shs 450 million -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, is the honourable minister in charge of Finance in order to bring to the House a Bill while not defining the engineering plants under their different categories? Is she in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you will come in at the right stage to give the proper definition of what an engineering plant should be in the Bill. That is the Bill the way it has been proposed. You can propose an amendment at the right stage. 

MR AMURIAT: Can I get clarification, Sir? 

MRS KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, the purpose of this fee –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I don’t intend to be very difficult. But I am a little bit unclear of what the minister is referring to. I would like to seek your guidance as to whether it would be proper for us to continue listening to the minister without us understanding the meaning of what she intends to put across to the House, at least in my case. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was hoping that was what she was going to do. Let her do it first then. 

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For example, under the Traffic and Road Safety Act, engineering plant means a vehicle that is specially used in engineering and is self-propelling.

The purpose of this fee is not for revenue-raising; it is meant to be a fee for documentation. Over the last two years, the revenue that we have raised from this category amounts to Shs 450 million only. Whereas, in the region, Kenya imposes a fee of Shs 360,000 equivalent, and Tanzania imposes an equivalent of Shs 150 million, while Rwanda has no such fee. So, that is our reason; to increase Uganda’s competitiveness in this area and to note that it has not been a revenue-raising instrument since we raised only Shs 450 million over the last two years. On the basis of this, the proposal in the Bill is meant to improve the business climate of Uganda and we pray that it stands.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Finance Act, 2006 (Amendment) Bill, 2012 be read the second time. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FINANCE ACT, 2006 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, the committee recommends that the Bill be passed with an amendment to clause 1 as follows: 

Clause 1 be deleted and the justification is that the retrospective application is of no effect. There is no mechanism for recovering money from taxpayers who have de-registered their plants and engineering equipment, and have already left the country. Indeed, the rate of Shs 500,000 has legal effect under Cap. 348. The Act will commence on publication. We recommend that clause 1 be deleted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had taken a vote on this matter, but it is a light matter; can we deal with it immediately? I think it is a light matter and the provision of the Taxes and Duties Provisional Collection Act is clear. It covers the period which should have been covered by the retrospective application of this particular Act. So, the committee proposes that instead of having this retrospective application of the Act, the Act commences on the date of publication because the other period is covered by the other law. Honourable minister, do you have any objection to this?

MRS KIWANUKA: No objection, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, clause 2 amends the first schedule and we request that we substitute for 500,000 the figure 20,000,000. The justification is that the measure is intended to encourage foreign companies that repatriate most of the money. It is important to note that these companies do not donate services to Uganda; they come to execute contracts and most of them do come along with personnel. The Ministry should be encouraging foreign firms to hire from the local market, and the net present value of Shs 12,000,000 which was set in 2006 is currently Shs 21,000,000 and the committee, therefore, recommends that the rate charged should be increased to Shs 20,000,000. I beg to move.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As we have stated before, we ask that the clause be left at Shs 500,000 in the interest of staying competitive and in view of the fact that we do not have much revenue raised from this. However, as a compromise, we suggest that we stay the current of Shs 12 million, which we will review next financial year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, if that is carried then you are just saying that you want to withdraw the Bill; the implication is that you are withdrawing the Bill. Okay? So be it.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I wish to oppose the minister’s proposal of maintaining the figure at Shs 12,000,000. And my reason is merely premised on what the minister has said. Whereas in 2006, firms were paying Shs 12 million, road works went on smoothly in this country. Today, the committee is proposing a fee of Shs 20 million, but the minister seems sceptical about the performance of contractors in this country. I think she has no reason to be worried because what happened in 2006 to contractors would happen today and, therefore, this country would still stay competitive. She should not worry and accept the committee’s proposal. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, in my one sentence submission, I had clearly thanked the committee and said I had nothing more useful to add. But the situation in which the minister is taking this House is as though her ministry and herself were not consulted by the committee when they were reviewing and giving justifications for this amendment. I think let the minister help us. Otherwise, I see no reason why she wants to indirectly suggest a withdrawal of this Bill. The way it is now, it is our Bill, and I do not think she has much to do at this stage. Unless advised otherwise, Mr Chairman. 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman and honourable members. I feel that the committee has done good work. If the minister has any problem, we can just set it aside, instead of withdrawing the Bill. Bringing the Bill afresh would mean that you have to start from the first stage, which will be time-wasting. So, I wish that the minister first considers the level of input by the committee members. She should go back and reflect more and decide maybe next week. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, this matter should not actually generate debate. 

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also stand to support the committee because by the time the Minister of Finance put Shs 12 million, it was actually in 2006. We are now in 2012 and everything has changed. Therefore, by the time the committee considered Shs 20 million, I am sure they had also seen how the economy is, and how competitive other contractors are. So, I support what the committee has proposed. (Hon. Baba Diri rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Koboko, can we listen to the minister? Maybe it will solve the issue you want to raise. Let us first hear from the minister now. Honourable minister, you want to say something?

MRS KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, I concede.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You concede to the recommendation of the committee? Honourable members, the amendment is that the figure of Shs 500,000 be deleted and be replaced with Shs 20 million. That is the amendment proposed by the committee of this House. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.15
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.16
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Finance Act, 2006 (Amendment) Bill, 2012 and has passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.16
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hononourable members, the motion requested is that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted by the House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

the Finance Act, 2006 (Amendment) Bill, 2012
6.17
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance Act, 2006 (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the third time and do pass with amendments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Finance Act 2006 (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED,
 “THE FINANCE ACT, 2006 (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2012”


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. I thank Chair of the committee.

BILLS
SECOND READING 

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012


6.18
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any seconders of this motion? The honourable Minister of State for Internal Affairs. Yes, any other seconder? The honourable Minister of State for Trade.

6.18
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to amend the Income Tax Act Cap. 340

    a) To amend the first schedule to provide for other listed institutions. 

    b) To amend the third schedule (i) in part (1) and part (6) to provide for new income tax rates to individuals; and (ii) in part (5) to provide for new withholding tax rates for interest and dividends for resident persons. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Chairperson committee 

6.19
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not going to go into the introduction and methodology. The object of the Bill has been read by the minister. I will go straight away to section 2, observations by the committee, and I beg for 10 minutes, Mr Speaker. It is long.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have seven minutes.

MS AKOL: The committee made the following observations:

Payment of income tax by local staff in listed institutions

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for other listed institutions. These are institutions which are exempt from income tax. They are mostly UN and donor agencies that support projects in Uganda where the Government is mandated to grant an exemption under international law and practice.

However, there is concern that local staff recruited to service diplomatic agencies hide under the misguided interpretation of the law on diplomatic privileges and immunities to evade paying income tax. The committee received clarification from the Permanent Secretary of Foreign Affairs and information that this matter would be resolved with the joint effort of Uganda Revenue Authority, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps in Uganda. 

In the same vein, the committee was informed that an agreement obliging the diplomatic agencies in the country to enable the Ministry of Foreign Affairs stop these exemptions extended to even locally recruited staff that should ideally pay tax. The authority informed the committee that it faces jurisdictional complications when attempts are made to implement the Act. These institutions often ignore request for information in respect to local staff. This means some people are evading tax and the authority lacks capacity to handle this. 

The committee recommends:

    1. That the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should submit the lists of locally engaged staff to URA for implementation purposes and regularly reports to Parliament on the extent to which this matter is being adhered to.

    2. The Uganda Revenue Authority should exercise their mandate to demand for this tax. The law provides the authority with several measures including power to recovery of tax of distrait proceedings

Review of the Pay as You Earn (PAYE) threshold

Last financial year, the committee recommended that the PAYE threshold should be reviewed to lessen the burden carried by low income earners. The committee is pleased to know that this has been heeded to by Government.

Clause 3(a) part 1 provided for new income tax rates for individuals as provided for in the chart. You can read it.

The new threshold rate is Shs 235,000 and the lower level threshold or the highest will pay 30 percent and 10 percent additional by which chargeable income exceeds Shs 10billion per month.  

Treasury Bills

Clause 3(b)(ii) proposes to insert paragraph (iii) to separate interest payments on government securities from other interest payments and increase the withholding rate of interest payments on government securities from 15 percent to 20 percent. The justification is that treasury bills have become very attractive, so Government sees this as a potential source of revenue. 

While the committee appreciates the need to generate more revenue, the committee notes that there is little participation by Ugandans. The existing procedures limit the participation of individuals and an individual who intends to buy treasury bills has to appoint an agent who is usually a bank.

The committee urges Government to explore ways by which individual participation to invest in treasury bills will be strengthened. This could include lowering the withholding rate of interest payments and Government securities payable by Ugandans as compared to foreigners. 

It may also include changing the Bank of Uganda rules applicable to purchase of the treasury bills with the view of liberalising the process to allow for individual participation. 

The committee was informed that their concern forms part of Government’s ongoing review of the Public Finance Bill. As such, the committee was assured that all possibilities would be explored by Government.

Currency Points

Section 7 of the Law Reform Act, 2008 provides that the minister shall amend the value of the currency points in any written law. The committee observed that since the value of the currency point was set at Shs 20,000 due to inflationary tendencies, the value of the shilling has since then deteriorated. The committee recommends that one, the value of the currency point should be stated in one piece of legislation that is the Law Reform Act, 2008. This aids in amending the value. There is no need for every other law -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, you need to read that law so that we distinguish it from other laws. Read it in full.

MS AKOL: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. The value of the currency point should be stated in one piece of legislation, that is, the Law Reform, Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters Act, 2008. This aids in amending the value. There is no need for every other law to state the value of currency points as is currently the case. The minister should review the value of the currency points.

Power of the minister to waive taxes

Every year, the minister pays tax for some taxpayers through waivers, which in effect amounts to loss of would-be Government revenue. This is not specifically provided for any in any piece of law. It is a policy decision by the minister. 

The committee observes under Article 152 of the Constitution that Parliament is the only institution mandated to levy and waive tax. While the committee appreciates that Parliament appropriates money which is used to grant incentives, the committee notes that tax incentives affect domestic revenue, create unfair competition between companies and shifts the tax burden to few people. 

The committee recommends that the powers of the minister should be clearly stipulated in regulations. There is need for regulations over this discretion. The law would clearly provides for circumstances and limits to avoid arbitrariness and abuse.

In the interim, since the minister undertook to ensure that the aid regulations are put in place in less than 30 days, the committee strongly urges Government to exercise restraint in the exercise of these discretional powers except for exceptional circumstances to consider not granting such exceptions.

Taxation in windfall profit

The committee observed that there are some companies making windfall profits. These companies transfer the tax burden onto the consumers through prices. Given that there is no policy on price control, this helps companies acquire abnormal profits at the cost of the stability of the economy. 

The committee recommends that Government considers this as a source of revenue and conducts a study on the impact of windfall tax on the economy with the view to utilising taxation policy to foster consumer protection and economic development.

The committee, therefore, proposes that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012 as proposed by Government be passed without amendments albeit underscoring the need for Government to consider the recommendations highlighted in this report in future.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay these two reports on Table. The report of the Finance Committee on the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill; and the report of the Finance Committee on the Finance Act, 2006. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The report is clear, honourable members. This is one of the rare occasions where the minister proposes a Bill and our committee agrees with the Bill and, therefore, the spirit is carried. I will put the question if there are no really burning matters.

I put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)


BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.28
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.29
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012” and passed it without amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.29
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

6.30
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012 be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2012”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. Congratulations, chairperson of the committee for very comprehensive work and thank you very much, honourable members. 

We have accomplished the tasks we set for ourselves on the Order Paper today. I am happy you are happy. This House is adjourned to tomorrow 10 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.31 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 30 August 2012 at 10.00 a.m.) 

