

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 26 August 2021

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. There have been discussions about saved business that should have been handled by the Tenth Parliament but they were not able to complete it. The rules allow the saving of such business. The question is how does such business come to the 11th Parliament? Does it just show up from somewhere and it comes through committees, or there should be a process by which such business comes back to Parliament before it ends up in committees? That is the discussion we have been having. 

We need to be clear because we have timelines imposed on committees; when they should commence work and 45 days later, they should deliver that work to Parliament. So, if we are just there with saved business yet there is no timeline, how do we assess when the committees should start and complete work to report to Parliament? 

My guidance is that that saved business must be reintroduced to Parliament. The date on which it is reintroduced, requires reference to the committee that they then begin running. The 45 days begin running from the date of referral to the specific committee so that we know what to expect from them within a specific time. We should be using this for all business.

In case of a Bill, there is no way the 11th Parliament is going to begin processing Bills of 2012 or 2014. We do not want to do that. Do we? That the 11th Parliament, which commenced in 2021, is handling Bills of 2014? No, reprint those Bills, bring them here and make them current for this Parliament; we will handle them. Okay? Imagine the 11th Parliament, which commenced in 2021, is handling Bills of 2002 or 2015, it does not make sense.

Finally, there is need to re-examine our Rules of Procedure. I have been looking at them and there are some amendments that have been made. We still practice the Commonwealth Parliamentary Practice and Procedure; there are some fundamentals that you cannot alter too much. If you do, you lose sight of what the purpose of that particular provision was. 

For example, yesterday, we had a discussion with hon. Basalirwa about rules 46 and 48 on supplementary questions. He followed me up and said: “No, Mr Speaker, I still think on these matters of urgent public importance, supplementary questions should be open up.” I said: “Okay, let me break it down for you. What is an urgent matter? Take an example, there is a cholera outbreak in some place and a Member raises information, that ‘Mr Speaker, this morning four people have been admitted in critical condition, there is cholera outbreak’.” Tell me, what supplementary question you could put there?

Which supplementary question is another Member going to ask about such piece of information? Does it make sense? The way these rules are structured, clearly indicate that they are meant to capture some moments and deal with them. 

As I keep explaining, rule 46 is an exception. All matters that come to this House must come by notice. However, when there is cholera outbreak somewhere, the rules say that one will not require notice. Notice is dispensed with the Member, who will come and notify the Speaker to raise such a matter without notice. That is the distinction that is made under rule 46. 

Therefore, you cannot say that we should open it up and start a supplementary question and that any Member can raise a supplementary question. Where are we heading? These are things, I think we should re-examine.

The other one is that when you are voting by roll call and tally, the doors should be shut. Voting by roll call and tally, 529 Members, hon. Jesca Ababiku may be No. 1 and by the time you reach the last Member from Jinja, example, the hon. David Zijjan - if you start voting now, by the time you reach Z, it will be 7.00 p.m. And you are saying he should be shut in here to wait on? Does it make sense? Voting by roll call and tally means Members are called by name and you do not have to sit here. 

However, the rules now say, you pack all the Members in here, lock the doors and you begin voting by roll call and tally. It does not make sense. We need to review some of these things over time so that we can have rules that are functional and serve the purpose.

I thought I should say this, and in the next few days, we should be starting the process of reviewing our rules.   

2.21
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the guidance that you have given as far as the rules are concerned. There are two issues that perhaps, your Office should continue to guide on; they relate to the practice set by you, the presiding officers. 

It is becoming very apparent that whoever presides, adopts a practice, which maybe at variance with the rules and you can understand the dilemma the Members sometimes find themselves in. Going forward, when do I stick to the rules and when do I stick to the practice, especially when sometimes such practice is not embedded in the rules? It is going to be extremely difficult if there is no harmony from the presiding officers.

Finally, Mr Speaker, this 11th Parliament, to the best of my recollection, has not yet considered the rules to govern us for the next five years. If my recollection serves me right, the rules we are using now, were made by the Tenth Parliament. I am aware that they were passed towards its end. 

Therefore, your advice and guidance on a reconsideration of the rules, I think is very urgent. Otherwise, you are going to find situations, where people are asking for supplementary procedure, supplementary questions because some of the presiding officers actually entertain it. 

Mr Speaker, bear with the dilemma we have found ourselves in and let the matter be streamlined as a matter of urgency. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: That is work in progress. On the issue of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Chief Justice then, Benjamin Odoki, on 19 May 2011 made a ruling. He said the Rules of Procedure of Parliament will always be the rules of procedure of any Parliament. Therefore, there is no rule for the 11th Parliament, no rule for the 10th Parliament and no rule for the Ninth Parliament. It will all be Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

He gave that guidance and we have been bound by it. That is why we no longer put dates to show which Parliament it is in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, based on the guidance by the then Chief Justice, Benjamin Odoki. 

Be that as it may, there is need, as you said, for harmony. You see, where we begin now tearing it apart and setting procedures that are not within the rules, it becomes very difficult to play by the rules because anything goes. That is why I am insisting that we play by the rules. It helps. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is just a point of clarification from you. Previously, beginning with the Eighth Parliament and Ninth Parliament, every time we were closing the Parliament, we would move a motion to save the work of that particular Parliament to be inherited by the incoming Parliament. I think in the 10th Parliament, we did the same. 

The logic was that sometimes you have a Bill in the House and the committees have done some tremendous work about it and the institution of Parliament, through the Clerk, have saved that work. Therefore, it would be much easier to process it in the incoming Parliament. 

With the ruling that we are now receiving through you, does it mean that all the work that we had saved in the 10th Parliament now has got to be accommodated in your new ruling? 

THE SPEAKER: Look at it this way, hon. Bahati. There was a Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs of the 10th Parliament. Its membership and leadership were known. They processed some work. The work was not complete. It was caught up by time and by law it should have expired completely but we have this animal of “saving it for the next Parliament”. 

Now, the next Parliament comes with completely new Members. They never participated in any of those debates; they never listened to any witness. In other words, the minutes do not show that they were there. 

Now, you want them to be the ones – the new chairperson of the now Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, who was probably not even part of the other committee of the 10th Parliament - to be the one to come and present this report and own it. Are we being fair to the process? 

2.27
PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Business Committee and in the meeting, we had – because the Business Committee has all the chairpersons of the committees - we were given detailed information about the previous work. 

My view is that if the committees find that a Bill which either expired or had reached a certain stage which is well explained, and the Bill is very important, it would be re-introduced as new business. 

I would like to agree with you, Mr Speaker. I would be very uncomfortable to sit here and say that I am debating a Bill of 2014 in the 11th Parliament. 

Since we have detailed information as chairpersons of the committees, we will see, in our committees, something we still regard as very important and reintroduce it as new business without necessarily referring to the 10th or Ninth Parliament. 

I would, therefore, request honourable colleagues that we go with the guidance of the Speaker. It is the right one and it would put us a notch higher in our business. 

THE SPEAKER: Are we going to start debating this? No. I see everybody now opening their copies of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. (Laughter) 

2.29
THE MINISTER OF ICT AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the past, transiting from the Eighth to the Ninth Parliament, we used to move a motion to just save. However, later on, when we were amending the rules, we put a provision to accommodate this issue. Rule 235 speaks to the lapse or reinstatement of parliamentary business upon dissolution of the House. 

Therefore, we have a clearly laid-down provision which is in consonance with your guidance on how business, which elapsed in the preceding Parliament, can be reintroduced in the subsequent Parliament. We may not need to spend a lot of time because the rules already provide guidance for that. 

THE SPEAKER: That is precisely what I am saying. Right now, the Government thinks the business is already there with Parliament, so, they are waiting for Parliament to process business that has never been reintroduced. 

It has to be reintroduced to Parliament so that it is a current business of this Parliament. We are not asking you to throw it away, but reintroduce it. How do we capture it in the record of the 11th Parliament that this business so exists? That is the point I am making. I am glad that we are now clear about this. 

2.30
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Mr Speaker, Sir, I really want to thank you for your distinguished leadership.

I entirely agree with you, but there are matters that are raised on this Floor that relate with human existence. A case in point, Mr Speaker, is that you, in that seat, directed the chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to bring on this Floor the report on the Kasese November 2016 clashes. 

The chairperson then, who happens to be the Minister for Lands Housing and Urban Development, literally decided to keep away from the House. I observed that. 

Hon. Doreen, the former Woman MP for Amolatar, took over as chairperson of the same committee. You directed, again, that they bring the report on the Kasese November 2016 clashes. Like her predecessor, she disappeared from the House. 

Mr Speaker, as you are fully aware, this is something that touches on human life. I come from Kasese. We continue to lose people. In Kirinya, just last Sunday – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, aren’t you now stretching it out of context? 

MR KATUSABE: Not really in the context. I am trying to appeal to the character in judgment to my fellow colleagues and to your leadership, Mr Speaker, that there are certain businesses that were in the previous
Parliament – the 10th Parliament – that cannot wait and this should simply be one of them. 

The community back home – and we, leaders are restless, seeing our own dying in prison untried and yet as a leader of this House, you have continuously directed this committee. I am yet to know the new chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. 

Mr Speaker, like you have guided, I will certainly get to him or her and ask that this report about the Kasese clashes in November 2016 is presented and submitted before this House, like you directed. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you sound like you are from a border - (Laughter) – where certain practices are conducted. You have successfully done that right now; this thing called, “Going outside border posts but still being able to access markets”. (Laughter) 

I would not like to say the chairpersons disappeared; chairpersons and Members in this House do not disappear. They just get engaged elsewhere. (Laughter) The record should be corrected to reflect that the chairpersons do not disappear; sometimes, they just get busy elsewhere. Member for Moyo West has an issue.

2.34
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank God. I would also like to congratulate and welcome you into the House. 

I rise on an urgent matter of national importance; the matter is about the displacement of people from their original place of residence. On 23 August 2021, over 80 local people in Moyo District were displaced from their grass-thatched houses, which were burnt, following claims that they were practising witchcraft. They were totally burnt with all the properties therein.

The incidence, which involved clan members of Paleure, occurred in Meria Village, Pajakiri Parish in the newly created Otce Sub-county in Moyo District. Over 40 houses were burnt, thereby displacing over 80 people. The elderly, children and those who are sick were all displaced and are running up and down with no food and so on.

Our prayers are that there is need for urgent relief assistance from the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees for the displaced people. I hope she is around – I do not see her. Please, we need urgent assistance for the elderly, sick, displaced and children who are running up and down.

They need items like blankets, utensils, tents, foodstuff, clothing and so on. Mr Speaker, it is now the rainy season; we have heavy rains in Moyo District, as I talk. My fear is that they can easily get other issues related to their health.

Lastly, there is need for the ministry to come out with stringent, deterrent and strong laws to punish the perpetrators of mob justice. You cannot simply claim that somebody is practising witchcraft and then you go, take the law into your hands and burn houses, thereby displacing people. Therefore, there is need for deterrent laws that can stop people from practising mob justice. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government?

2.37
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to welcome you back and we thank the Almighty for keeping and bringing you back the way you are.

I want to respond to the honourable member’s issue about the people who have been displaced because of suspected witchcraft. I have taken note and I am going to liaise with the concerned ministry to see how those people can be helped, especially in terms of relief aid. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.38
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of urgent public importance. 

On Saturday, 21 August this year, strong windy rains, hailstorms and hailstones hit my constituency and an entire parish was completed ravaged. We lost lives; two people died instantly. Others were admitted and they are still in the hospital. Houses were destroyed to the extent that it would be difficult to attach a certain roof found in a given place to a certain house.

Even right now, some people are homeless. They are displaced because of that strong hailstorm –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are covering your face.

MR KYOOMA: Oh! Sorry, Mr Speaker. It is not intentional. (Laughter) Crops were destroyed, animals lost, birds killed and properties destroyed. It is in a state of disarray.

Therefore, while we are taking appropriate measures of writing to the Office of the Prime Minister, the immediate prayer for my people is to call for urgent intervention by the Office of the Prime Minister and minister in charge of disaster preparedness to come to their rescue.

Actually, whereas the parish was adversely affected, even the neighbouring parish of Kashozi was equally affected. I visited this place on Sunday and I was speechless. I have seen our good Rt Hon. Prime Minister visiting some places. My prayer again is, how I wish she could go and visit this place or send the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness, since she cannot be everywhere. 

Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity and I call the attention of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and relevant minister to do the needful.

THE SPEAKER: I hope in both cases, the reports from the Chief Administrative Officers that are required to be sent to the Disaster Preparedness Unit have been submitted. This is for information of Parliament. The Premier will act but the formal documentation at least should be with the responsible department.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, with your permission, may I be allowed to lay some of the pictures of the property destroyed on the Floor?

THE SPEAKER: We just want a response.

MS NAKADAMA: Mr Speaker, like you have guided, I request the Members to put this in writing and send it to the Office of the Prime Minister and copy to the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees so that appropriate action can be taken. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: In the meantime, there should be governmental presence; the people should see that the Government is here. While all these other technicalities are going on, somebody should show up and talk to the people. It is good for the people to understand that the Government is standing with them.

Hon. Kyooma, is there another matter? 

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, I entirely agree with you. I would like to inform the minister that at the moment, there are people who do not have where to sleep. As I have said, we are in the process of writing - we know the formalities. One homestead had three houses completely destroyed. Remember we have the issue of COVID-19 right now. Formerly, people would easily share houses with others, but now it is very difficult. Those who are displaced do not have any shelter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Nakadama, you may have to see how to – Are you going there, Dr Baryomunsi? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to provide information that we come here as Members of Parliament to raise these issues which occur in our constituencies. Like you have guided, we usually expect that when there is a disaster in a community, our Government people - particularly the subcounty chief - should assemble a team to visit the ravaged area, even take photographs and detail what has been damaged. There is a disaster preparedness committee at the district, chaired by the CAO. They should be able to consider this report and then submit it to the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Our work is supplementary as Members of Parliament. As we have guided, that process should be immediate because these are urgent issues so that by the time we raise them as Members of Parliament, a process has already taken place. Like that relief, maybe it has been mobilised. It is because most often, by the time we raise the issues, people are already suffering. 

As Members of Parliament, we should engage the CAO and the district leaders to immediately take action. We are here in Kampala when these disasters occur in our constituencies, especially for us who represent distant constituencies. 

I provided this information to reinforce your point. Like the Prime Minister has said, as Government, we shall take it up and see how the Member of Parliament and the people of Ibanda County North shall be supported.

THE SPEAKER: Dr Baryomunsi is the acting Government Chief Whip. I think he is speaking in that capacity. (Laughter)

2.46
MR ABDI FADHIL CHEMASWET (NRM, Soi County, Kween): Mr Speaker, I thank you for coming back to the House. Last week on Thursday, 19 August 2021, I left for Dar es Salaam to witness the swearing-in of hon. James Kakooza who was elected to fill the vacancy in Uganda’s representation at the East African Legislative Assembly. 

Having been cleared by the Deputy Speaker as the Deputy Chairperson of Committee on East African Community Affairs – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please go to the urgent matter. 

MR CHEMASWET: The matter of national importance that I am raising, which is urgent, is the mandatory PCR test at the airport by all returnees - both citizens and non-citizens. I noted that whereas the Ministry of Health, in its endeavour, is trying to mitigate the influx of the new variants of COVID-19 into the country, the process is precarious and unnecessarily expensive. 

The private laboratories at the airport are charging $65, which is an equivalent of Shs 250,000. When I made some inquiries about the test at the airport - on whether the recent Afghan refugees were all subjected to the same PCR test, I was reliably informed that indeed all the refugees were tested but on the account of the Government of Uganda. 

This is not a good message to Ugandans being subjected to tests at a high cost in their country and yet non-Ugandans are being catered for by the Government.

Secondly, as if the high costs are not enough – 

THE SPEAKER: I would like you to tell me the urgent matter or else we will pause it there. What is the urgent matter? 

MR CHEMASWET: Mr Speaker, the question is on the high cost of COVID-19 testing at the airport. Secondly, the disorganised manner of handling the process at the airport - If you are to go there today, you will realise that the whole process is disorganised. People are bundled into the buses and taken elsewhere to be tested. They are not tested at the airport. This is so grievous – (Hon. Member rose_) Information? 

THE SPEAKER: You have the information and you are informing the House. Therefore, you cannot allow information. (Laughter)

MR CHEMASWET: Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter. In fact, these Ugandans were taken to some beach and not to the airport. This infringes on the rights of an individual to travel peacefully and safely within Uganda. 

Imagine if somebody had made prior bookings with taxi operators and the termination of the networks are not working, how would you access the taxi services within the country?

THE SPEAKER: I think it is time for the Minister of Health to deal with this matter. She is right there. Can we give her a chance now? 

MR CHEMASWET: Let us give her a chance. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR CHEMASWET: Mr Speaker, I think her boss has failed to tame her even. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: She is right here. 

2.50
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Globally, all airports are screening and testing people for reasons that we all know - that is COVID-19. It is also to prevent importation of variants which keep on coming up from time to time. 

Entebbe International Airport is small, with limited space. Apart from that, there are also ongoing works. Whereas we would have loved to test people at the airport, it is not possible because of the size, the ongoing works and the overcrowding. In addition, our airport is undergoing an evaluation for us to comfortably start flying Uganda Airlines. So, we cannot afford to overcrowd the airport again.

Mr Speaker, the ongoing testing at Peniel Beach Hotel is a collaborative work between the Ministry of Health, Civil Aviation Authority and the private sector. I visited Peniel Beach Hotel by myself. There is no crowding there. The process is smooth. The buses in which people are taken are very beautiful. The cost of $65 which Ugandans complain about may be high, but compared to other countries, it is relatively cheap. 

We cannot afford to import other variants; we must test. I thank you.

MR CHEMASWET: Mr Speaker, the information from the minister is good. PCR testing for COVID-19 in Tanzania is a preserve of the Government of Tanzania. However, with Uganda it is about private entities.

Mr Speaker, one thermocules machine meant for testing COVID-19 costs only US$ 5000. If we take a projection of 3000 sub-counties or town councils in Uganda, the cost would be US$ 15 million.

THE SPEAKER: Raise the supplementary question.

MR CHEMASWET: US$ 15 million would translate to Shs 54 billion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chemaswet, what is the supplementary matter you are raising?

MR CHEMASWET: The Supplementary matter is, we would like to interest us on these laboratories; whether they belong to Government or private individuals and who they are. What about the transport companies; what are they? Who owns them?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Chemaswet. (Laughter) 

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, I request the honourable member to visit the place and interest himself in the processes. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we now go to the Order Paper?

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON BUILDING A MORE RESILIENT SECTOR: LESSONS LEARNT FROM A SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON THE TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY SECTORS

2.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Mwine Mpaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay a report of the sectoral committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on building a more resilient sector.

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MWINE MPAKA: I beg to lay the minutes of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry.

THE SPEAKER: Let the records also capture the minutes.

MR MWINE MPAKA: Mr Speaker, I beg to request - honourable members, you have a copy of this report on your ipads; it is a comprehensive report of 50 pages. However, I have summarised it and I wish to make my presentation on 20 pages only. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

On behalf of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, I stand to present a report of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on building a more resilient sector: lessons learnt from a socio-economic impact assessment of the COVID-19 pandemic on the tourism, trade and industry sectors.

Mr Speaker, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry undertook an exercise to assess the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on the tourism, trade, and industry sectors and to propose a way forward in view of building a more resilient sector. The committee now reports to the House.

The background is indicated on page one of the report, honourable members.

The Rationale

In accordance with its oversight mandate, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and industry has conducted a study on the socio-economic impact of COVID-19 on the tourism, trade and industry sectors. The study aims, as much as possible, to use the lessons learnt to propose to Parliament a way forward in order to inform and shape what the “new normal” for the tourism, trade and industry sectors should look like, in a bid to improve the country's adaptation to the COVID-19 virus and to build a more resilient economy.

The Scope

The committee considered the subject with respect to the three sectors of tourism, trade and industry. While cognizant of the fact that the aforementioned sectors do not exist in isolation, the committee tried as much as possible to limit its analysis to those sectors without delving much into other sectors, e.g. health and education, except where it could not be avoided.

The Objectives

The committee sought to find out the following: 

The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the tourism, trade, and industry sectors; 
Factors that have exacerbated the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the sectors; 
Efficacy of the strategies to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on the sectors.

The Methodology Used:

The committee adopted the following methods of work:

Meeting with key stakeholders. They are listed on page three and four of the report, honourable members.

Memoranda; we also received written memoranda from key stakeholders.

We carried out field visits in accordance with rule 202 of the Rules of Procedure. The committee divided itself into sub committees which constituted delegations and conducted regional visits from 30th July to 2nd August 2021 in the selected districts as follows:

Northern region, in the districts of Amuru, Gulu, Lira and Nwoya; 
Eastern region in the districts of Busia, Jinja, Kibuku and Mbale; 
Western regions in the districts of Fort Portal, Rubirizi, Lwengo and Mbarara.

A list of the respondents and the groups that the committee interacted with in the field is provided in appendix A of that report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, some Members seem to have a problem with accessing the report on the ipads. Is it a general problem? It is there? Please up your skills so that you can access it. I am told that the word is “refresh”. The report is there. Proceed, chairperson. 

MR MWINE MPAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee also carried out desk research to establish the statistics to enrich it.
 
Observation and Analysis:

This section presents the committee’s findings and an analysis of the data generated by the various methodologies. Honourable members, pages 6, 7 and 8 have the details and statistics of the tourism, trade and industry sectors’ contribution to the economy before the pandemic. 

Negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Tourism, Trade and Industry sectors;

Loss of Market and Slump in Sales and Revenues. The study of business entities indicated that there was a substantial fall in the effective demand in the economy, which affects access to markets.  Players in the tourism, trade and industry sectors are thus facing staggering losses due to the interruption of the business operations. This is evidenced in the different sectors as follows below.

Tourism; Visitation to Tourist Attractions reduced drastically, as shown by the data
in the table on page 9. National parks; in 2019, we had 323,861 visitors, in 2020, we had 101,331 visitors. This is a negative 69 per cent decline.

Uganda Wildlife Education Centre (UWEC) (Zoo) in 2019, we had 383,398 visitors. In 2020 we had 67,789 visitors. This is a negative 82 percent drop and several examples as indicated in that table.

The committee was informed that such low numbers were last recorded in 2002. Tourist arrivals in 2020 - the foreign visitors to Uganda dropped by 69 percent to 473,085 from 1,542,620 visitors recorded in 2019. The tourist arrivals in 2020 declined to levels of 2005.

Foreign exchange earnings

The foreign exchange earnings dropped three-fold in the year 2020 from $1.6 billion, that Uganda earned from foreign tourists in in 2019, to $0.5 billion in the year 2020; a 73 per cent decline.

Accommodation facilities 

The country registered a decline in hotel room occupancy rates, from 51.9 per cent in 2019, to an average of 20 per cent in 2020.

Additionally, the sector registered booking cancellations up to over 90 per cent of the hotel facilities. This led to a loss of revenue amounting to $320.8 million, which is equivalent to Shs 1.19 trillion in addition to other business losses. 

Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Events (MICE)
 
At least 85 per cent of booked meetings, events and conferences to be hosted in Uganda were cancelled in 2020. For example, international meetings and events such as the UN G77 Summit that was scheduled to take place in Uganda in April 2020 and was to attract participants from 136 member states, was cancelled. 

Tour operator business 

Nine out of 10 tour operator businesses registered client booking cancellations between March 2020 and June 2020. As a result of these cancellations, tourism revenue in excess of $30.4 million, had been lost in just four months between March and June 2020. 

Loss in revenue for Tourism, Ministries, Departments and Agencies

Overall, the tourism sites in the country registered 77 per cent decline in tourism volumes. The table on page 10 of the report shows this. I will give just two examples.

Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) performance in the Financial Year 2020/2021

Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA)’s actual NTR collections in the Financial Year 2018/2019, was more than Shs 194 billion and Shs 28 billion in the Financial Year 2020/2021.

Uganda Wildlife Education Centre (UWEC)’ actual NTR collections in the Financial Year 2018/2019 was more than Shs 4.0 billion and more than Shs 1.5 billion in the Financial Year 2020/2021.

Effects on transport, logistics and other aspects of the business value chain 

The restrictions on movement particularly affected the transport and logistics part of the organisation's business value chain due to the ban on the inter-district movement. 

The committee notes that during the lockdown of June-July 2021, movement between districts was banned. During its field visits, the committee found out that markets in cities such as Jinja and Mbale were severely affected by this inter-district movement ban because most of the people who work in and buy from the markets come from outside those cities to engage in trade activities there.

Results from the committee's field visits indicate that border districts were impacted more by the pandemic than those that do not lie at the borders, in terms of loss of market and slump in sales. This is because border districts were occasionally left on lockdown even after other districts were opened up, for example, Kasese District.

Increase in street vending and reduction of business in markets 

The committee also found that the ban on movement constituted a denial of access to traders’ ordinary places of work. Hence, the traders resorted to operating on the streets and road-sides to make a living, causing overcrowding on the streets and reducing business in the markets. 

Reduction in average plant utilisation rates 
Average plant utilisation rates by manufacturers reduced from about 70 per cent before the COVID-19, to between 30 and 40 per cent during COVID-I9, for small-to-medium sized firms and 50 per cent for the larger ones.
 
We also had a decline in annual growth of industrial output from 9.1 per cent in the Financial Year 2018/2019, to 3.3 per cent, in the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

Rent arrears and failure to meet other operating costs

Honourable members, tenants could no longer pay their rent because they did not make or receive any income. Businesses also lost capital through paying back loans and meeting other expenses outside the business operations.  

For service businesses such as hotels, while their occupancy rates had dropped tremendously, operating costs, both on utilities and wages remained constant. Meeting these operating costs remained a serious challenge.

Difficulty in servicing loans
The Minister for Trade, Industry and Co-operatives informed the committee that over 90 per cent of both fixed and working capital used in the trade sector is obtained through borrowing and/or through various avenues such as money loan sharks, banks, SACCOs, among others. 

According to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Non-Performing Loans in the Trade and Commerce Sector rose from a quarterly average of 5.0 per cent between July and September 2019 to 7.4 per cent, between January and March 2020 and eight per cent between January and March 2021. 

Depreciation, spoilage and wear of business assets
According to the United Arcade Traders’ Association (UATEA), restaurants and food vendors lost food, fridges, ovens and other cookery units as they had no chance to collect them the day the lockdown was effected. Several traders complained of losing their merchandise to rust, mould and leakages, among others.

The traders that deal in perishable goods suffered obvious losses. In a meeting with Mbarara bar owners, it was stated that they had enormous losses because their drinks such as beers and sodas had expired –(Interjections)– yes, beer expires.

Difficulties with paying taxes and other statutory charges

The committee found that businesses were finding it difficult to meet their legal obligations in taxes and other statutory charges. This was generally because they had made, if at all, only meagre incomes during the duration of the pandemic and particularly on the months within which the country was on lockdown. We also had a decline in incomes and tax revenues accruing from the sectors.

Tourism

The committee was informed that owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, 88 per cent of tourism enterprises lost 50 per cent of their incomes, while one out of every 10 enterprises lost 100 per cent of their incomes.
 
Trade

More than 67 per cent of the Micro-Small and Medium Enterprises have recorded 50 per cent reduction in incomes. During the first lockdown, tax revenue from the Transport and Storage Sector declined by 31 per cent. We also had other challenges like closure of businesses and rising levels of unemployment in the sector.

Other concerns voiced by the respondents include anxiety, mental health issues, insecurity, harassment of the traders by security operatives, hiked prices of goods and services.

In conclusion, the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent containment measures have negatively affected the Tourism, Trade and Industry sectors with disproportionate impact of the three sectors under study. 

The Tourism sector has been hit the most negatively, particularly owing to the travel restrictions and other associated activities. As a result, the tourism sector registered a massive business loss characterised by private business shutdown, tourist booking cancellation, closure of businesses.

With a resultant loss of jobs and livelihood, the tourism sector also generally suffered from reduced visibility of its activities. While the sector has already started showing some signs of recovery, some of the measures put in place to mitigate the impact of the pandemic are yet to produce their desired results. 

The trade and industry sectors were also negatively impacted by the pandemic. As for tourism, they experienced loss of markets and slump in sales and revenue, rent arrears and failure to meet other operating costs as well as difficulty in servicing loans, depreciation, spoilage and wear of business assets. 

There were difficulties in paying taxes and other statutory charges, decline in incomes and tax revenues accruing from the sectors, closure of businesses and overall reduction in investment. There were also rising levels of unemployment, among others.

However, the industry sector appears not to have been hit quite as hard as its counterparts. And so, it appears to have bounced back much faster, with manufacturing particularly seen to be playing a critical role and supporting Government’s efforts too, in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. Several
factories have undertaken research and repurposed their production lines to produce essential products.

Honourable members, we also have underlying factors that exacerbated the negative impact of the pandemic. These are basically the factors that were in existence before the pandemic but made it worse.

Policy framework 

Limited funding for these sectors

The sector budget intends to be inadequate. For example, tourism is the largest foreign exchange earner of this country and during our budgeting process we allocated it about 0.4 per cent. 

The tourism agencies are sustained by the non-tax revenues they collect and you have seen that non-tax revenue has also been affected. The sector revenue projections in the budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022 will not be realised due to COVID-19 containment measures. 

Lack of commercial attaches in our foreign embassies/missions

Mr Speaker, a commercial attaché is a person posted to a foreign embassy to promote the economic interest of his or her home country.

The committee noted that the minister responsible for trade had interviewed commercial attaches to work in our foreign missions and submitted the list to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. However, currently, diplomatic attaches are working as commercial attaches.

High loan interest rates

Honourable members, you know this was already in existence even before the pandemic. This was a very big challenge when the pandemic came and even Bank of Uganda reduced the CBR rate from 7.5 per cent to 6.5 per cent, in order to resuscitate the economy post COVID-19. However, most commercial banks did not comply with this regulation. 

The tax regime

Several respondents we spoke to complained about the numerous taxes and high taxes, for example, taxation of textile using weight or kilogrammes. Previously, valuing customs for imported goods sold for export to the partner states was done using the transaction value method until June 2021 when the legal notice No. EAC/118/2021 of the Protocol on Establishment of the East African Community Customs Union gazetted the East African Community Gazette on 30 June 2021. The method of valuation was changed to measurement in kilogrammes.

The legal notice was made in accordance with Articles 12(3) and 13(c) of the Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Community Customs Union, which confers powers upon the Council of Ministers to amend the protocol. The Council of Ministers approved changes in custom duty rates on certain items, including textiles and it provides as follows:

“Textiles - Fabrics as per approved HS Codes LN. No. EAC/118/2021 - Uganda to stay application of EAC CET rate of 0 per cent, 10 per cent and 25 per cent and apply a duty rate of 35 per cent or $3 per kilogramme, whichever is higher.”

During our interactions with the United Arcades Traders Association, they made this point clear. When these people import textiles in a container, almost 20 per cent is considered garbage. We have hangers, boxes and travel carriers, among others. When you tax them according to the weight of the textile as opposed to the quality, they are at a disadvantage.

Two, they clearly stated to us that they do not sell these textiles in kilogrammes. When you go to a butcher, they will weigh your meat but when you go to a boutique, they are not going to weigh the clothes you are buying. Therefore, they do not find this relevant but instead an encumbrance.
 
Introduction of the digital tax stamps

Whereas the introduction of the digital tax stamps contributed to reduction of fake goods on the market and illicit trading, it also increased the cost of certain products manufactured in Uganda, namely; beers and spirits. This has increased the cost of production which means the customer must bear the cost. 

Numerous taxes and licences and levy for the hotel industry

Honourable members, during our interaction with the hotel owners, they clearly stated to us that they are paying over 23 taxes - you have a hotel and you are paying the tax for the hotel, tax for bar in the hotel and tax for the restaurant in the hotel and so much more. 

Lack of operationalisation of the tourism development levy

The committee observes that unlike other states in the EAC region, Uganda lacks a sustainable tourism funding mechanism. Kenya and Tanzania each introduced a tourism development levy to build a sustainable fund for their sectors. Section 20 of the Uganda Tourism Act, No.2 of 2008, provides for a tourism development levy and gives power to the minister to operationalise this levy as follows:

“20. Tourism development levy.
(1) The minister may, after consultation with the minister responsible for finance by statutory order, impose a tourism development levy. 

(2) The levy imposed under this section shall be paid, collected and accounted for in accordance with the regulations made under section 34.”

The committee notes that the minister has, since 2018, not operationalised the imposition of the tourism development levy. If the levy had been fully operationalised, it would have provided a source of funds to cushion the sector during these hard times of the pandemic. 

We also had a challenge of lack of a consumer protection law, which leaves consumers vulnerable to unscrupulous business practices. Honourable members, during the pandemic - you are aware that the cost of treatment of COVID-19 skyrocketed during the pandemic, with some clinics charging as much as Shs 100 million and they went to an extent of retaining the bodies of the deceased until someone had cleared these bills.

In Uganda, the evolution of cartels, where prices are determined by connivance contrary to the principle of market forces, has undermined the principles of competition. There are also concerns over the growth in prices of specific services and goods, especially fuel, telecom, banking, sugar, etc. We do not have consumer protection law to protect our citizens. 

Delayed enactment of the national local content law

The committee notes that the National Local Content Bill, 2019 was passed by the Tenth Parliament on 20 May, 2020. However, upon presentation for assent, it was returned by H.E. the President for re-consideration on certain matters, in accordance with Article 91(3) of the Constitution and Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

We also have restricted access to the internet and e-services that were there even before and it affected us during the pandemic. While Uganda has the highest cost of internet in the East African Community, an excise duty tax of Shs 200 on its use was introduced during Financial Year 2020/2012. The overall effect has been to somewhat stifle access to internet, especially for low-income earners, including the young people. 

Furthermore, the Facebook App was blocked in Uganda since March 2021, thereby reducing access to e-markets and access to e-marketing.

The committee observes that the young people may generally not afford transport costs or rent of office space and other work premises, many of them are in position to conduct business from their homes via Facebook in particular and internet in general. Furthermore, digital marketing is a useful function for the supporting and development of alternative routes to the market.

Analysis of the interventions by Government to mitigate the impact of the pandemic

General and immediate interventions by the Government

Honourable members, apart from matters to do with Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), ban on mass gatherings, restriction of high-risk social activities, provision of medical treatment and mass vaccination, the Government restricted cross-border movement, except cargo. The Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that efforts were made to avoid undermining the flow of commercial cargo and tourists.

Government of Uganda economic stimulus package

In the Financial Year 2019/2020, under the Supplementary Budget Schedule No.3, Parliament approved a total of Shs 555.18 billion for a COVID-l9 economic stimulus package. This was in response to the Government’s plan to provide a much-needed business cover to keep businesses afloat during the COVID-l9 pandemic, and thereby, stimulate the economy. 

The stimulus package was distributed as follows: Uganda Development Bank Shs 455.18 billion; Uganda Development Corporation Shs 100 billion.

Uganda Development Bank 

In response to the impact of the COVID-l9 pandemic, the Government of Uganda committed to capitalise UDB with Shs 455.18 billion to be used to support the private sector. 

However, the intended purpose of the stimulus package has faced challenges, which have threatened the achievement of this objective as follows:

UDB lengthy credit appraisal process

It was established that UDB's credit approval process and high minimum lending thresholds of Shs 100 million are biased towards large corporate borrowers who have better business plans, better credit ratings and higher profitability. Honourable members, you cannot borrow from UDB an amount less than Shs 100 million. This discourages many of the MSMEs who are largely informal and focused on low productivity activities.

UDB legal registration requirements make credit inaccessible to most MSMEs

According to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, a greater percentage of MSMEs are unregistered and operate informally and yet these businesses are the backbone of economic growth in Uganda. However, to access financial services from UDB, MSMEs must have undergone the legal process of forming a corporate entity with the Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) or to have registered as a cooperative or farmer group. This alienates the MSMEs from accessing the stimulus package from UDB.

UDB’s reliance on land titles as collateral excludes MSMEs who are most financially constrained

The committee observes that financial institutions generally do not sanction credit to most MSMEs due to lack of significant collateral; and the situation is not any different with UDB. It was established that collateral is discounted to the forced sale value, which disadvantages MSMEs in accessing the loans above the threshold of Shs 100 million from UDB.

UDB lending interest rates

The committee also established that UDB disburses its loans at interest rates of 14.5 per cent, which is almost the same as commercial bank rates. This makes it more of a commercial bank than a development bank.  And this was supposed to be a stimulus package to help our citizens.

Lack of physical regional presence

The committee found that UDB lacked physical regional presence. Therefore, it was not easily accessible by businesses that were not located in Kampala or near to the few offices. 

Honourable members, when we looked at the chart of the beneficiaries from UDB, 70 per cent are from the central region. 

There was confusion between Stimulus package and ordinary/normal UDB capitalisation

While Parliament approved a supplementary budget of Shs 455.188 billion, to support the private sector that had been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, UDB continued to state that the funding was for capitalisation and not a stimulus package. Yet the 10th Parliament passed this money specifically for a stimulus package under Vote 008.

Uganda Development Corporation (UDC): Shs 100 million

UDC's focus on pre-defined priority projects

UDC is an investment arm of government and not an emergency vehicle by design. The notion of UDC only investing in Government strategic interventions has a crowding-out effect on private sector access to support. 

Results of the Government interventions through UDC are strategically important and cannot be underestimated. However, these may require a lot more time to reap the desired benefits. The committee is therefore of the view that UDC is unsuitable for emergency recovery funds

External Finance COVID-l9 interventions

Tourism Sector 

The tourism sector received a stimulus package of € 6 Million from the European Union. The committee was informed that in December 2019, UDB partnered with the European Union to provide a grant of €6 Million equivalent to Shs 21.8 billion. 

We also had the COVID-19 Economic Recovery and Resilience Response Programme of US$ 8.3 million. 

The Private Sector Foundation of Uganda (PSFU) partnered with MasterCard Foundation to implement a COVID-l9 Economic Recovery and Resilience Response Program (CERRRP) worth US$ 8.3 million from June 2020 - October 2021.

Observations

The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities informed the committee that the € 6 million grant was disbursed through UDB, however, UDB tied it to a loan. In other words, to access the grant, you had to borrow a certain amount of money from UDB. The committee observes that this waters down the effect of the grant, to effectively turn it into a loan.

The committee further observes that information about the performance of these interventions is scanty and the criteria used to select beneficiaries is unclear. 

Additionally, there is poor coordination of external financing in form of grants that are meant for COVID-19 economic recovery. This may point to lack of transparency, duplication and poor accountability.

Conclusion on economic stimulus packages

Overall, the lack of transparency, limited participation, poor targeting of the intended beneficiaries and weak accountability mechanisms remain key challenges in the utilisation and disbursement of the economic stimulus packages. 

While the tourism sector was heavily affected by the Government containment measures, the economic stimulus packages designed have so far not achieved their intended objectives.

Efforts to restructure loans 

While the Government, through Bank of Uganda, has guided borrowers and banks to hold negotiations with an aim to restructure/reschedule loans and interest repayments as businesses recover from the effects of COVID-19, the committee observes that this has instead, to a large extent, served to disadvantage the borrowers. 

Loan restructure intervention did not yield any result since the longer the loan stretches, the more the customer has to pay due to the application of the principle of time value for money. Hence this intervention instead worked to benefit the banks.

Interventions regarding taxes

The Government introduced provisions to ease the burden of payment of tax due to the effects of the COVID-l9 pandemic. For instance, a person registered as a tax payer under and who was liable to pay tax on or after 1 April 2020 and before 30 June 2020 had their liability to pay the tax deferred until 30 September 2020. Additionally, no interest or penalty was to accumulate on the outstanding amount of tax during the period referred to above.

Furthermore, any interest on tax arrears that were unpaid by 30 June 2020 by a taxpayer who voluntarily complies with their tax obligations would be waived. Additionally, upcountry accommodation facilities and Kampala based hotels were exempted from VAT up to 30 June 2021.

Grace period of one month before renewal of driving permits

While, after the most recent lockdown that was lifted on 31 July 2021, the Ministry of Works and Transport provided a grace period of one month for renewal of driving permits, the committee finds that extension of time insufficient to allow most drivers get enough funds for payment for the renewal.

The Africa Continental Free Trade Area Agreement (AfCFTA)

The committee was informed that the Government had put in place a medium-term measure to facilitate access to the new regional markets under the Africa Continental Free Trade Area Agreement. The committee hopes that this medium-term plan will yield positive results.

Honourable members, much as we had challenges, there were also opportunities created by the pandemic. 
Opportunities in trade
The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that annual coffee exports continued to increase in both volume and value. Coffee exports in the Financial Year 2020/2021 reached 6.1 million of 60 kilogrammes bags, up from 5.05 million bags in Financial Year 2019/2020 and 4.18 million bags in 2018/19. 

Opportunities in the industry sector

Average annual growth in industrial output recovered slightly from 3.3 per cent in Financial Year 2019/2020 to 3.4 per cent in Financial Year 2020/2021 

The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives reported that over 160 factories had undertaken research and repurposed their production lines to produce essential products, including: 

Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs); 
Sanitisers and disinfectants; 
Clinical care equipment; 
Supportive care drugs and herbal remedies;
Food, salt, bottled water, et cetera. 

Honourable members, on page 39 are the recommendations of the committee. The committee makes the following recommendations: 

Specific recommendations for the tourism sector

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development urgently operationalises the Tourism Development Levy that is already provided for in the Uganda Tourism Board Act, Cap 333. 

It is hoped that this will provide a sustainable source of funding for the tourism sector. 
The committee proposes a levy of $10 to be charged on each ticket for every person who departs from Uganda by air – (Interjection) Pardon? (Laughter) For every Ugandan.

It is proposed that the Tourism Development Levy be collected, managed and utilised as follows: 

That 70 per cent of the funds will be used to support the revival of businesses of private sector actors/players in the tourism sector, considering they have borne the brunt of COVID-19 in their businesses; 

That the 70 per cent be managed by Post Bank Uganda - because we have already seen challenges with UDB. Since Post Bank is a Government bank, the committee recommends that this 70 per cent be sent to Post Bank for the tourism sector;

The criteria for accessing these fees from the bank will be decided upon by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in consultation with the relevant stakeholders; 

That 20 per cent will be appropriated to the Uganda Tourism Board to intensify the marketing of Destination Uganda and of our tourism products at both domestic and international levels. 

The levy will be collected by Uganda Revenue Authority, which will also retain 10 per cent as a collection fee. 

Review of existing taxes, fees and licences in the tourism sector 

The committee proposes a review of all the existing taxes, fees and licences that are specific to the tourism sector, with a view to harmonising them. For example, the issue of the hotel owners.

Affordable accommodation and transportation for domestic tourists

Honourable members, in a bid to reduce the overdependence on international tourists, the committee recommends that:

The Uganda Wildlife Authority should encourage investors to provide affordable transportation and accommodation options for domestic tourists. 
The Minister of Works and Transport should fast-track the expansion of Entebbe International Airport and upgrade the regional aerodromes to respond to the challenging needs of travellers, in light of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Increased subventions

Honourable members, the committee recommends that Government increases budget subventions to the tourism sector, ministry, department and agencies to enable them remain afloat. 
For example, as we speak now, Uganda Wildlife Authority does not have money to pay salaries of the staff.

Specific recommendations for the trade sector

Payment of property rates, rent and utilities

This was one of the biggest challenges, I think also to the honourable members - property rates and rent.

In order to ease the financial pressure suffered by tenants and landlords, the committee recommends that local Governments should suspend payment by landlords of 50 per cent of the property tax payable per year. 

In turn, the landlords will forego rent that is demanded from tenants for the one month we were in lockdown. This exemption will apply only to arcades, shopping malls, bars, night clubs, sports betting clubs and health clubs.

Extension of period for renewal of driving permits

Honourable members, the committee recommends that for the taxi drivers and boda boda riders, whose driving permits expired during the lockdown, the Minister of Works and Transport should extend the period for renewal of their permits to six months.

Licence fees 

Honourable members, the committee recommends that the Uganda Revenue Authority and local authorities maintain pre-lockdown licence fees for a period of one year, to allow traders time to recuperate or recover from the economic shocks they suffered during the pandemic. 

Honourable members, when we visited Kabarole, the local Government had increased the licence fees by 200 per cent. So, the committee recommends that the licence fees remain as was before the pandemic.

Alternative and cheaper transport mechanisms 

The Minister of Works and Transport should strengthen the capacity of the Uganda Railways Corporation, so that railway transport is a reliable and cheaper option. It should be strengthened to ease transportation of business cargo. 

Legal framework

Enact and enforce a law on consumer protection. Government is urged to prioritise tabling a Bill on consumer protection, with an aim to protect the interests of consumers in Uganda. The enactment of a consumer protection law would help protect consumers’ rights against fraudulent and deceptive practices by sellers and suppliers of goods and services and promote ethical standards in commercial transactions.

It would specify unfair practices through which big companies gain an advantage over smaller competitors or through which they mislead consumers and provide for a redress mechanism for consumer claims. For instance, it could provide for direct action against offending undertakings by prosecuting them for arbitrarily increasing prices of goods and requiring dominant undertakings to reduce their prices. 

The committee also proposes to develop a competition policy and enact a law on competition. The committee urges that Government puts in place a legal framework to govern competition, including a policy, law and regulations to be employed by Government; to ensure that the markets remain competitive through maintaining a fair degree of competition by eliminating restrictive business practices by private enterprises. An agency to regulate anti-competitive practices would also be necessary. 

A competition law would be expected to protect small firms against their more powerful rivals and to encourage competition in the economy by:

Prohibiting restrictive trade practices; 
Controlling monopolies; 
Encouraging enterprise, innovation, efficiency and 
Widening of choice to allow consumers to buy the goods and services they want at the best possible prices. 

Honourable members, for example, when you look at Garden City, you have a large supermarket – Mega Standard – upstairs. You have a large supermarket downstairs. This is what we are talking about.

Enact and implement a law on local content

The committee recommends that the National Local Content Bill, 2019 be included among the lapsed businesses to be saved from the 10th Parliament, so that it is considered expeditiously by the 11th Parliament. 

Alternatively, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development should table a fresh Bill, if necessary. Enactment of the local content Bill will ensure that products made in Uganda are given a higher advantage to compete in price of procurement, so as to encourage local manufacturers. 

The committee submits that should Government delay to table the proposed and critical Bills, the committee shall evoke rules 123 and 159(b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and initiate Private Members’ Bills. 

Business communities and associations

Formation of associations as lobbying groups

Honourable members, business communities are urged to form strong associations as lobbying groups that can voice their concerns during this and other crises. The same traders’ associations could be used as channels to oversee the enforcement of Standard Operating Procedures for COVID-19 by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

For example, when we interacted with Kampala City Traders, they said they do not have authority over some traders who are not members of KACITA.

Revival of the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry

Additionally, in the alternative, the committee recommends that the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry should be revived. As you are aware, it is currently under an injunction.

The committee recommends that the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry should be restructured, strengthened and revived, in order to support it to be at the forefront of lobbying, on behalf of the business community.

It would, however, require provision of financial support, up to a point in time when it can stand on its own feet. That way, it will have the necessary capacity to support the businesses by amplifying their voices and keeping their footprints visible in the world of business.

Commercial attachés

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in consultation with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, prioritises the deployment of commercial attachés to our foreign missions that will assist Uganda in promoting her tourism and trade interests abroad.

Specific recommendations

Import substitution

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should support the pursuance of the long-term import substitution. It is proposed that the local manufacturers are supported through reduction of taxes on raw materials and that the ministries transmit industrial knowledge to the population, to encourage Ugandans engage in manufacturing. That way, Uganda will not have to be too dependent on imports, which prove not to be reliable enough during the pandemic.

General Recommendations for Tourism, Trade and Industry Sector

Mass Vaccination

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health prioritises mass vaccination of the workforce and the entire population that is eligible, up to at least 22 million people, to prevent the economy from having to be put through another lockdown. Additionally, the vaccines should be extended near to the traders' places of work and residences in order to avoid overcrowding and to encourage traders to get vaccinated.

Cost of Borrowing

The committee recommends that Government should review the relevant laws to introduce an interest rate capping law that is done in Kenya, for example, in order to enforce the central bank's monetary policy interventions.

Economic Stimulus Packages 

With specific reference to trade facilities, bars, entertainment places and owners of private schools should be considered among the vulnerable groups that should receive priority consideration in the case of future economic stimulus packages. 

The committee notes that private teachers were already granted funds out of the economic stimulus packages. However, these funds have not yet been accessed to date. 

A financial intermediary selected to handle the economic stimulus package should have physical regional presence, and the funds should be distributed equitably throughout the regions of Uganda. 

Development institutions such as Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) and Uganda Development Bank (UDB) must put in place flexible arrangements, for credit access that include smaller businesses and informal sector that would otherwise not benefit under the existing criteria. 

The use of movable property as security as regulated by the Security Interest in Movable Property Act, 2019, for example, should be fully operationalised to foster access to credit by Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). This will help minimise the risk that stimulus aggravates economic disparities. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is urged to adopt risk-sharing strategies like provision of credit guarantees to increase MSMEs' access by lowering the amount of collateral that MSMEs need to pledge to receive a loan. A credit guarantee scheme would allow for higher risk borrowers to access credit. Uganda could borrow a leaf from Kenya, which has set up a credit guarantee scheme to ensure access to credit by Small Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in the current pandemic crisis.

The Auditor-General should audit the management of economic stimulus relief funds to ascertain the bottlenecks in the disbursement of the funds and provide recommendations. 

Government should come up with a legal framework containing specific guidelines and procedures for economic stimulus packages. It is because when you send this money to UDB, for example, and it does not have specific guidelines, they will use the existing guidelines. 

Given the nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, wide consultations with stakeholders and the general public to tailor the economic stimulus packages and fine-tune their parameters should be undertaken going forward.

Taxation

As pledged by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the responsible Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Minister of State for East African Community Affairs should renegotiate with the Council of Ministers under the existing legal framework and revise the Legal Notice to remove determination of import duty for textiles in kilogrammes. This will support the traders who are already limping due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic in sustaining themselves in business during these hard times. 

In the interim, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should make official communication requesting the Council of Ministers to suspend the implementation of the Legal Notices EAC/118/2021 and EAC/118/2021 that changed the transactional value to apply a duty rate of 35 per cent or US$ 3 per kilogramme, whichever is higher for one year, as negotiations are underway.

Waive/suspend the Excise Duty tax on internet and VAT for at least six months or for the duration in which the country is in partial or full lockdown. As a compromise, income tax would rather be charged on the incomes earned from the use of the internet; that is to say that it is better not to tax the use of internet but to tax the effect of the use of the internet. 

The committee recognises that the lower the cost of data, the higher is its consumption and the higher the tax revenue generated.

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should extend the waiver of VAT on accommodation in Kampala and upcountry hotels to 30 June 2022, to enable them recover sufficiently.

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should extend the waiver of interest and penalties on VAT to 30 June 2022 set out under section 40(c) of the Tax Procedures Code Act, 2014. 

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should review section 38 of the Tax Procedures Code Act, 2014 so that penalties and interest are recognised pro rata with the principal tax at the time of payment. 

Restriction in movements.  Where it does not offend public health considerations, Government should, during any further lockdown or restrictions in movement between districts, as much as possible, endeavour to simulate restrictions with the nature of the area so that a city may not be cut out from the greater areas that it serves, for instance, Kampala City, Mukono, Wakiso and etc.

In conclusion, the committee set out to ascertain the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Tourism, Trade and Industry Sectors; the factors that have exacerbated the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the sectors and the efficacy of the strategies to mitigate the impact. 

The committee found that the Government interventions, especially the economic stimuli, had not achieved the intended objectives in particular because of the lengthy processes/guidelines that were involved. It is for this reason that the committee has made recommendations, which if implemented, will ensure quick economic recovery from the effects of COVID-19 pandemic and beyond.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I actually expected that from you the Members. Thank you. Hon. Mwine was very smart in tricking the Speaker. He announced, at the beginning, that the report is 50 pages, which is true, and that he would present only 20 pages, which is not true. (Laughter) He actually presented 47 pages, leaving only the appendices. It was a smart way to introduce the report to calm the nerves of the Speaker down. Next time, I will be more careful. (Laughter)

Honourable members, it is coming to 4 o’clock, which is the Prime Minister’s Question Time. I had expected that we would finish with the presentation of this report and have a debate afterwards but the chairperson decided that he would use all the time even for the debate. So, we will not be able to debate this matter today. I ask you to look through this report in more detail. I think the report is quite good and detailed. I think it is by coincidence now that we have to defer debate on it. Look through the report so that we have a comprehensive and enriching debate on this rather important matter. 

The motion that I propose for your debate is for adoption of the report of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on building a more resilient sector: lessons learnt from a socio-economic impact assessment of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Tourism, Trade and Industry sectors. That is the motion I propose for your debate. Is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded by hon. Okupa, Mbale, hon. Nambeshe, Kalangala, Hoima and Kapelebyong. 

The motion is properly placed and duly seconded by the entire House with a few representative names I mentioned above. Debate should have commenced now but it will not. We will defer it to next week. You hold on to this report - I am still speaking. You will empower this report and then we have the discussions next week because right now, it is Prime Minister’s Question Time.

After that, I have an important motion, from one of our members to be moved by the member for Alebtong. I am hopeful that I will be able to accommodate a debate on that immediately after the Prime Minister Question Time.

On what matter do you rise, hon. Kahonda?

MR KAHONDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to say something about your communication on the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: That one is finished, hon. Kahonda. We will deal with that next week.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right if you directed that on the date we will debate this motion, which is key to the economy of this country, the ministers of finance, trade and the Prime Minister be in attendance such that we are either able to get responses or for them to take notes keenly?

Mr Speaker, I have seen that there are issues of pertinent nature in the finance sector. If I were to name them, especially the taxation, the traders are crying loud and loud - therefore, isn’t it procedurally right for you to direct that way? That is my prayer. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: On procedure? Honourable members, like I said yesterday, when the bell rings for the teacher to go to class, it does not need anybody to tell him or her that you can now go to class. The bell has rung and called for the Minister of Trade, the Minister of Finance and the other sectors that are mentioned including the Prime Minister that classes will begin on Tuesday next week.

Therefore, we do not need to direct them. If they do not show up, then there is a problem. Otherwise, this debate will be next week.

MR KAHONDA: Mr Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is: this matter is very important. With the SOPs here, the party whips designate members - the Members present in the House today have been keenly following this report. So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right if you direct that the Members, who have attended plenary today, be the same people to attend when this matter is being debated? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: To the extent possible, the whips have heard the plea of the member. Please heed to his call. However, I am sure that even those Members who are not in Chambers are in different places on zoom and television following this very important discussion, which has been presented by the chair.

To the extent possible and appropriate, we could do that but it should not be a bar to other Members who have followed keenly from elsewhere to be part of this discussion. 

We are not going to debate by procedure; we have other matters that we should be dealing with. The Prime Minister isn’t here yet but I will have time to deal with that issue with her privately because 4 o’clock is supposed to be exact just, like 2 O’clock is supposed to be 2 o’clock but the Prime Minister is not yet here. Anyhow, we will deal with that at another level.

I have some very quick responses to urgent matters. There was one from the minister of works, which should take about two minutes. Please call that item and after, we will go to the one that concerns the Minister of Health.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT ON THE GOVERNMENT’S PLAN TO REHABILITATE THE 96KM MASAKA-KYOTERA- MUTUKULA ROAD

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Transport) (Mr Fred Byamukama):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I gave a statement with regard to rehabilitation, but the honourable member demanded that I give a statement regarding maintenance.

THE SPEAKER: No, he requested.

MR BYAMUKAMA: And he requested that I be specific to commit myself, on behalf of the ministry, when the maintenance plans will start, following the communication from the Prime Minister that said that by the 21 September 2021, the 100 per cent maintenance plans would have started.

Therefore, briefly, I can give out this statement within one and half minutes -

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable minister.

MR BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, I stand here to make a statement on the Government's plan to maintain the 96km Masaka-Kyotera-Mutukula Road. It is a national road with a total length of 83km starting from Masaka City via Kyotera town to Mutukula at the Uganda-Tanzania Border and it is being maintained by UNRA Masaka Station. The traffic on that road is composed of both heavy cargo trucks and light vehicles. 

The weighbridge at Mutukula is not operational because of lack of staff and equipment but the government is working hard, through the Ministry of Finance, to rectify this. Therefore, the road is deteriorating because of the weak axle road control.

The status of this Road

The Masaka-Kyotera has a 43km paved road and it is in a fairly motorable condition. There is an on-going procurement of a private firm to carry out patching and shoulder recharge, by the directorate to road maintenance at the UNRA Head Office in Kampala. However, because this cannot be handled by the UNRA office of Masaka, it has been referred to the UNRA Head Office.

Kyotera-Mutukula has a 45km paved road and it is in a poor motorable condition with a lot of potholes attributed to high volume of axle loads. Maintenance activities - however, UNRA Masaka station is currently doing pothole patching on the section of the Kyotera-Mutukula Road, using both gravel and asphalt. 

We have so far patched and sealed using bitumen, 30 to 41 kilometres - as you can observe from the photos that we have uploaded on your iPads and a section between 6 and 12 kilometres is yet to receive bitumen sealing. 

In the long-term, the road was earmarked for rehabilitation as I told you yesterday but those photographs show the current work, which is being done there. 

The challenges we have relate to the Budget, which UNRA receives or which it received this first quarter for maintenance –(Interjections)- of course it comes from the Uganda Road Fund. UNRA requested for about Shs 80 billion for the approved plan of the first quarter to maintain those roads.

With the pandemic we have, that surged due to some Ugandans who do not want to follow some simple SOPs like washing hands and wearing a mask. The Government did not have funds and they provided only Shs 47 billion
out of the Shs 80 billion. The Shs 47 billion was used to pay the service providers, who had worked on other roads in the last financial year and had not been paid. They are now waiting for the next quarterly release for them to get someone they can pay 100 per cent and then request the person to go and work on the problem the honourable member requested.

The Prime Minister communicated that work would start on the 21st of next month. That is so far the work going on along Kyotera-Mutukula Road. Right now - maybe the honourable member did not check as he was coming - the same simple repairs are being done on Masaka-Kyotera Road. 

Therefore, if you want the 100 per cent maintenance, maybe that commitment can be made through the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. If they do confirm they will give us money, depending on the need Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has, then I can commit myself.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Your one minute was even way up. Thank you, honourable minister. I think we pause it there. Hon. John Paul from Kyotera, do you still have a matter? I think let us monitor what is going on and if there are gaps, we can come back here.

4.03
Mr john paul lukwago (DP, Kyotera County, Kyotera): Honourable minister, the state of affairs on that road, as I insisted yesterday - I come from Kyotera almost every two to three days. I know what is on that side –

The Speaker: Honourable member, I think that has been recognised. The question is, the minister has said they have started doing some patches; haven’t they?

Mr lukwago: No. The gravel that is being used can barely stay on the road for two days. It is very sub-standard.

The Speaker: So, they are doing patches that cannot hold but they are doing it.

Mr lukwago: Yes.

The Speaker: Honourable minister, would you like to do better patches on this road in the meantime? (Laughter) Instead of mud, put murram.

Mr byamukama: Mr Speaker, even for the patches they are working on, on that road, UNRA had to strain itself under the directive of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I do accept but wait for them to finish the work. If you get the road stuck within two or three months, you come back and report.

I am not an engineer and I think you are not one either. Let us give the engineers time to carry on with what they are doing, we test and see. You never know it may work for us. If it does not, we are discussing with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to see how we can permanently address the problem. Thank you. 

The Speaker: I think let us pause it here and monitor. If in two or three weeks nothing takes place, come back here. Hon. John Paul, the House is here. It is not going anywhere. Since the Prime Minister has delayed, the penalty is that we will listen to the Minister of Health to give her response to the matter. We waited for you, so, you have to wait for us.

RESPONSE TO an URGENT QUESTION raised by hon. ATKINS Katusabe On the high cancer burden in Kasese district, compared to other parts of the country

4.05
The Minister of Health (Dr Jane Aceng): Mr Speaker, I am responding to a question that was raised by hon. Atkins Katusabe, Member of Parliament for Bukonjo West.

The burden of cancer in the country remains high. I will give a few statistics on the overall data:

Number of new cases (incidence): 	136,032.
Mortality: 				91,968
Prevalent cases: 			250,192. 
That is in 2020.

In my report, I have also given the distribution of top cancer cases per region. Here, the central region tops, followed by western, eastern and northern. However, when you break it down by attack rate, it is only the central region that has a higher rate. Western, eastern and northern are nearly similar.

According to the Uganda Cancer Institute (UCI) cancer registry, Kasese falls under the western region. Indeed, as I mentioned, it is second only if you consider the entire region. If you consider the attack rate, they are all the same.

Uganda Cancer Institute does not have district-specific data. However, they have committed themselves to analysing statistics from people hailing from Kasese. The Ministry of Health will provide this data accordingly. Thank you.

The Speaker: Thank you. Hon. Katusabe, do you have a supplementary matter?

4.07
Mr atkins katusabe (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the response. I will excuse the minister because she received this on short notice. I saw her yesterday and appealed to the Office of the Clerk to ensure that they get a written communication to the minister. It is possible that she did not naturally find time - the fact that she got a late notice - to comprehensively respond to this.

Mr Speaker, every day – 

The Speaker: Honourable member, this is supposed to be a supplementary matter but you are now giving a full speech.

Mr katusabe: Mr Speaker, what I am trying to say is that the minister has gone outside the scope of my question. My question was very clear. I roped in even the pipes from the water sources. It is a Government programme called “Bwera Water” that supplies literally the entire district.

I also encouraged the minister to explore the possibility of deploying our Government chemists to go on the ground in Kasese and make some chemical analysis to find out if there are no elements of asbestos concentration. I thought the fact that this matter touches the lives and existence of a community, it is something that the minister and the entire Government should pay the relevant attention to.

I am also bringing to the attention of the minister why fellow citizens should sell their houses just because they have to come to Kampala to seek treatment for cancer –

The Speaker: That is now outside what you raised initially. The issue is, why is it that there is a higher cancer burden from Kasese? Could it be because of the asbestos? That was the question but you now want to make it everything.

Mr katusabe: Mr Speaker, I would appreciate if you directed so that when the minister comes back on this Floor, she brings –

The Speaker: I think it is multi-sectoral. The minister only picks the statistics from the cancer incidence because that is what she knows. Somebody else should have gone down on the ground and taken samples to test and see whether the alarm you have raised has some truth in it. I thought that should have happened. It should not only have been the Ministry of Health but another person. Who would that have been? The Ministry of Local Government?

DR aceng: Mr Speaker, the Member can write to us requesting for research to be carried out in his area without raising it on the Floor. His question on the Floor was that there is higher cancer prevalence in Kasese. I am responding by telling him that it is country-wide but not only in Kasese.

Now, if he wants a research, we can request Uganda Cancer Institute to carry it out. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I agree, and this is also with the other incident of urgent matters because this is something that requires to be researched; to go down on the ground and find out. Is there some toxic thing that is causing problems to the people of Kasese? 

You might want to restructure this from urgent matters to either a question for oral answer or some other form that can provide avenue in written terms; what you want them to find out and report back to the House. You might want to do that but not now.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will do exactly that. However, I am drawing the attention of the Government to deploy industrial chemists to go and examine the asbestos elements in those pipes and I think this cannot wait. I appreciate you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. What I suggest is that put a formal Question for Oral Answer, setting out clearly the issues you want addressed so that we communicate this to the responsible people in clear terms. Extracting what you have stated now will provide confusion about what you actually want to be done. 

Please do that and then we can process it in the course of next week and we give them time to come back and give us details of what their findings are. On the issue of the burden is high in Kasese, the minister has responded to, but certainly, they could be something happening there, which needs to be found out.

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter of cancer prevalence is all over the country. For us to request this information through Kasese would be unfair to the people of Dokolo. I think it is a matter, which touches all of us from all over the country. We want a relevant committee of Parliament to research thoroughly why cancer prevalence is getting higher so that we all debate it and see how to mitigate it.

Mr Speaker, yesterday, if you recall, we talked about climate change, which has its own impact on the prevalence of cancer because the Government has failed to control polythene bags or polypropylene materials. We do not even have a law or legal framework that regulates it to ensure that we have good quality.

THE SPEAKER: The procedural matter?

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is: We require a committee of Parliament maybe the Committee on Health to present a well-researched and well documented paper for us to discuss and diagnose the causes of cancer in the country, so that we can focus on that rather than just focusing on Kasese. Otherwise, this is a serious matter that affects the entire country, including Dokolo, where I come from. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think that is what the minister said; she said that the prevalence is countrywide. However, this specific issue of Kasese has to do with the predominance of asbestos materials in the area. The suspicion is that this could be contributing to the incidence of cancer and this makes it specific to that request. It does not stop the minister from widening this or the Committee on Health to deal with this. I think you need to reduce this in the form I have stated. Let the Government go there, find out and inform us. It could be possible or maybe, it is an alarm that may not be true. If it is true, remedy measures have to be taken to deal with it. Ambassador, on what matter do you rise?

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, on the same issue of asbestos from Kasese. If it is just a question of asbestos, it cannot be limited to Kasese. Most of our secondary schools have dormitories and classrooms with asbestos roofing. The police, prisons, and army barracks have roofing of asbestos. 

Therefore, this research cannot be limited to Kasese only since the minister has said that the incidence of cancer is all over the country. Why don’t we broaden it and cover the whole country on the impact of asbestos on the lives of Ugandans? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No; we do research by sample. This matter has come up from Kasese and you could use Kasese as a sample. In law, we say the sample shall correspond to the bulk. We will then apply that if this is happening here this way, then the presence of asbestos in Koboko and other places could be causing this problem as well.

Let us start from Kasese and we see how to roll these things out and find a solution. Okay, Prime Minister’s Question Time. 

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

THE SPEAKER: How do you deal with this matter in this amended rule? I am used to the spontaneous one; I used to like it very much but now, they have reduced it to writing. How do we deal with the question? Question No. 1 is from hon. Margaret Rwabushaija.  What do we do with the questioner, who is not in the House? What should we do with this question?

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I suggest you only mention the names of the people who asked the questions. Since you had the questions already, you read the question and give the answer so that we do not have to worry because this is now for the House. We do not have to worry whether the Member is present or absent. You read the question and give your answer. Proceed Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

4.19
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Margaret Rwabushaija asked a question that recently and specifically, sometime back, 14 girls were rescued from a guest house called Papaya Holiday Home in Muyenga. These girls were to be trafficked by one Ndagire Dorothy of an NGO called Maya Project Uganda Chapter. She was claiming to be collaborating with a UK NGO that is not registered in Uganda. 

For reasons best known to the owner of the NGO, these girls were being forced to sleep with dogs on the same bed at night and during the day. The same girls were forced to carry these dogs around the compound all the time.

Mr Speaker, my response is that I would like to thank the honourable member for raising this matter. This matter was first reported to the police by a whistle-blower. When this matter came up, the police immediately swung into action as follows:

The police visited the said Papaya Holiday Home in Muyenga Zone in the night of 20 July 2021. Upon reaching the home, they found the suspect Ndagire and the 14 girls, 13 of whom were aged 4-17 years and one aged 19 years. 

The police rescued the 14 girls and handed them over to Uganda Network on Laws and Ethics and HIV, a gazetted facility for safe custody. 

The suspect, Ndagire, was arrested. A case of suspected aggravated trafficking in children was opened against her. 
Investigations have further revealed that the Papaya Holiday Home in Muyenga has never been licensed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to operate a children’s home. It was, therefore, operating illegally. 

The girls were subjected to a medical examination for possible sexual acts. The findings show that there was no evidence of the 13 girls ever engaging in sexual acts, save for the older girl of 19 years. 

COVID-19 tests were also done on the 14 girls. The good news is that they were all negative. 

Meanwhile, a professional counsellor was hired to provide psychosocial support as part of the process for their rehabilitation. 

Police confirmed that none of the girls slept with the dogs as earlier alleged. 

Statements have also been recorded from the directors of Mercy Child Care, a child home where the suspect claimed to be working as a volunteer.

Some people have since come up claiming to be parents of the children. These were two. They were interrogated on how their children got into the hands of Ndagire, but the DNA tests confirm that they are the true parents and the children have since been handed over. 

I wish to inform you and confirm to the entire august House that investigations by police have been finalised and the file has been handed over to the DPP for further action.

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank hon. Rwabushaija for raising this matter and showing genuine concern for the safety and the wellbeing of our children. 

The second question was also from hon. Rwabushaija; that there is also a problem of cross-border human trafficking in the East African Community. The New Vision paper of 22 July published a story of girls brought from Rwanda and sold for as low as Shs 30,000 as wives to Ugandan men in Mityana, which has been the practice since 2016. 

As if that is not enough, on 23 July, a court in Nairobi declined to sentence 20 Ugandan girls who were arrested in a probe on suspected cases of human trafficking to Oman. These girls were using Kenyan security stamps and entered Kenya through Busia, Malaba and Lwakhakha border posts. 

My response is that Government is making significant efforts in eliminating child trafficking. These efforts include, in July 2020, the Government adopted the national referral guidelines which provide victims referral guidelines for stakeholders including police, emigration officials, and the prosecution unit, NGOs, described social services resources and recommendations for victim protection. 

Government has continued to operate under and implement regulations of the 2009 Anti-Trafficking Act. These regulations outline the responsibilities for relevant stakeholders, including law enforcement, medical professionals, and civil society members to combat trafficking. 

Government has increased prosecution of suspected traffickers and increased training to law enforcement personnel. 

In addition, it has investigated allegations of complicity in trafficking crimes. It created a human trafficking officer position within the Uganda Police Force in the Criminal Investigation Department (CID).

Government has increased awareness-raising campaigns, launched, funded and implemented the national action plan for prevention of trafficking in persons Uganda 2019/2024. 
Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

The other question was also coming from the same Member. She said that it is also disheartening that a 14-year-old girl in Hoima City named Daphine Nakimuli committed suicide because she had been turned into a laughing stalk in the community after scoring aggregate 25 in the recently released PLE results at Bwikya Muslim Primary School. She left a note indicating that her parents and neighbours were harassing her for the poor performance. These kinds of infringements point to a society gone morally wrong. 

This was her question: “I call upon the necessary Government agencies to see that the rights of children are protected at all times and that parents and guardians are urged to be more responsible for the welfare of children under their care.” 

She also said that it is surprising that none of the parents or guardians recorded a statement of a missing child anywhere. 

Her prayer was that Government should come up with a report on the above-mentioned cases informing this august House on the measures that have been put in place to curb the unbecoming, embarrassing and dehumanising infringement against the girl-child. 

Mr Speaker, my response is that it is very unfortunate and regrettable that the life of such a young girl, Daphine Nakimuli, was terminated at such a tender age and in a cruel manner. 

Government has put in place legal and policy frameworks such that the children of Uganda enjoy their fundamental rights for survival, health, protection and participation in development and education. 

What happened in Hoima - which led to the girl to commit suicide - is an aspect of parental and community failure. 

The Government, through Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, developed parenting guidelines and the National Child Policy 2020 and continues to disseminate and sensitise communities on their duties under the law, policy and guidelines. 

The Local Government Act, as amended, gives responsibility of child wellbeing to the vice chairpersons of local councils. This responsibility seems not to be taken seriously. That is why such unfortunate situations of children committing suicide happen. 

The mandated grassroot structures are not protecting the children. 

The police in Hoima swung into action and arrested the alleged people who castigated and ridiculed Daphine Nakimuli causing her to commit suicide because of poor PLE results. 

I do not know whether hon. Agnes is around. I think she can read her question. 

THE SPEAKER: No, just proceed the way you are doing now. 

MS NABBANJA: Since she is around, I would suggest that she reads her question so that I can also take a bottle of water. (Laughter) [Ms Agnes Atim rose]

THE SPEAKER: Woman MP for Amolatar District, are you stepping in for Dr Acuti?

MS AGNES ATIM: Yes, Mr Speaker. I have the question here with me.

THE SPEAKER: Which one? I thought the next question was from hon. Dr Opio Acuti who is here. Do you remember the question in full?

4.31
MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole County North, Kole): Yes, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Mr Speaker and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

My question to the Prime Minister is in relation to the low prioritisation of the national road network in Lango sub-region. I will give a brief preamble before posing the three questions.

THE SPEAKER: Just pose the question.

MR OPIO: The first question is because of low prioritisation, Mr Speaker, one of the roads that has been affected is the Lira-Kamdini Road. We want to know when the rehabilitation of the Lira-Kamdini Road is going to commence.

The contract was signed in 2018. It is now more than two years; there are no works that have begun on site. What we are seeing is continuous maintenance. We are also concerned that because of the extensive delays, there has been a lot of degradation that has taken place on that road. So, we want to know whether reconstruction will be done. That is the first question.

The second question is on the Karuma Bridge, which, as I have highlighted, has a lot of poor safety features. It has very low railings on the side, it has a sharp descent and a sharp bend on it. 

Just in April this year, a truck lost control and plunged into the river killing two people. This is not the first time but we pray it is the last. We want to know when this bridge is going to be rebuilt and what are the interim safety features to ensure that no more lives are lost there.

The third and last question is considering the low prioritisation on the Lango roads. Mr Speaker, I want to bring to your attention that in the last 10 years, Government has constructed 31 roads totalling to 2,130.2 kilometres but none of these roads have been in Lango sub-region.

Considering the low prioritisation, we want to know whether there is any affirmative action for the national roads in Lango sub-region that the Government can consider. Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Hon. Dr Opio, allow me to thank you. This is the status of rehabilitating Lira-Kamdini Road, the planned measures to improve safety at the Karuma Bridge and Government plans for the Lango sub-region.

Honourable members, the Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga Road – 191 kilometres - is one of the national roads selected for upgrading by the Government of Uganda, as part of the Third National Development Plan (NDP111). The road is part of the national road network, which is managed by the Ministry of Works and Transport and Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). 

The upgrading of the road is expected to improve access to Apac District and provide an alternative route connecting Kampala to Lira city and the Northern region at large.

Status of rehabilitation of Lira-Kamdini Road

Mr Speaker, Lira-Kamdini road is part of a larger project called the North Eastern Road Corridor Asset Management Project. This project covers the Tororo-Mbale-Soroti-Lira-Kamdini corridor, a total of 340 kilometres. 

The project is being implemented in form of Output and Performance-based Contracting. The total financing for the project is US$ 255 million, funded by the World Bank in partnership with Government of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, the ongoing intervention on the Kamdini-Lira section of the corridor will involve rehabilitating the entire section to allow the road to serve for over 20 years. After the rehabilitations are finished, the contract also allows for routine maintenance activities for another eight years to keep the road in a motorable condition.

The rehabilitation works on Kamdini-Lira section have been delayed due to requirements for environmental approvals for quarry sites. As the processing of the approvals for the sites continues, the Ministry of Works and Transport, through UNRA, obtained approval from the World Bank to undertake emergency repairs in order to keep the road motorable. 

The emergency works involved reshaping the road and maintaining it with a smooth gravel surface, free from potholes. In the meantime, the process of getting approved quarry sites is proceeding well and the contractor is expected to commence the major civil works to rehabilitate Lira-Kamdini section by October 2021.

Status of Karuma Bridge

Mr Speaker, Karuma bridge is one of the important bridges on the national road network, connecting the northern regions to the capital city. The bridge serves as a gateway to Greater Northern region and on to our neighbours in the Republic of South Sudan.

Considering its importance and strategic nature, the Government of Uganda has prioritised the replacement of Karuma bridge during the NDP111 period, that is 2020/2021 to 2024/2025. The feasibility study and detailed engineering designs for the new bridge are complete and discussions have been initiated with the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) to consider financing the construction of the bridge.

Government plans for roads in the Lango Sub-Region

Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda is committed to the equitable development of all the regions of Uganda and this is included as an objective in the Vision 2040 and also taken into account in the development of the National Development Plans.

I have directed Ministry of Works and Transport to organise a special presentation for the Members of Parliament from the region, outlining Government’s programmes in all regions of the country.

4.39
MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Mr Speaker. I had three questions for the Prime Minister.

First was on the issue of killing, rape, torture and extortion in Lake Kyoga and Lake Kwania that surround Amolatar District. We are also cognisant that the Fisheries Protection Unit deployment was meant for good. However, my people are concerned that individual members of the UPDF have turned this lake into a war zone. 

For example, on 2 June this year, Patrick Omara was stabbed to death and eight people were extorted of money. This case was reported to Police; I have given the Prime Minister the police reference file number. A 16-year old girl, Naome Ekip, was raped in broad daylight by a uniformed man. The case was reported to the police. I have given the reference number of the police case, and I have also got a police report confirming this incident. A total of over 65 torture victims have been beaten. The wounds are horrible. I have pictures that I would have attached to this, but I didn’t do that because the Rules of Procedure do not provide for that. 

Yesterday, the minister confirmed here that over 30,000 fishermen and fisherwomen lost their fishing gears. 
Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, my questions are: how far has Government gone with the investigation and prosecution of these accused UPDF officers? What plans are in place to support the families of the dead, the girl who was raped and her future shattered and the torture victims? Those are the issues; they rotate around torture and the provision of alternative livelihoods to over 30,000 families that have lost their livelihoods as a result of this operation. 

The second question is about the road from Namasale to Dokolo. In 2015, our people were excited as they neared the election of 2016 after hearing the news that the road construction would start in the next six months. People’s property was marked for compensation. However, up to today, nobody has returned there. My question is: what is the progress on this road construction because I have checked through all the reports of the planned roads under UNRA and found out that this road is not reflected anywhere?

The final issue about Amolatar - and I had raised it to the Prime Minister - is the issue of floods. We would like to inform you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that we have received very minimal relief support yet the number of the affected people is quite high. 

Amolatar District is one of the districts with the lowest level of land compared to the neighbouring districts of Nakasongola and Dokolo. It is lying at 1,300 feet and, therefore, it is the most vulnerable in the event of the rising water levels on these lakes. 
We request the Prime Minister to visit Amolatar District. You have visited rivers, which have burst their banks, but we want you to visit a district where two lakes have burst their banks with the poor people being in the middle. 

All our roads have been flooded. Fourteen out of the 16 subcounties are flooded. The only hospital that we have in the district, Amai Community Hospital and several schools, have also been flooded. Therefore, my question is: what plans do you have for the people of Amolatar District? Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I think the first question is new; the one of rape. I pledge to bring a response next week because that will help me to get and bring concrete answers to it. 

The second question is on the project of the road. This project is reflected in both the National Development Plan III and the NRM’s manifesto and it is scheduled to be implemented within this term of office and it will start from 2023 to 2024. The detailed engineering designs have been completed and the acquisition of land for the project’s right of way is scheduled to commence in October, which will be the second quarter of this financial year. 

Hon. Agnes Atim is a friend. Of course, she reported to my office and we have already got the status of the floods in Amolatar District, which was submitted by the Amolatar District Local Government. The different Government agencies have been involved in studying the report and take immediate actions. My office has already dispatched relief food and non-food items, which include 1,200 blankets, 700 tarpaulins, 75 kilogrammes of maize flour and 26 kilogrammes of beans. 

Since the last two months I have been in the office, I have been able to visit a number of places. I will definitely go to Amolatar to visit my friend. 

Recently when I was in Nakasongola, I found out that there is a live electric wire under the water. You know there is a place that used to be called Munami Landing Site. It was almost at the level of a town council, but all of it got submerged. So, I saw those live wires as we moved to see the schools to appraise ourselves on what to do for those communities. We found out that some electric poles were almost collapsing, which can be a disaster.

Therefore, I directed the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to disconnect that line and they have done so. Otherwise, even your people would have died because you know water is a good conductor of electricity. It could have been a disaster, but we have been able to cut it out. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MS NABBANJA: Is hon. Wakayima around? 

THE SPEAKER: Your question, hon. Wakayima.

4.47
MR HANNINGTON WAKAYIMA (NUP, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I have two questions. The first is about the roads in Wakiso District. The President issued a directive some time back that all the murrum roads that are to be done in the local governments have to be well gravelled. However, the way UNRA is doing the roads; they are not entirely gravelled. That creates a lot of dust and potholes. As a result, the roads become impassable. One of such roads is the one coming from Matugga-Wakiso-Buloba to Nsangi. That road is now impassable. 

So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when is that directive of the President going to be put in action so that we have things done well?

The other question, Mr Speaker, is about the town councils. Previously, town councils would do one tarmac road, but to our dismay, two town councils of Wakiso, Kakiri and another, have never done any tarmac road in almost ten years. Why is this directive also not being implemented? 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, before you respond, let me make some recognition here. Honourable members, in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have hon. Titus Edward Songiso Mvalo, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs of the Republic of Malawi. He is here to observe our proceedings. Please join me in welcoming him. (Applause) You are welcome, Sir.

MS NABBANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Although the colleague has changed his question - the first question he raised was -

THE SPEAKER: It would be safer for you to read the question and proceed. 

MS NABBANJA: The President directed that all marram roads in local governments should be repaired and gravelled from time to time. However, honourable members, you are aware - and some of you are members of the district roads committees and others are leaders in that regard.

The issue of gravelling in the local government is a local government priority. Funds dispatched to local governments are meant to repair, gravel and maintain the roads. Some local governments decided to budget and open new roads at the expense of the already-existing roads.

I have directed the Minister of Local Government, together with the Minister of Works and Transport, to work with the districts to see that there is proper planning and budgeting for enough fuel and oils to run the roads equipment so that all the roads are gravelled and maintained from time to time.

The second question was about town councils. Town councils are supposed to, at least, get a kilometre of tarmac road each financial year. Town councils receive funds for three elements; 

Periodic mechanised maintenance
Routine mechanised maintenance
Routine manual maintenance

It has been a policy of the road fund to give priority for tarmac to town councils without tarmac roads throughout the country. In the event of construction of any national road which passes through a town council, the town council is given two to three kilometres of tarmac.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS NABBANJA:  Hon. Irene Muloni is not around and I request that I read her question. She told me that she has gone to Bulambuli but -(Interruption)

MR WAKAYIMA: Mr Speaker, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister has talked about local government. The road that I am talking about is not under the local government of Wakiso District. It is under UNRA. 

On this road, they just bring soil of any kind that is not good; that is the Matugga-Wakiso-Buloba-Nsangi road. It is not under Wakiso district but under UNRA.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, like I said, that is a new question. I will come with an answer next week.

Bulambuli District is found on the slopes of Mount Elgon with a very difficult terrain. Its main economic activities include growing Arabica Coffee, bananas, Irish potatoes, peas, beans, passion fruits, horticulture, apiary, piggery and goat rearing, among others.

This area borders Mount Elgon National Park. Therefore, tourism is one of the potential products. The access roads are impassable because of the volcanic soils, which get washed away every season. His Excellency the President recognised this challenge and advised on a lasting solution of constructing these roads using low-cost sealing technology in such areas. 

The road from Simu Corner-Masira-Bulogo-Bumasabo-Buluganya-Buyaga of about 50 kilometres, serving two constituencies in Bulambuli (Elgon North and Elgon), was included in the NRM manifesto 2016/2021 among other roads in the region and the country for implementation. This road was further included in the National Budget of 2016/2017 but no implementation was done.

To their surprise, this road disappeared from the NRM Manifesto of 2021/2026, yet it has never been implemented. To make matters worse, according to hon. Muloni, this road that is in the Central Government maintenance schedule, was given to the contractor who has been on ground since last year but has not completed the maintenance work to date. Whenever the heavy rains begin, the road becomes extremely impassable.

She asked the Prime Minister that: “I am seeking your indulgence in establishing the state of affairs pertaining to this road and the Government’s plans of providing a permanent solution to the people of Bulambuli.” 

This is my response. Mr Speaker, the road network in question is reflected on our national database as Simu Corner-Kaserem (l0km) and Buyaga-Buluganya, Bulegeni-Sisiyi-Bulago (27km), totalling to 37km, instead of the said 50km. The balance of 13km is under Bulambuli District Local Government Road network.

The two road sections are currently being maintained by two contractors (Engineers Investment Limited for Buyaga-Buluganya, Bulegeni-Sisiyi-Bulago and Boona Enterprises for Simu Corner–Kaserem) under the Framework Contract Phase II.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. I have put enough information for Members to note: the mechanised maintenance of the selected paved roads - on page 21; the cost and the period when this road will be completed – that is October 2023; the scope of work, and; photos for you to know where we have reached. 

Mr Speaker, Members can go through this and know what we have done in that part of the country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister. (Member rose_) On what matter do you rise?

4.59
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Nambeshe): I rise under rule 41(9). Mr Speaker, as you are aware, I am the acting Leader of the Opposition and by this rule –

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, let me also add my voice to yours to recognise the presence of the legislator from Malawi, who is in the public gallery. You are most welcome and greetings from the Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Prime Minister for the responses that she has made and I suppose that she has been in strict adherence to the rule that requires her to make written responses to the Members in advance.

As a matter of courtesy, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, this is an omission on your part. You ought to have also availed me copies of those responses –(Interjection)- thank you.

Mr Speaker, I take issue with the question that was raised by the honourable member for Amolatar, where a girl-child was raped by a uniformed man; a Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) officer and no response has been made. That is a matter of urgency –

The Speaker: The Prime Minister said that question was not captured by the system that was sent to her. She will be responding to it next time.

Mr nambeshe: Most obliged. However, in future, those are questions of urgent public importance that require a lot of attention. In that question, there are also 65 torture cases –

The Speaker: Honourable member, the system is such that you handle a question - they put it in a box, turn it round and I think select 15 of them. The person who asked the question may think they have included it in the first lot yet it could not have been picked. That is why we have hon. Wakayima asking a different question from what was picked. He might have had that question and another.
 
Therefore, I do not know how we can solve this. Otherwise, I can ask three questions and expect my other question to be the one that could have been picked. So, I expect answers from it yet they picked another one. I now stand up to ask my question and it is different from what was sent to the Prime Minister. Do you get the dilemma? We need to find a way of streamlining that so that we are effective.

Mr nambeshe: Much obliged. Mr Speaker, the 30,000 people who have been deprived of their normal lives in that district of the distinguished Woman Member of Parliament, ought to be given humanitarian attention. 

As we talk, their normal lives have been disrupted. Literally, I must say that they are displaced because of the Fisheries Protection Unit that has occasioned a lot of – as you can see, even cases of torture are mentioned. There is a lot of gross human rights violations. So, you should go an extra mile to attend to this 30,000. She has even alluded to the loss of their fishing gear to the force that is supposed to protect them.

On the question of roads, if I could lump it together, like the one of Lira, Apac, Kamdini; the 230, which you have pledged ably that the project is being implemented - however, what is at issue is the snail pace at which this implementation is being done. It is implementation indeed but it is taking ages. This is coupled with shoddy works like hon. Wakayima has already informed the House that the road from Matugga to Buloba is being worked on by Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) but it is full of potholes. Mr Speaker, these UNRA officers compromise the quality of roads because of corruption.

Corruption is a challenge to this country. The Office of the Prime Minister is equally riddled as you have helped – I must salute you. Recently, when you cracked the whip on those who had bought substandard items - the food and non-food items; keep it up and ensure that heads roll, not that after interdiction they are back in office. Indeed, I have seen it in the papers that after your directive, they have been cleared and they are back in office.

Mr Speaker, the challenge with these girls being trafficked is because of the mass unemployment; the poverty. These traffickers are exploiting majorly our girls and young men because of poverty. They are jobless and COVID-19 has exacerbated the case. It has inflicted a lot of devastating effects on those who were employed. Most of them lost their jobs and they are being exploited.

The Prime Minister, therefore, should come up with a presentation – on the state of the economy and how the stimulus package you launched in your office should be distributed evenly so that it does not end up in double payment –(Interruption)

Ms ogwal: Mr Speaker, for the purpose of the record, the Leader of the Opposition announced that he was rising under rule 21. However, when I look at the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I think he meant rule 41(9). Thank you.

The Speaker: Did you say rule 21?

Ms ogwal: Rule 41(9).

The Speaker: Did you say rule 41 or 21?

Ms ogwal: He said rule 21 – (Interjections) – oh, he said 41(9).

The Speaker: Also, the record should be corrected. You stated something about a road. I think the geographical location may be a source of this problem. You said Lira-Apac-Kamdini Road. That is putting it upside down. The road you are referring to is Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga-Acolibur. Kamudini is a bit off completely from Lira. Let the record be corrected to that effect.

Mr nambeshe: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the correction. I think he raised three questions for the two different roads but because I had summed them together, that is why I seemed to have mentioned them together. Otherwise, thank you, for the correction.

A quick one, on the girls who are forced to sleep with dogs or even carry them around; I think this is done by the so-called “investors”. 

The Speaker: I thought they said that the finding from the police was that it was not true.

Mr nambeshe: Of course, the police have even recommended –

The Speaker: No. Do not alter the records. The record shows that police did the investigation and found those allegations not to be true. Now you want to amend them. The Leader of the Opposition shall respect the record of Parliament.

Mr nambeshe: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I must salute the police for the work they have done. They recommended professional counselling and psycho-social support. That was good work done.

Finally, on the question of 14 year Nakimuli in Hoima who committed suicide, there might be many more cases in the country of such who are frustrated, traumatised and lack counselling. So, they end up taking their lives.

In the past, schools used to have senior women teachers. I do not know how it ended. That was very helpful. There was even that department of counselling and guidance. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, could you ask the Ministry of Education and Sports to resume or put in practice what is in limbo? I know these senior women teachers are still there but not active and facilitated.

On the question of Bulambuli, I am conflicted but it is a very important one. There are many roads that are disappearing from the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Manifesto, including mine of Bubulo-Bududa-Circular Road, which was meant to be tarmacked. We do not know what is happening because it is a mysterious disappearance of roads. I could mention five of them in the sub-region. Therefore, take it up. 

In addition, even the contractors, who are supposed to be doing gravelling or periodic maintenance, are not doing the right work. They use murram, which is substandard and it is all about compromising the quality so that they remain with most of the money. I thank and salute you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the Leader of the Opposition, for those comments on the responses given by the Prime Minister, on the questions raised by the honourable Members of this august House.

Honourable members, looking at the time, we will now have the next item, and see how to proceed - You have accessed the microphone before I allowed you. Please resume your seat.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE HON. JULIUS ACON FOR HIS INDUCTION INTO THE WORLD OLYMPIANS ASSOCIATION AS AN “OLYMPIAN FOR LIFE”

THE SPEAKER: Is it the one? No, honourable members, I do not know whether the mover thinks that this would be the right time to move this motion. I have discussed with her and she thinks that she should move it when the House is better constituted so that they can have a better recognition of this “Parliamentary Hero”. 

He is one of our own, but he has been recognised by the world. Her own sentiment is that it might not be the right time to do it.

I think we defer it to next week when the House is properly – (Hon. Dorcas Acen rose_) – Do you want to speak to what I have just said?

5.12
MS DORCAS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, you have stated it very well because we are talking about one of our very own, who is in the House, hon. Julius Acon. I think people are exhausted. If it would not hurt, I think we could push it to next week. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us deal with item No.7 and we see how to proceed.

STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK, 31ST AUGUST TO 2ND SEPTEMBER, 2021

5.12
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, Rule 28 of our Rules of Procedure requires the Leader of Government Business to make a statement in the House regarding the Government business for the succeeding week. I am, therefore, submitting the following business for the succeeding week, 31st August to 2nd September, 2021:

Motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to take over Mountains of the Moon University as a public university.

Statement on the state of healthcare service delivery in Uganda and the budgetary implication. 

A statement on the status of livestock quarantine in cattle corridors due to the Foot and Mouth Disease.

Statement on the status of the refugees in Uganda.

Statement on the status of disasters in the country.

Statement on the status of the environment conservation in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, those are heavily-loaded statements that require a lot of time. For example, the one on environment, it is quite heavy. We had a bit of discussion on the statement from the minister yesterday. The situation of disaster in the country is another heavy one; it will attract a lot of debate.

We will see how to phase it out; which one can be accommodated and which one might not. You also now need to do an internal assessment to see which ones are heavy, which cannot be accommodated within one week so that you assist the House in making proposals that can be executed.

However, these are quite loaded, but it is well received.
 
Members, take note that some of these issues will show up next week, together with the debate on item No.3, which we deferred  debate upon on this report from the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, which is important.

Also, the second one, which we were not able to handle, is the motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate hon. Julius Acon, for the induction into the World Olympians Association as an “Olympian for life”. We shall have those discussions next week. There being no other business, the House is adjourned to Tuesday, next week.

(House rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 31 August 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
