

Wednesday, 24 August 2022

Parliament met at 2.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS 

The oaths were administered to:

Mr Thembo Mujungu.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Members  on either side, we always feel happy when we see our colleagues back.(Applause) It is a tradition in this House because we all know what it takes to come to this House. 

Hon. Mujungu, I congratulate you and welcome you back. You have been part of us and so, you know how we conduct business in this House. In the meantime, I want to give you the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Rules of Procedure to enable you to carry out your legislative mandate. Please, get a seat. You can sit anywhere. Colleagues, today is free sitting.

Tomorrow, Government Chief Whip, please, ensure that Hon. Mujungu is given to committees where he will be joining colleagues to conduct business. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I want to welcome you to today’s Sitting. Yesterday, we received seven Bills from the Executive, which were referred to the various committees. However, upon consultation - you remember I called a meeting with the Leader of the Opposition, the Government Chief Whip, the Chief Opposition Whip, the Dean of Independents, and the committee chairpersons where we sent the Bills. 

We held a consultative meeting, where the Attorney-General brought to light salient issues, which I want to explain to you and give my guidance, as per what we agreed upon yesterday from the leadership of the House. 

Upon consultation, our attention was drawn to the urgency of these Bills with regard to Uganda's international financial obligations under the global fight against terrorism and terrorism financing. 

Currently, Uganda is on the grey list of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), an inter-governmental body formed to combat money laundering. It has 23 countries and we are among them. The blacklist has only two countries. This means that Uganda is at the border of being blacklisted, as far as doing international financial transactions is concerned. 

The task force was convened by the G7 Member States, the European Commission and eight other countries. 

The economic declaration from that G7 Summit states that the taskforce is convened to assess the results of cooperation already undertaken in order to prevent the utilisation of the banking system and financial institutions for the purpose of money laundering and to consider additional preventive efforts in this field, including the adaptation of the legal and regulatory systems so as to enhance multilateral judicial assistance. 

The FATF is involved in reviewing money laundering and terrorist financing techniques and constantly strengthens standards and addresses new and emerging risks. The taskforce also monitors countries to ensure they implement standards fully. The process of monitoring the implementation of its recommendations is done through peer reviews or mutual evaluations of member countries. Following the review, the FATF lauds good efforts from countries and holds non-complying countries to account by classifying them on the grey or black list. 

To identify non-complying countries, the FATF has maintained the FATF blacklist or the Call-for-Action countries and the FATF grey list or the other monitored jurisdictions, since 2000. 

The blacklist is the agency's official list of non-cooperative countries or territories, which it judges to be non-cooperative in the global fight against money laundering and terrorist financing. Being on the grey list, as we are at the moment, is very bad for Uganda as it portrays it in bad light as a destination where financing is not safe. 

Our failure to address the peer review concerns before 3 September, 2022, which is the end of next week, could easily land Uganda on the blacklist, which has countries that I do not want to mention here, but they are only two countries. You can check for that on Google.

We, therefore, owe our country a duty to do our part as the Legislature. Now, one might ask: why did the Executive delay? That is not my concern. My concern is us doing our part. We had a long meeting and these are areas we looked at. We said if we fall into the blame game, our country might be blacklisted. You will end up finding that no investor can either get money here or take it out. Even for you, yourselves, your cards might be deactivated because the clearing channels, internationally would be looking at money from Uganda as money for financing terrorism or money laundering. 

Therefore, for us, as the Legislature, we decided in that meeting that we do our part. Then, we shall go back and sit with the Executive to ask them why they delayed. Otherwise, the time for the blame game is not of any help. Because of that, I would like to direct as follows: 

The committees to which the Bills were referred have until the end of this week to report back. Some of these Bills seek to amend only two clauses. If you got copies of the Bills, there are two or three clauses that need to be amended. For most of them, we are domesticating international clauses. For example, the clause for beneficial ownership cuts across all Bills. We are just importing and domesticating. They are very clear Bills. 

My office has gone ahead to organise, tomorrow at 9.00 a.m., a joint meeting for all committees that are involved – that is, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs – in the Conference Hall. You will all meet there at once. The chairpersons of those committees will be chairing sessions, which affect their Bills. 

This will enable us to deal with the stakeholders. All stakeholders have been written to and Government has also appointed a taskforce, headed by the Attorney-General, to ensure that all assistance is given.

Most likely - which we shall be communicating - we are coming here on Monday to consider those Bills because, in one day, we can finish them. They are not big. Apart from the Companies (Amendment) Bill and the Insolvency (Amendment) Bill, the other Bills are not big. 

Of course, we need an overhaul of the Bill on trustees. However, for now, we want to deal with the clauses that talk about beneficial ownership because very many people declare what they have, but the beneficial owner is not defined. We have to ensure that we do this and comply. 

To reduce on the work, for the Companies (Amendment) Bill, we agreed that it should be referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. We are going to give you all the legal support. 

In the end, what is important is what is passed by this House, not what is passed by which committee. Therefore, all committees have to support each other. These committees will have to work over the weekend. By Monday, we shall need reports for consideration. Where we fail, as presiding officers, we might invoke our powers and bring these Bills to be processed on the Floor. 

Therefore, committees, please, ensure you do that. We cannot allow our country to go into darkness, when we are here, as the Legislature, and we are contributing to national development. 

Tomorrow, chairpersons, ensure that, indeed, your members – I am sure they are already working with your clerks - comply with this. 

Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we added to you the Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2022, on top of the Bills we had given you. Members, I hope that is very clear. We have seen the urgency. 

Secondly, Members, last week, Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited indicated a load-shedding schedule, due to some technical challenges at Isimba Hydropower Plant. The minister came here and promised that they were going to work tooth and nail; day and night. I am happy - and I have received information today - that as we talk now, at Isimba, three of the units are up and running. They are generating 137 megawatts, which saves us a lot. I am told we imported power of around $13,000 only. We are now able to resume our normal operations, but we need to work closely to ensure that this does not happen again. 

Colleagues, I would like the House to join me in congratulating our very own, Hon. Laura Kanushu, Member of Parliament,  People With Disabilities, for her election as the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Parliamentarians with Disabilities network at the 65th Commonwealth Parliamentarians Conference in Halifax, Canada. (Applause) She is still in Canada, at the conference. She was elected yesterday and we feel proud when a Member of this House is elevated to that position. 
I would also like you to join me in congratulating our very own Minister of Health, Dr Ruth Aceng, on appointment as the Second Vice-President of the World Health Organisation Regional Committee for Africa. (Applause) This is testament to the good work she has been doing. As a Member of this House, we are proud of her. Thank you, colleagues. 

Is there any reaction to my communication? If it is on the Bills, I am just requesting you, colleagues, not to derail me because we have a lot to handle.

2.41
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not want to derail you or talk about the Bills. However, the procedural matter I am rising on is that yesterday, different schools started reopening, yet the Minister of Education was in this House and he gave clear directive that there should be no fees increment, given the economic situation in the country. 

However, schools, including Government-aided schools, have raised fees by more than 50 per cent. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Hon. Solomon, if you could take your seat for a minute, and we refer to what we are agreed. Colleagues, we agreed that point of procedure should be on proceedings of the day. This has nothing to do with today's proceedings. 

However, this could have been raised as a matter of national importance. I do not want us to abuse the points of procedure. Let procedure be about proceedings of the day. That is when we shall have an organised House. 

2.44
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, I want to appreciate your communication – as I call for the attention of my colleagues, and majorly as I seek protection from my colleague, Hon. Silwany.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I want to repeat: Point of Procedure is on what is going on in the House. If you have an issue of that nature, that is a matter of national importance. 

Honourable member, if you had come to my office, I would have given you space. However, what I am going to do is to adjust my list and allow you to raise it as a matter of national importance; but I do not want the abuse of “point of procedure” to continue.

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, your guidance is always right. Concerning your communication, I appreciate the minister for rectifying Isimba Dam. 

My request to Government is that when they note such a problem, the users of electricity should be told in advance. The challenge we have in Uganda is that we always operate like a fire brigade system; we wait for a mistake or a problem to happen and that is when we begin gambling to settle it. 

Uganda would have had a standby team to rectify such a problem that took very long and heavily cost many business people who have factories; they ended up making losses.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think we shall discuss more when the Committee on Natural Resources reports on its findings, because we gave them that assignment. 

2.46
MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your communication to the House. I just want to respond to one item, which is the International Action Task Force on our inability to respond appropriately on AML and anti-terrorism activities. 

Mr Speaker, the point you have made regarding these matters and the Bills that are now before the committees is so grave that Uganda will be cut off from international financial system - we will neither be able to send money out nor receive anything. 

I would like to urge my colleagues that if there is any time in our history to burn night candles to work overdrive, to get these Bills done, this is now the time because we are now on the grey list; we are only three countries. The next one is for us to go on the blacklist, and join the two that the Speaker talked about, which is not good for this country. 

I would like to support you and as the Committee on Finance, we will do our best to make sure that these things are done. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I had allowed Hon. Joel Leku.

2.48
MR JOEL LEKU (NRM, Terego West County, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the communication. I am back on the Isimba Dam issue. We had a meeting about electricity with the Minister of Energy yesterday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who had a meeting?

MR LEKU: The people of West Nile with all the sector players. In that meeting, the minister communicated that we did not import power from Kenya; what we did was that we stopped exporting power to Kenya. 

However, in your communication, you said, we bought power for about $13,000. So, for us who attended the meeting, we are wondering what actually happened? Did we sell power? Did we buy or did we stop exporting power? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think honourable member, let $ 13,000 not give you too much headache. We were supposed to spend millions of dollars in that crisis. What I am happy about is that we now have local capacity; our own young engineers have been able to restore Isimba Dam; that is what I can celebrate and we should be celebrating that. Hon. Dr Ayume  -

2.49
DR CHARLES AYUME (NRM, Koboko Municipality, Koboko): Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule 141(2) of the Rules of Procedure, I rise to seek for an extension in considering the Uganda Organ Transplant Bill, 2021 for a 30-day period. We were not able to process it in the 45 days that were allocated to us for four major reasons; 

One, being the scientific nature of the Bill; it is the first time country is trying to venture into organ donation and transplant. 

Two, there was an impasse in regard to donation by children, where it says, “People below 18 years old will not donate organs.” However, we think that there is an opportunity there. 
The third point is that we anticipate a lot of organ trafficking because this is a very lucrative trade. Therefore, we want to make this law very airtight in regard to organ trafficking. Therefore, we need 30 more days to ensure that we do the right job. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is a highly specialised Bill, but the framers of the rules knew we would be dealing with both highly specialised and non-highly specialised. Therefore, really, it is a point of concern. It affects the performance and rating of the House. 

However, since it is such a complicated Bill and highly specialised, we are going to grant the 30 days, but please, do not come for more time; ensure you deliver in 30 days. 

MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is about a life-and-death situation. Within the precincts of Parliament, Roko Constructions Company is undertaking a structural development. Last week, the KCCA and the Ministry of Works issued evacuation letters to most of the tenants in the building called Lotis Towers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, kindly, first take your seat. Were you here when I was talking to Hon. Silwany?

MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA: It is about a matter of life and death.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, first take your seat. Whereas it is a matter of life and death, today you were in my office, and you never told me that I am threatened. You kept it to yourself to raise it here and you- This is an issue you would have shared with me. Please, colleagues, let us not abuse the point of procedure; let us remain focused. 

Colleagues, I also forgot to make one small announcement that the Youth Day celebrations, which were slated for 12th of August, were extended to 26th of August - on Friday - at Kaunda Grounds in Gulu City at 10.00 a.m. The Chief Guest will be His Excellency, the President. We urge you, colleagues, to attend in big numbers. For coordination, Hon. Boniface Okot, our Youth MP Northern Region - you can stand up - and Hon. Brandon Kintu will be coordinating our transport to ensure that, indeed, we go and celebrate in big numbers. 

Therefore, colleagues let us go to matters of national importance. We are starting with Hon. David Sserukenya.   

2.53
MR DAVID SSERUKENYA (NUP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, on 18 August 2022, Hassan Simba was chased by police from Sharjah Town, UAE. He was deported because of overstay. Because he sold his belongings to pay the company that took him, he could not allow to come back and start from scratch. When he got to the highest point of some building, he had no choice, but to fall off, which led to his death. 

Mr Speaker, recruitment companies promise our gallant sons and daughters, heaven and earth. On reaching Dubai, usually the numbers of workers are more than the available jobs. So, they have no option, but to keep our sons and daughters in warehouses. When your licence expires, you pay 100 dirham per day and once you are caught, you are arrested, penalised and deported.

I visited these people in April this year and I want to say that our brothers and sisters are going through hell; many have no jobs and many sleep in the open. 

My humble prayers are as follows:

That Government regulates the companies and carries out proper investigations before issuing them licences;

Government makes sure that our gallant sons and daughters in Arab countries are protected because they bring a lot of revenue into the country; and

Government should foot transport bills and burial expenses of my citizen, Hassan Simba and compensate his family. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, you have said there is a company, which took him. You said he sold all his property and paid the company, which took him. So, maybe you would say that Government should compel the company. 

2.56
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, I want to cause the Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development, who is here, to give an explanation. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was scanning and I was not seeing Hon. Peace Mutuuzo here.

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE)(Ms Peace Regis Mutuuzo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have just heard the concern here. Otherwise, we are working on the laws to strengthen labour exportation. We shall soon be on the Floor to inform the House on the new laws and the mechanisms of regulating these companies.

For some time, we have even delicensed some of these companies. Therefore, we shall be able to give an update to the House as soon as possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, before you go, a colleague has a specific case about the body that is still in Dubai and the family is stranded. So, he is praying that the body is repatriated and the family is compensated.

MS MUTUUZO: Mr Speaker, let us get in touch with the concerned person and follow up with the companies and the organs that are concerned so that we save the situation.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, hon. Sserukenya link up with the minister to ensure that this case is – (Members rose_)clarification should have been for the minister, but she is not on the Floor.

2.58
MS JOVANICE TWINOBUSINGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise under Rule 54 of the Rules of Procedure relating to matters of national importance concerning education in the country and specifically, I will talk about Kiruhura District. 

Kiruhura has two constituencies – Nyabushozi and Kashongi. It has 14 subcounties, but seven sub counties of these do not have Government-aided schools. (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, you are protected. Go on. 

MS TWINOBUSINGYE: It is not a matter of laughing. That is the fact. Seven subcounties do not have Government-aided schools.

Mr Speaker, on a daily basis, our students trek 40 kilometres to and from school. Therefore, it is my prayer that the relevant ministry looks into that matter and addresses the challenges and we get our Government-aided schools.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, before Government Chief Whip, whom I know is capable of answering this question as a former immediate Minister of State for Education and Sports, let me allow the Commissioner to raise his point also, so that those issues are responded to, at once.

3.00
MR SOLOMON SILWANY(NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. I am aware that the only person who gives us solutions, in case we are not sure of something is you, Mr Speaker. So, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to raise this issue. 

When schools were closed about two weeks ago for children to come back home - about 80 per cent of the schools I have interacted with, including Government-aided schools, have increased fees by more than 50 per cent, citing the increase in fuel prices and commodity prices. 

I wonder why this is happening, yet, the Minister of Education and Sports while on the Floor of Parliament directed schools to halt any kind of increment in school fees, starting with Government-aided schools, then, trickling down to privately-owned schools. 

Mr Speaker, this is where I want to seek the indulgence of the Rt hon. Prime Minister: what are our parents going to do - because they have not been doing any business? You know, after COVID-19, everybody has been stuck. Prices of commodities went high. Parents are struggling to find school fees, but they are stuck, yet the schools have increased school fees. What are our parents going to do and what is the guidance? 

Wouldn’t it be right for the Prime Minister to direct, maybe, all schools to maintain the school fees at the same level until further notice, when the economy stabilises?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Let us hear from the Government Chief Whip.

3.02
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr HamsonObua): Mr Speaker, I undertake, in principle, to inform the Minister of Education and Sports to come to Parliament and respond to the two issues.

However, let me say the following for now; on the issue of the seven subcounties in Kiruhura without seed secondary schools, I know that in the Financial Year 2016/2017, the Ministry of Education and Sports conducted the school mapping exercise all over the country. That is what informed the Uganda Inter-Government Fiscal Transfer (UgIFT) project. By then, they found over 200 subcounties all over the country without secondary schools. That is what informed UgIFT I, UgIFT II, which we are soon starting and UgIFT III, which will come in future. 

Mr Speaker, in 2020, the Ministry of Education and Sports was expected to do another mapping exercise because between 2016 and 2017, a number of new administrative units had been created from the old ones, but because of the lockdown caused by COVID-19, this was not done. 

I believe, probably, they have planned because from that time to-date, a number of new administrative units have been created and Honourable Members know this. Therefore, that should be a new mapping exercise to inform us arising from the new units, how many new subcounties do not have. 

I want to believe that the record from Kiruhura could probably be part of the new administrative units created from Financial Year 2016/2017 after the mapping exercise. 

Secondly, on fees increment, I believe there are two things. First of all, under the law, subject to confirmation, school fees are supposed to be increased with the approval of the Ministry of Education and Sports. (Interjections) I have stated, subject to confirmation of the law. That is the position of the law and that implies that any school increasing school fees without approval - You are supposed to present the cost-drivers justifying the increment, including private schools because the law does not only apply to the Government-aided schools; it applies to all of us. That is in principle.

Secondly, under the Education Act, the Ministry of Education and Sports is preparing the statutory instruments on matters of school fees because the minister is empowered, under the law, to come up with that statutory instrument. By the time I left the ministry, we already had a draft. The draft was expected to go to top management and later on, to Cabinet, and then, we lay on the Table here –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chief Whip, please, go on.

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, I want to conclude that going forward, the Ministry of Education and Sports is preparing a Statutory Instrument, which is a mandate anchored on the Education Act. I believe that we will be in position to – Honourable Members, if that is brought here, I believe that will give us a long-lasting solution, but no school is expected to increase school fees without the approval of the Permanent Secretary. That is the law. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. (Members rose_) Hon. Rauben - Colleagues, it is already past 3.00 p.m.

3.06
MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE (Independent, Isingiro West County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here on a matter of national importance concerning uprooting of electricity transmission poles in Kabuyanda Town Council, Isingiro District. 

On 22 August 2022, several electricity poles with their accessories were uprooted in Iryango Ward, Kabuyanda Town Council, Isingiro District by a team headed by a one Vajira Usham, an Asian of Sri Lankan origin, and a one Twebaze Kenneth, a Ugandan, both employees of Demo Engineering Company. 

On my orders, the police arrested them and case No. SD10/22 of August 2022 of malicious damage and vandalising of electric installation was registered at Kabuyanda Police Station.
 
Mr Speaker, when they were interrogated, they actually said that they were uprooting them because Rural Electrification Agency has not paid them. Mr Speaker, I see this as being queer. Even if you build a house and someone has not paid you, you cannot go and break it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayers, honourable?

MR ARINAITWE: My prayers are that the minister should order the fixing back of those electricity transmission poles that were uprooted.

Secondly, the minister should keenly follow up the case so that this habit does not spill over to other areas. I thank you, I submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, poles are being uprooted because you have not paid contractors. 

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Usually, when those cases occur, nobody is supposed to remove the poles. They only look for payment. Since the case has occurred, we will bring the response and action taken next week. We request. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister –(Members rose_) Colleagues, please, my time. By 3.00 p.m., we should be finishing all these matters and going on to substantive items. 

Honourable Minister, please, handle this matter seriously as it is affecting many people across the country. 

Hon. Manjeri, Jinja City.

3.10
MSMANJERI KYEBAKUTIKA(NUP, Woman Representative, Jinja City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter I am raising is about Wanyange Landing Site, which is among the largest fishing sites in Jinja City, Northern Division. This site was started in 1980 and donated by Mzee Malinga to help the community start fishing activities and improve their social livelihood. 

This site handles fish arrivals from Kisima I, Kisima II, Buvuma, Malindi and Misoli in Mayuge. The landing site handles 40 tonnes of fish per month, destined to different markets in Jinja City and outside, including fishing processing industries. The site has 200 boats registered with over 1000 fishermen.

Mr Speaker, with all those advantages of the landing site, there is the water hyacinth and other related floating water weeds. The existence of such floating water weeds has led to reduction in fishing activities at the landing site hence affecting the livelihood of people.. The local revenue generated from the landing site has also gone down due to reduction of fishing activities at the site. 

Mr Speaker, some of the businesses have collapsed due to lack of transport and parking areas and this has also affected the livelihoods of the people. There is lack of transport means because the boat sellers have nowhere to land and most of them have diverted to different places hence affecting the incomes of the community.
 
Criminal cases have also increased within Jinja City because people lost their jobs and this has led to domestic violence in homes, insecurity and prostitution for survival, among others. 

My prayers, Mr Speaker, are that the responsible ministry and the minister should urgently address the matter since the site is in a sorry state and it is one of the sources of income to the people of Jinja City. 

Lastly, Government should build and develop the landing site to revamp the fishing and other economic activities of the people in Jinja City. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, the said landing site and many others are in a sorry state. The ministry shall map out how to improve those landing sites.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister, I would implore you to visit the site. Jinja is not very far. Please, establish the facts on the ground. Go with the area MP and the woman MP who raised it because she needs hope for her people.

MS ADOA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.14
MS MARGARET AYEBARE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker.I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the heavy rains that affected the people of Akatafari Village, Rubingo Ward, Bukiro Town Council, Kashari South Constituency, in Mbarara District. 

I bring the cries of these residents, who, on 20 April 2022, and 17 August 2022, experienced water floods, mixed up with heavy stones from the hills of Rubingo in Mbarara District and Kamukaki, Rugongo in Karungu Subcounty in Buhweju District. These heavy stones have destroyed people’s properties including plantations, animals and buildings and also, blocked some of the access roads within the area.

It is observed that there has been a lot of environmental degradation caused by people who grow crops on these hills. As if that is not enough, water runoff channels from Buhweju were directed to Rubingo, Bukiro Town Council in Mbarara District during the construction of Karungu-Rukanza Road that connects the two districts, which was constructed during the last dry season without considering what would happen when the rains come.

My prayers: 

There should be a construction of gabions along the storm water channels to minimise the impact of the storm water and heavy stones on the residents of the area.

The Ministry of Works and Transport and Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) should help in managing storm water at Akatafari Trading Centre and construct drainage that will re-channel the water into the downstream wetland system. 

I pray that there should be a rejuvenating environment where the natural system can be put to order by planting more trees and shrubs in that area. 

Mr Speaker, I also bring evidence from the assessment by the environmental officer and the pictures of the destruction of the area. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, it is free sitting; you can sit on either side. 

Most of the prayers, need quick action - the ones not for policy and structural nature are to do with the Ministry of Works and Transport. In the interest of time – Otherwise, there is the Ministry of Water and Environment, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and then, the Ministry of Works and Transport.

Minister of Works and Transport, yours seems to be very urgent. You can speak for the rest, especially on how you will coordinate together.

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have noted the concern from the honourable colleague and I request that after this Sitting, I will get in touch with her to see how to dispatch a team from the Ministry of Works and Transport to handle this problem as a short-term solution. 

Regarding the long-term solution of planting trees, we shall sit down and plan for it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, coordinate with other ministers. Honourable member, you are still young and energetic. Ministers, it helps colleagues when you go on the ground. People can see that a Member raised an issue and the minister came on the ground. (Members rose_) Honourable ministers, I do not have time. We are really late.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE REGULATIONS TO OPERATIONALISE THE WILDLIFE FUND UNDER THE WILDLIFE ACT, 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before the minister comes, in the public gallery, this afternoon, we have a delegation of constituents from Busongora South Constituency, Kasese District. They are represented by Hon. Thembo Gideon Mujungu and Hon. Kabugho Florence. (Applause) They have come to observe the Administration of Oaths of Hon. Thembo Gideon Mujungu and the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Colleagues, we also have in the public gallery staff from Uganda Aids Commission. They include:

Dr Eddie Mukooyo - the Chairperson, Board of Commissioners;

Dr Vincent Bagambe - Ag. Director-General. By the way, I do not know why we have many acting positions. These people qualify to be given substantive positions. (Applause)

Ms Enid Wanimani - Director Partnerships;

Mr Quinto Rwotoyera- Director Finance and Administration;

Dr Stephen Watiti - Chairperson, People living with HIV.

They have come to listen to the motion for the adoption of the report of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters, which we shall consider later. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

Honourable Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, I am sure 10 minutes are enough for you.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the statement uploaded?

COL (RTD) BUTIME:  It is.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, continue.

COL (RTD) BUTIME:  Mr Speaker, at the 17th Sitting of the First Meeting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament held on 11th August, Hon. Wanyama Michael Odwori, MP Namayingo County South, raised a matter on the destruction of crops and vegetation in Namayingo District by a hippopotamus and the attendant risk of food insecurity in the affected communities. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, there is a point of procedure.

MR MATOVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the minister was preparing to present the statement, you wanted to clarify, if, indeed, it was uploaded. Unfortunately, we are proceeding without the entire details of the statement. Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, does it open on your iPads?  [Honourable members: “No”] But that is not the minister’s problem. It is not the minister who uploads; it is the Clerk.

Members, is it opening? The statement is uploaded, but they are saying there is an issue with the format. Honourable Minister, just give me a few minutes so that our Clerk can sort it. Clerk, ensure to put it in a format that colleagues can open; our usual format is PDF.

In the meantime, we can listen to another statement. Let us stand over this. We shall come back to it later. 

PRESENTATION OF PETITION OF REGISTERED COFFEE NURSERY OPERATORS

3.23
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I presenting this under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure. 

The humble petition of the members of the Devoted Coffee Farmers Initiative, Uganda, represented by me, Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro, Woman MP Sheema and Hon. David Muhumuza, the Mwenge North MP. 

SHOWETH AND STATES THAT: 

Your humble petitioners are members of the Devoted Coffee Farmers Initiative, Uganda, a farmers’ organisation that brings together a cross-section of coffee growers and coffee nursery operators from all coffee-growing regions in Uganda that are under the guidance and registered/licensed by Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA);

Your petitioners aver that:

Upon being licensed by the Uganda Coffee Development Authority, they have been supplying seedlings to UCDA and directly to farmers across the country; 

However, following the launch of the Parish Development Model programme and from March to May 2022 season, coffee nursery operators have been stopped from supplying coffee seedlings to UCDA, yet, they continue receiving overwhelming demand from farmers, who had prepared their farms to plant during that season;
 
3. Your humble petitioners note that:

a) 	The abrupt change of the programme with no prior notice to the farmers, especially the registered coffee nursery operators, and farmers not getting coffee seedlings under UCDA, has had a negative implication on them; 

b) 	Coffee nursery operators under UCDA guidance had not been warned to scale down production of seedlings, yet, the coffee roadmap of 20 million bags targeted by 2025 had led to increased demand and production of coffee seedlings to the farmers;

c) 	The coffee seedlings estimated to cost Shs 71 billion have overgrown and are going to go to waste if no intervention is made by Government;

d) 	Farmers who were prepared to plant coffee in March/April 2022 were frustrated, but have continued to demand for the coffee seedlings; 

e) 	Some coffee nursery operators had acquired loans as a supplementary capital to establish the coffee nurseries for farmers, but are losing property to banks and other lending institutions;

Your humble petitioners further note that;

Although Parliament in its sittings of 12 May 2022 and 20 May 2022 directed that coffee seedlings be given to farmers and permission be given to nursery operators to supply all overgrown seedlings in the nursery beds as the March-May 2022 planting season was running out, no guidance was given to that effect;

b) 	The farmers remained stranded as no written clarification by Government to UCDA has been given to-date and UCDA is still not in position to issue any allocation of coffee distribution and the farmers and the coffee operators are stranded with the overgrown coffee; 

c) 	As the August-September 2022 planting season is setting in – and you know the rains have started – farmers continue to overwhelmingly demand for the coffee seedlings and the nursery operators are looking on without any choice while the coffee is overgrowing;

NOW THEREFORE, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament directs:

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give guidance on the matter of overgrown seedlings that were verified by UCDA for farmers to plant during the 2022 Coffee year;

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to allow coffee nursery operators to supply seedlings this season to the ready farmers, who had already opened up the gardens, and payment be made later when funds become available so that the seedlings do not go to waste. 

And your humble petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.

Mr Speaker, we have the petitioners in the gallery and I would like to lay on the Table the file representing the farmers across the country – north, east, west, south-western and central – that had applied for coffee seedlings and were verified by UCDA, but cannot access because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not allowed UCDA to supply.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to note that when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented here a statement -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are speaking to your motion now before we know whether Members have seconded it or not. (Laughter)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, is the motion seconded or not? (Members rose_) I can see Hon. Omara, Hon. Kaberuka, Hon. Byakatonda, Hon. Katusabe – it is supported by the majority of the House. Honourable, you have one minute to speak to your motion.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Speaker, in one of the sittings here, the minister committed in the season of March-May that they were going to allow the nursery operators to supply these seedlings. This was in May when he committed himself. Up to now -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, the minister committed himself. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Speaker, the Government is fond of exciting farmers. We tell them that Government is in for growing coffee and people get into the mood of growing coffee and all of a sudden, they change. 

We urge Government to stabilise on certain inputs or certain projects that they start so that our farmers do not put in energy and then, they let the project disappear. 

For instance, now, they are jumping away from coffee and tea and they are on Hass avocado and macadamia. They abandoned the cashew nuts – the farmers get confused. The target is that we want to produce more coffee for export. Now, if we do not support our farmers to grow more coffee, what is going to happen to that target that Government has always told us and the Members of Parliament are always telling our people: “Grow more coffee.”

Two, if we do not allow coffee to be supplied by UCDA, we are going back to the coffee that we were growing previously, which is substandard and, therefore, we will fail to produce the quantity of coffee that country needs to export in order to generate income.

No wonder that is why people are crying that the fees has been increased and they cannot raise it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. You can leave room for others to add on.

3.32
MR ABDULHU BYAKATONDA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for prioritising this petition and I thank the honourable colleague for the presentation.

I am also the chairman of Nursery Planters in Uganda. As you move to the countryside, people have produced seedlings, which are overgrowing and going to waste. I find that coffee contributes 15 per cent to the national economy and 19.1 per cent of all export volumes of the country, something, which is very important and a nani - foreign exchange earner. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the language of nani is not –(Laughter)

MR BYAKATONDA: That is Swahili, Mr Speaker and we are part of the East African Community Region.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Hon. Nambeshe has said it is Kiswahili.

MR BYAKATONDA: Mr Speaker, this has been caused by Uganda’s withdrawal from the International Coffee Organisation because one, they used to offer support to the coffee sector. They used to achieve reasonable balance between supply and demand in the coffee economy.

Therefore, my prayer is that Government needs to study and ensure that we recommit to go back to the International Coffee Organisation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.34
MR DAVID MUHUMUZA (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from Mwenge North constituency, Kyenjojo District, which is a coffee growing area. Here in Parliament, we passed a budget, where we had put money for coffee. After passing the budget, we went ahead and mobilised farmers.

I have been in the constituency; I have been on radio stations, telling people that you are bringing coffee seedlings. I am now almost becoming an Internally Displaced Person. When I go home, they ask for coffee seedlings. Everybody who calls asks for coffee seedlings because we had assured our farmers that coffee seedlings would be brought for this season of September. 

Farmers went ahead and dug holes and applied farm manure. Every time we get a phone call from the constituency, they say the pits and holes are ready; they are preparing for seedlings.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, about the issue of the Parish Development Model (PDM), it is targeting a small percentage of the people in the constituencies – about 10 per cent – and it has not even come. People who want to grow coffee –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Time is not our best ally. Colleagues– just a minute.

The Minister of Finance came here and committed himself. I remember what we considered was simple. You see, this would have been the first Parliament where colleagues are not going to support their constituents with seedlings – it was a practice. We used to ensure that these seedlings reached our farmers. Farmers in my constituency are also asking me for the same. 

Government brought the argument of the PDM. Whereas we appreciated the PDM we went ahead and appropriated money for seedlings. The PDM has not yet started, but the planting season is on-going. 

Another fear we have, honourable colleagues, is you have very many nursery bed operators who borrowed money and prepared nursery beds. Now, these people are stuck with loans. Some came to my office crying. They are asking if they can allow them to at least supply this season, so that they know next season, they shall not be holding anyone responsible for preparing the nursery beds.

However, these are nursery beds they prepared much earlier because they knew it was a practice for Government to buy seedlings from them – their nursery beds supervised by UCDA. “We borrowed money and invested in all this. Now, if you have, all of a sudden, stopped, what do you want us to do?” This is what they are asking – very simple. The farmers are also saying they need seedlings. They are ready to plant, but do not have capacity to purchase seedlings. What happened, all of a sudden?

Therefore, since we provided for this money in the budget – we are not asking you to bring a supplementary budget – why don't you be a bit flexible, just for this season –(Applause)– so that from the coming season, these nursery bed operators now know that Government is not going to be buying seedlings from them?

Hon. Rwamirama, I do not know what you have to say about this. 

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your message is taken. We are going to ensure that we consider this item on Monday because it is a serious matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, beyond coffee, there is tea. Hon. Kaberuka had brought an issue on tea. (A Member rose_) Wait, Honourable Member. Hon. Kaberuka had brought an issue on tea.

3.38
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you very much for being considerate to the people of Uganda. In this regard, I would want us not to look at the suppliers. I would want us to look at the strategy of Government, which it has put as a strategy to develop Uganda. 

One of the strategies is to have Prosperity For All, where Government has prioritised coffee and tea as major crops and people have taken up that advice from Government. Along the way, we find they are now getting out of that programme without giving any alternatives.

Mr Speaker, as we move forward to talk about the coffee farmers, the same minister, on the same day, promised to give way for the tea suppliers and farmers to access tea. Look at Buhweju, Kanungu and Zombo, where we are promoting tea. Along the way, before we have factories take off, you withdraw. That is a bad practice.

We need the Minister of Finance to tell us why we should not have factories already being constructed for tea farmers. You want green leaf tea to be supplied and employ Ugandans, but then, along the way, you withdraw without any preparation. Mr Speaker, this is a bad practice. We need the minister to tell us why.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues. Now, I am going to – when we open up this matter – You see, a motion, by our Rules of Procedure, should be directly referred to the relevant authority. Hon. Kateshumbwa, you are insisting; I do not know why. Tell me what you are insisting on.

3.40
MR DICKSONS KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I thank you for your guidance. You have invited the Minister of Agriculture to make a commitment, but I think the minister is not very honest. The problem lies somewhere else and we need to hear from the Ministry of Finance.

When the strategy of Government changed to PDM, the understanding was that people would use PDM funds to finance the seedlings you are talking about, but that has not happened. The PDM is not happening; seedlings are not there.

For the whole quarter, Government only released money for wages. How is the country going to develop? Where is economic growth going to come from? So, we need a commitment from the ministry. This House appropriated funds to support that activity. We need to know, Mr Speaker, whether we still have the authority over appropriation, as a House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will allow the Member from Amuria and the Leader of the Opposition; then, I give my guidance.

3.41 
MS SUSAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas other regions are crying about coffee and tea, I also want to bring to your attention the issue of fruits in Teso Subregion and other regions. 

Government gave a lot of money to supply fruit seedlings – oranges, mangoes and the rest – and gave us a factory that is not consuming the fruits. So, where do we take these fruits? 

These fruits have occupied land that we should be using for other productive activities, just because we were listening to what Government was saying. We wanted to show our commitment that we are working together, but today, our people are crying and stuck with rotting mangoes and oranges.

Mr Speaker, what do you have for Teso? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, I hope you are listening.

3.42
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John-Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you. Mr Speaker, you should allow truth to be spoken to this Government. The funds were not only appropriated, but also the minister made a commitment here on the Floor to avail the funds for these coffee nursery beds. 

However, there is a litany of concerns that have come so far, including that of increasing school fees. You remember very well that there was a Presidential bailout of Shs 20 billion for private school teachers. It has never come. Even when there was a stimulus package to support schools after two years’ of closure following the devastating effects of COVID-19, the package has not come by. 

Can you even imagine that a minister, who has committed to visiting the fishing landing sites, is already throwing hands into the air that she does not have transport to go there. Can you imagine?

Therefore, this Government has not only abdicated its responsibility of delivering services to the people; it is also sleeping on the job. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, before you come in, I think you will need to meet your ministers - the reasons that very many of them are raising on the Floor relate to getting funds.  

The Minister of Fisheries was assigned by this House to visit Katosi Landing Site. The Woman MP for Mukono has been calling her all the time and the minister has confessed that she does not have fuel to take her there; it is bad to that extent. So, you need to handle these issues. They should not be coming to the Floor -  issues of fuel and so on; you need to work closely with your colleagues. 

Some of you, Honourable Members, talked about seeds. The Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture told you that we did not appropriate money for seeds. Therefore, I want us to confine ourselves to the money we appropriated. What we did not, let us be cautious about it. For seedlings, we did - coffee, tea and all that. 

I am now constrained. Under Rule 30(6) of the Rules of Procedure, I am going to refer this petition to the two ministers - the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Finance so that they meet and present a joint report. Otherwise, we want seedlings. In fact, the problem is not even the report, but the seedlings - when the Speaker is making a ruling, you do not refer to a point of procedure. 

I refer it, as per Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure, which talks about such matters being referred to either the committee or the responsible minister, to the two ministers to report back to the House on Wednesday, next week on the actions taken - not just an explanation of why we have not got the seedlings. 

Let us go back to the item on Tourism. I hope it is now uploaded and colleagues can access it. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE REGULATIONS TO OPERATIONALISE THE WILDLIFE FUND, UNDER THE WILDLIFE ACT, 2019

 
2.46
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Col (Rdt) Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You referred the matter to me and directed that I present a statement on the operationalisation of the Wildlife Fund under the Wildlife Act, 2019. This, therefore, is to comply as directed.

Operationalisation of the Wildlife Fund

Mr Speaker, the Uganda Wildlife Act, 2019, under Section 64, provides for the continuation of the Wildlife Fund that was established under the Uganda Wildlife Act, Cap 200. 

The Wildlife Fund that was created under the Uganda Wildlife Act. Cap 200 was preserved by the Uganda Wildlife Act, 2019 and has continued to operate uninterrupted. 

The matter that Hon. Wanyama raised relates to the Wildlife Compensation Scheme that provides for the compensation claims for human deaths, injuries or damage to property, caused by a wild animal outside a protected area as provided for under Section 83 of the Uganda Wildlife Act, 2019. 

In order to give force to the Compensation Scheme, the Uganda Wildlife Compensation Scheme Regulations, 2022, No. 65, was gazetted on 05 August 2022. 

In addition, the Uganda Wildlife Revenue Sharing Regulations 2022, No.65, was also gazetted on the same day. Mr Speaker, I lay the Gazette on the Table.

As provided for in the Wildlife Act, 2019, the Uganda Wildlife Authority, since the enactment of the Act, has put aside two per cent of its revenue, which constitutes part of the funds to support the scheme that to-date has accumulated to Shs 900 million. Other sources of funds to this scheme include appropriation by Parliament, which we are yet to benefit from.

The Wildlife Compensation Scheme Verification Committee that is responsible for the verification of claims has been fully constituted and preparations are underway for it to commence work. 

A substantial amount of wildlife in Uganda lives outside the wildlife protected areas in the bush lands, water bodies, forests and Savannah ecosystems. Whereas most of the areas have now been opened up and settled on by people, the country is still rich in wildlife that lives amongst the areas occupied by people.
 
With increasing human population and opening up of more land for agricultural expansion, areas that formerly hosted wildlife have been destroyed, leading to the displacement of a host of species, especially resulting into increased human-wildlife conflict. 

Wildlife species, with the highest incidence of human wildlife interactions and conflicts in Namayingo District, are the hippopotamus and the crocodiles. 

Whereas Lake Victoria was richly endowed with fish resources that constitute the major food for crocodiles, overfishing has resulted in depletion of stocks, affecting the feeding habits of the crocodiles. Fishermen have been seen using canoes that are easily accessed by crocodiles. Over time, crocodiles have learnt that these canoes are stocked with fish. In the process of venturing to source food from canoes or boats, humans have often been preyed on, unfortunately, by the crocodiles.

In addition, the opening up of wetlands and lake shores for agricultural expansion has resulted into degradation of the habitats that provided food to the hippopotamus resulting into either scarcity or unavailability. 

The hippopotamus, thus, eat crops grown in the protected zones or in the absence of food, the hippopotamus venture to areas beyond.

Uganda Wildlife Authority created a Human-wildlife Conflict Response Unit that has been trained in the capture and translocation of problem crocodiles. In Namayingo, a total of 10 problem crocodiles have been translocated from the areas of Lugaga, Bumeru, Dolwe and Malongo. 

Uganda Wildlife Authority constructed five crocodile safe cages in the villages of Mwango, Butanira A, Butanira B, Mwangoda and Kisumu Landing Sites in Dolwe Island in Namayingo District to provide safe water points for community members. The recent raising levels of the lake have affected the effectiveness of the cages, which have been flooded. Several awareness raising sessions have also been held at the various landing sites on the islands of Lake Victoria.

Since the beginning of 2022, only one problem hippopotamus case has been reported that occurred on 8 August 2022. A team from UWA visited the site, made an assessment and noted that the problem is related to the degradation of the lake shores, which community members have opened for crop growing hence encroaching on the wildlife habitat. 

It is, therefore, incumbent upon all those who have a stake to take responsibility and execute our respective roles in the protection and conservation of our heritage. The protection of 200 meters zone from the lake shore particularly needs to be enforced. 

Finally, I want to mention that the problems related to wildlife that are being experienced in Namayingo District are a result of environmental degradation and fish depletion from the lake. As my ministry tries to put in place mitigation measures to reduce the impact of the animals on the people, it is important that communities are encouraged to observe the laws related to fishing and the management of lake shores. This way, wildlife and humans will coexist. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is Hon. Michael Wanyama here since he is the one who raised this matter? It seems he is not. 

Honourable minister, I would like us to be specific. If you could help us and give us a timeline on the operationalisation of the scheme, that will help us. When we say preparations are underway for it to commence work, can we have a timeframe projected to enable us say that we should be able to see light at the end of the tunnel?

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is 1 October 2022. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, you have noted that it is 1 October 2022. That was very direct.

MS KAAYA: Mr Speaker, my procedural matter concerns many of us who have already raised the challenge of wildlife and their effect on crops. I remember raising the effect of the white and black calabash monkey. Another Member of Parliament raised the issue of elephants. There are very many others who have already raised issues that we need the minister to respond to, other than the two wild games, including the challenge of ensuring that vermin control officers are fully established at the relevant local government offices. There is also the issue of availability of the cyclone vermin control drugs that are out of stock in Uganda.

I do not know if we are proceeding well if the minister just goes with only two types of wildlife yet we have raised this issue on a number of wildlife effects. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, we are proceeding very well because the minister has responded to what we, as presiding officers, assigned him. If we had assigned him the rest - but you have raised them. 

Honourable Minister, you need to get time to prepare a comprehensive statement on human-wildlife conflict so that you address these issues. However, colleagues, the biggest solution is in operationalisation of this scheme so that our people can be compensated. What the people want is compensation. 

Therefore, on 1 October – honourable minister, we can say 2 October - if it is Tuesday, we would be glad for you to come to this House and say, I have done it. We shall go and celebrate with our people and start taking action. 

Colleagues, Rule 52(2) of the Rules of Procedure allows for debate. I am going to allow a debate of 15 minutes because this is out rightly clear. I will start with the Honourable Member from Bugiri because she is close to Namayingo; then, I will go to Kitgum where elephants have disturbed people. I will go to West Nile and then, Kanungu. Colleagues, use one minute each so that I can pick more.  

3.59
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and the honourable minister for the report. The issue of crocodiles in Namayingo is very serious. I would like to appreciate your ruling that the minister operationalises the compensation fund. However, I request that as the fund is being operationalised, we generate a list of the affected people so that those to benefit are known. Otherwise operationalising the fund might end up benefiting other communities. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, no more time.  We do not have much more time. I had already picked colleagues to speak. Let each one of you take one minute.

4.00
MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of human-wildlife conflict is a very big one. In Orom Subcounty, which is in Kitgum District, this community has seen all the challenges we can talk about. Right now, they are struggling with the challenges of the Karamojong raiding cattle. 

During the dry season, we have elephants moving all over. It is my appeal that the minister takes off time, before coming back to this House, to visit all these areas. He should interact with the community. 

Most importantly, we need to empower the UWA officials. Some of these officials - when we went on ground – told us that they do not have the bullets required for shooting and scaring the elephants. Therefore, we need to empower them and have these interventions done on time. Compensation is very key. Thank you.

4.01
MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The area of greater Nebbi, especially Pakwach, borders Murchison Falls National Park. We want this fund to be operationalised not only to protect the humans, but the animals as well. 

In Pakwach for instance, poachers have been killing hippopotamus for their teeth. They believe that if they wear hippopotamus teeth along their necks, they will be protected from the wild animals and game rangers. Therefore, Mr Speaker, this fund is good because it will help in fencing wildlife reserves and protecting the animals. 

Recently, the ministry increased gate passes around the national parks. Entrance is now Shs 25,000 for Ugandans –(Member timed out.)

4.02
MS PATIENCE NKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. We have the same issue of wild animals from Queen Elizabeth National Park, especially the elephants. They have vandalised people's gardens from Nyanga Subcounty, Kihiihi Subcounty and Nyamirama. Currently, people are starving because all their crops have been eaten by wild animals. 

I understand there is a procurement process for fencing the national park. I, therefore, ask you, Mr Speaker, to talk to the concerned ministry so that they can spped up  the procurement process to have the national park fenced. 

My prayer is that the people in the three subcounties I have mentioned should be provided with some food because right now, they have no food to eat. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Patience, you have raised that issue - When I visited Hon. Kaberuka, there was an element of compensation for land. Honourable member, would you like to clarify that issue? Otherwise, your people said they want that issue on the Floor. 

4.03
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Speaker for his indulgence. The issue is about Mpungu and  Mbwa Tract, which was gazetted erroneously and it took many people's homes within that area. The ministry came there in 2004, but since then, they have never taken any action. 

On 6th July, I wrote to my senior minister, but up to now, I have never got any reply. Last week -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, he is not your senior minister because you are not a junior minister. (Laughter)

MR KABERUKA: I am a minister in making. (Laughter) Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister received the letter on 6th July, but we are now in August. In Mpungu, two parishes cannot process a title or develop their land. The minister promised to go there, but he has not. 

Last week, people were up in arms - we have been shock absorbing, waiting for your indulgence. Would the minister help us to at least give us a green light on what is going to happen to the people in Mpungu? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Baryomunsi, is it on the same? I want to see the minister.

4.05
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am just rising to confirm what Hon. Kaberuka has presented.

When this Parliament gazette Bwindi area, there were two parishes in Mpuuga Subcounty that were erroneously included in the park. The residents cannot even construct permanent houses, grow coffee or other perennial crops.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Isaac, I request you to leave the minister to respond to the Member’s concern.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I add my voice that Hon. Butime should come to the rescue of that community because they keep coming to us, the Members of Parliament of the area.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Butime, visit your colleague and sort out that issue. 

4.06
MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have keenly followed the report presented by the minister but I want to draw our attention to Kidepo. Elephants have done a lot of harm in Kidepo. Therefore, it is a concern that that issue ought to be equally addressed. 

Mr Speaker, the delays in implementing this compensation scheme is going to cost us a lot. You are going to open a can of worms to litigation that sometimes could have been avoided by having some of these mechanisms. Therefore, I urge Government that the earlier and faster we do this intervention, the better. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

4.07
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to also thank the minister for the report he has given us. However, this Act was already implemented in Sebei Subregion in 2019 and so, I am surprised that the verification committee is yet to be constituted. 

In Sebei Subregion, whenever a cow enters a forest or just goes near it, you must pay Shs 50,000. When a dog or a pussycat goes near the forest, you must pay Shs 20,000 or Shs 10,000. How come this committee is just being verified, yet, people have been paying money since 2019? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the money for revenue sharing? I will allow Hon. Linos and Hon. Mugole –(Members rose_) Colleagues, we have several items on the Order Paper, to which you will contribute. 

In addition, standing up many times does not mean that I will see you. Please, resume your seats. I will pick you because I always pick you even when you have not stood up many times. So, making for me signs or winking –(Laughter) For the ones winking, I do not know which step I should take. Therefore, colleagues, make clear signs that I can understand. (Laughter)

4.08
MR LINOS NGOMPEK (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We also have issues of elephants destroying our crops. What the people of Kibanda and I want to know is; when we operationalise the compensation scheme, from which year shall we start paying? Is it from 2010 or 2015? 

Elephants have been destroying crops for a very long time. Therefore, it would be good enough for us to know which year the compensation for our people’s crops will start. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Mugole, you are the expert on tourism issues.

4.10
MR STEPHEN MUGOLE (NRM, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two things. One, on the issue of elephants, recently, I was discussing with the Executive Director that for example, if a park - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Executive Director of what?

MR MUGOLE: The Executive Director of UWA.  I am giving information that if a park has too many elephants, what do you do? Some of them may need to be put out of action -(Interjections) - listen correctly, my brothers. If, for example, there are those which are stubborn and unknown, they can be put out of action. 

However, the most immediate action we should do together is the issue of fencing. Other than that - even the compensation we are talking about; Shs 900 million so far saved cannot compensate all of the people, even if that is operationalised –(Member timed out.)

4.11
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the points given, but I feel that compensation cannot be sustainable. It does not matter how much money we set aside for compensation; it will not satisfy the level of destruction we are experiencing across the country. 

Mr Speaker, I want to advise that there must be high-level sensitisation of the community so that we learn to live with the wildlife and invest in community protection and sustainability. Of course, the advice, which the other colleague gave is also very important – fencing – so that we can have preventive mechanisms in place. 

Mr Speaker, I appeal to colleagues that it is good to talk about this issue. The minister is suffering for nothing. However much money you give him, he will not satisfy us. We need to look at this thing at a higher level and be able to –(Member timed out.)

4.12
MR NULU BYAMUKAMA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have the same problem, but mine is a bit different because my people have been suffering for the last 15 years. Now, they do not even have anything to eat. 

About three years ago, Col. Butime came with food and people were happy. However, I want to inform the minister that the one lorry of food that you brought was eaten in one day. I request you to supply more food. I thank you.

4.14
MR KARIM MASABA (Independent, Industrial Division, Mbale City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. As the Shadow Minister of Tourism and Wildlife, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for the statement because this was one of the key issues that I raised in the alternative Ministerial Policy Statement during the budgeting process. I believe my effort and that of my team have paid off. Let us hope that this money will come as promised by the minister. 

I have one concern, which is about the wildlife compensation verification committee because the UWA Act, 2019 Section 20 talks about the community wildlife committees. I am not certain whether you have incorporated them in this compensation policy. We might find that the wrong people are the ones who will end up being compensated. We will be faced with a situation where this verification compensation committee you are creating is of, say, some people around Kampala, who will end up sharing this money instead of the money reaching the actual beneficiaries on the ground. 

We need to incorporate the community wildlife committees. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.15
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, it has taken you a whopping three years to lay on Table the gazette of these regulations, ever since the Act was enacted in 2019. 

When I say you are sleeping on the job, I mean it in every sense of the word. Three years is a long time, Honourable Minister. Many lives have been lost, property damaged and some people have even sustained injuries.. 

Mr Speaker, together with the compensation scheme, the minister has laid the revenue sharing scheme. Those of us who live around Mountain Elgon National Park, have witnessed a revenue sharing scheme, where funds are collected from penalties and tourists and given to the district. The district takes 5 per cent and 95 per cent is given to those subcounties whose communities live along the fringes of the forest. 

I suppose in those regulations, there is also compensation – there should be some compensatory mitigation to resolve the conflict of the running battles between those people living along those forests and UWA because it has gone on for long; it has claimed lives and even property. 

Therefore, compensation should also be considered for those people who are alleged to be encroachers, yet, they have stayed there for ages. (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Acting Leader of the Opposition, please, conclude.

MR NAMBESHE: As I conclude, you know very well from the Act, Mr Minister, that this committee that verifies claims that are submitted comprises only five people. I wish you could mention them and the offices from which they are to emanate are known so that we know, for sure, that this time round, you have fully constituted the committee for verification of compensation claims. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me start with a response to the acting Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Nambeshe, on the issue of sleeping on the job. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, gazetting is the last stage of the Act because the Act was passed in 2019. The minister was required to make regulations. So, the minister sat there and started working on the regulations. These regulations – after being properly cross-checked by the office of the Attorney-General and the First Parliamentary Counsel -  it is a very tedious, long and meticulous process. This was done. 

Therefore, what happens after all that – which cannot take weeks, but years – is that you finally get the regulations and gazette them. These regulations, therefore, were gazetted on 3 August 2022. 

I thank all the other ministers before me, who worked on the law and, eventually, it is in place. That is the most important thing. 

For the shadow minister – the colleague across – yes, the verification committee will be meticulously selected. There will be no friends, isn’t it? In your view, you are talking of Kampala. It is not a matter of friends. They will be meticulously selected and they will form that committee. 

My good friend, Hon. Nulu Byamukama, we were together two weeks ago and I cannot continue bringing food to that area. However, I think we shall work more on the electric fence. Really, the electric fence is the answer. The electric fence, plus what Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has said - community engagement to create a sustainable situation, where it is not just the money compensation. What is the purpose of the money when somebody dies? You can compensate, but life was lost. 

The most important thing is to create a sustainable situation, where the communities, plus Uganda Wildlife Authority, work together and mitigate that situation before the unfortunate incidents take place.(Interruption)

MR ALERO AZA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving me way and thank you for your report.
 
Honourable minister, how do you solve the issue of elephants moving from Nimule Game Park in South Sudan, across the border into Dufile Subcounty in Moyo District in Uganda, thereby destroying food crops, houses and displacing people?

Can the Wildlife Compensation Scheme for damages close to persons outside protected areas benefit the people of Dufile Subcounty in Moyo District? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Switch on the microphone, Honourable Minister.
 
COL BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I had to give way because of the Member behind there. You know, we share the name and so, I had to give way very quickly. (Laughter) 

Elephants can also go – they can also be tourists. (Laughter) If they come from South Sudan to Uganda, these are tourists. (Laughter)Elephants do not carry passports. They just roam the whole world. They do not need passports like humans. (Laughter)  As soon as elephants get to Uganda, if they destroy property, it is the responsibility of Uganda Wildlife Authority. If such a situation happens, the Authority takes responsibility and we compensate. 

Hon. Ngompek wondered when the actual effective date of the Wildlife Compensation Scheme is. Mr Speaker, the effective date is 5 August 2022, because that is when the gazette came out. That was the beginning. The rest is just administrative. In other words, the verification committee must be in place as I promised, by 1 October 2022, and that is it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Honourable Minister, please –(Hon. Olanya rose_)– Hon. Olanya, wait a bit and let me guide the Honourable Minister. I do not have much time. I am not going to let the Honourable Minister accept very many. Otherwise, my time is limited, but let us allow this. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get clarity from the honourable minister. Honourable Minister, according to Hon. Ngompek, he was asking whether those whose animals destroyed their property, killed their persons 10 years ago, shall be included in this compensation. 

Secondly, Honourable Minister, you need to specify what type of compensation you mean. We have different types of compensations. Some were killed, others had their property destroyed and others had their people injured by these animals. The compensation may not be the same. 

I pray that when you are coming, you have to lay down the criteria and how much shall be given for each and every compensation; those who were killed and injured and those whose property was destroyed. That would guide.

You also need to tell our community what they should do if their property was destroyed by elephants. What should we tell our community to do? Should they use the lawyer to ask for the money or should they go by themselves to your office?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Honourable Member. Honourable Minister, you have two minutes to conclude. 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Let them go to the Chairman LC I or report to the police. The effective date is 5 August 2022. 

Hon. Kaberuka, we have agreed to meet and discuss the matter and finalise it. 

People paying – the honourable Member from Sebei was talking about people paying. That is illegal. People should not pay UWA. It is UWA, which is supposed to compensate the victims. 

Queen Elizabeth National Park: The electric fence [Hon. Everlyn Chemutai: “Clarification, Mr Speaker, just for your information.”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable colleague, you do not access the microphone without the permission of the Presiding Officer. Honourable Minister, please, go on. 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Mr Speaker, the Queen Elizabeth issue – it is the electric fence. The procurement of the electric fence is at an advanced stage. I will not interfere in the business, but all I know is that it is at an advanced stage and very soon, the tender will be given out, the electric fence supplied and construction begins. 

The Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has been to MurchisonFalls area. He has been to very many protected areas and, therefore, this is an invitation to return to Murchison Falls. Let us work on the fence and we will see how to proceed. 

The Member from Pader was – but there is no lake in Pader. I do not know why the Member – there is no lake. (Interjections). River Pakwach is in Pakwach District. Pader is in Nebbi District, Pakwach is Pakwach District. (Interjections) Oh you are talking about Greater Nebbi - Because I know that very well? 

Let me finalise by saying that the most important one was the Wildlife Compensation Scheme and regulations. They were gazetted on 5 August 2022. The verification committee will be in place on 1 October 2022. The rest will be settled. Shs 900 million is ready for the Wildlife Compensation Scheme. So, as soon as all this is done, I am sure problems will reduce. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Honourable Minister. Honourable minister, 1 October 2022 will be a Saturday. Therefore, on Tuesday 4 October 2022, please, come to the House and update us on the action taken as promised. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF THE INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION (IPU) AT THE 144TH ASSEMBLY AND RELATED MEETINGS HELD IN BALI, INDONESIA FROM 18TH TO 24TH MARCH, 2022.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Susan Amero -

4.29
MS SUSAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay a report of the Delegation of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) at the 144th Assembly and Related Meetings held in Bali, Indonesia, held from 18 to 24 March, 2022. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, this report is for information purposes. Please, study it; it will help you in your legislative work. 

MS AMERO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Report of the Delegation of the Parliament of Uganda at the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) Non-Aligned Movement Parliamentary Network Conference held in Baku, Azerbaijan from 29 June to 2 July, 2022. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Like the earlier report, this is also for information purposes. Please read these reports. They are very rich in information especially when we are on our international obligations; they guide us on what was going on and we get a lot of information. Therefore, ensure you read them because they will help you in your work. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021 ON 12 DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND TWO MUNICIPAL COUNCILS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you have 15 minutes because we need 30 minutes of debate, which will make it 45 minutes.

4.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) (Mr Mapenduzi Ojara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I embark on this assignment, permit me to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings and a copy of the report of the committee.

In the interest of time, I also request you to allow me as I present this report and basing on the time you have given,  to give an executive summary of the report of the committee On Public Accounts (Local Government) on the Report of the Auditor-General on 12 District Local Governments and Two Municipal Councils for Financial Year 2020/2021. As I do that, Members will be able to go through the executive summary, which gives an over view of the main report.

Mr Speaker, in accordance with Article 163(5)(a) of the Constitution and Rule 182(5) of the Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) considered the report of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2O2O/2021 and wishes to report its findings to the House.

The committee report covers 12 district local governments and two municipal councils. The details are provided.

This report has been compiled based on the findings of the Auditor-General and the observations of the committee mainly to show the current state of local governments and to aid policy makers in improving the performance of these local governments as highlighted below.

Mr Speaker, number one, looks at the budget performance for the Financial Year 2O2O/202l and out of the total budget of Shs 571,286,551,418,which was appropriated for the 14 local governments reported on in the Financial Year 2020/2021, Shs 468,329,217,286 was released, representing 82 per cent. By close of the financial year, a total sum of Shs 423,200,140,736 had been spent, representing 74 per cent of the appropriated budget. The total unspent balance of Shs 38,394,131,559 was returned to the Consolidated Fund.

The committee observed that the local governments failed to absorb the money released due to failure to recruit, delayed deployment of teachers by the Ministry of Education and Sports, failure to procure contractors under USMID and others.

Mr Speaker, the committee has provided recommendations and for purposes of saving time, I appeal to colleagues to look through. It is indicated and there are a number of recommendations that we have given.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, the recommendations need to be heard properly.

MR MAPENDUZI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. The committee recommends as follows;

The accounting officers should institute measures that will ensure the timely declaration of vacant positions to the district service commissions, appointment and access to the payroll, to avoid return of unspent balances to the Consolidated Fund; and

The Education Service Commission should ensure strict and timely adherence to their recruitment plans to avoid delays in staff recruitment.

Local revenue performance

The 14 local governments in the Financial Year 2020/202l budgeted to collect a sum of Shs 13,727,831,626 as local revenue and by close of the financial year, a total sum of Shs 8,482,326,450 was collected, representing a performance of 62 per cent.

The committee observed as follows: 

The local government’s local revenue mobilisation were greatly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic thus the low local revenue performance; and

There were leakages and spending at source by the lower local governments.

The committee recommended as follows:

The accounting officers should ensure that the local revenue enhanced committees are strengthened;

The local governments devise elective measures to address the leakages and hold accountable revenue officers who abuse their powers;

The accounting officers should ensure that an updated revenue register is in place to track and enhance revenue performance; and

The accounting officers should ensure that effective revenue mobilisation and tax education plans are in place.

Payroll Management 

Budgeting for salary, pension and gratuity and the submission of budget estimates

The audit reports for the Financial Year 2O2O/202l revealed that local governments and municipal councils failed to adhere to paragraph 2.2 of the Establishment Notice No.2 of 2019, which requires accounting officers of local governments to submit salary, pension and gratuity estimates for the subsequent year to Ministry of Public Service by the 30th of September of the previous year.

The delays were majorly attributed to COVID-I9 lockdown restrictions on movement of persons and low staffing.

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should, for the subsequent financial years, ensure that they strictly follow the timelines as prescribed under Paragraph 2.2 of the Establishment Notice No.2 of 2019 on the submission of wage estimates by 30th September of the previous year.

Payment of salaries, pension and gratuity 

Absorption of funds

It was reported that local governments failed to absorb the money for salaries, pension and gratuity. The under-absorption of funds was due to factors including, but not limited to:

Failure to recruit staff as a result of the COVID-19 national lockdown; 

Absence of and non-functional district service commissions; 

Delayed approval of members of district service commissions; 

Delays by education service commissions to recruit teachers and enabling them to access the payroll by the Ministry of Public Service; and

Failure to attract staff in key positions for instance, district health officers, district engineers and medical officers.

Mr Speaker, the committee observed as follows:

Many local governments conceal or ring-fence positions that have fallen vacant by deploying junior staff in acting capacity/assignment basis beyond the mandatory period of six months as a ploy to give time to their favorites to gain the prerequisite qualifications during which period they deny deserving persons employment at the expense of service delivery;

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development made releases to some of these local governments over and above the requested funds;

The absence and failure to implement the provisions of the Negotiating, Consultative and Dispute Settlement Machinery Act, 2008, resulting into failure to settle labour disputes, leading to under-absorption, loss of funds and high costs of dispute resolution. 

The committee recommended the following:

The accounting officers should institute measures that will ensure timely declaration of vacant positions to District Service Commission;

The Education Service Commission should ensure strict and timely adherence to recruitment plans to avoid delays in staff recruitment; 

Local governments should ensure that there are fully constituted service commissions to enable timely recruitment of staff;

The Ministry of Public Service and Public Service Commission to develop guidelines for timeliness on the tenure and approval of members of the District Service Commission; 

The Ministry of Local Government should intensify its inspection and monitoring on matters of staff including staff establishment, service functionality and cases of staff discipline; 

Provision of Negotiating, Consultative and Dispute Settlement Machinery Act, 2008 be adhered to. 

Under No.4, we looked at under-payment, over-payment and non-payment of salary. The committee noted that a majority of the accounting officers admitted to authorising overpayment or underpayment of salaries to some employees under the service of their respective local governments. A case in point is Luwero District Local Government that made an overpayment of Shs 150 million. 

The committee also noted cases of non-payment of salary, which was mainly attributed to mismatch in information between the IFMIS or IFMS and employee bank details. 

The committee recommends the following:

The accounting officers of the affected local government should, in future, ensure that they adhere to Section (B-a)(7) of the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders, 2010 with a view of authorising employees’ right payment of salary amounts;

Accounting officers should ensure recovery of overpaid salary amounts from the affected employees;

Accounting officers should ensure processing of payment of top-up salary amounts in respect of employees whose salaries were underpaid;

The accounting officers should liaise with the Ministry of Public Service to reconcile the different salary amounts paid to their respective entities.

Under 4.0 on payment of salary using wrong scales accounting officers in most of the local Governments erroneously authorised for payment of staff salaries, which was attributed to payroll changes not supported by a signed pay change report. 

I refer you to the main report, where we have provided details and observations. 

Under 5, delayed deletion of staff from payroll, some accounting officers authorised for payment of salaries to staff who had retired, been transferred, absconded or died. However, recoveries of monies erroneously paid out to affected staff were ongoing. 

The committee recommends that the Office of the Auditor-General should carry out annual audit of the staff and pension payroll to clean up the system.

Under 6 - Unauthorised loan deductions

The audit report revealed deductions from employees’ salaries without letters of undertaking. 

The committee recommends the following:

That the accounting officers should not sign off staff loan applications through issuance of letters of undertaking where staff have running contracts with credit lending institutions; 

Government should institute more protective measures to curb multiple and over borrowing by employees; 

Without going into the details, Members will realise from the main report that there are a lot of irregularities going on in as far as borrowing of loans by employees of Government. We have given a detailed report on that. 

No. 7 is non-deduction of PAYE from political leaders. The audit report I laid highlighted failed deduction of PAYE from political leaders leading to loss of revenue by Government. The committee was informed that the anomaly was occasioned by lack of dedicated budget line or window on the IFMIS platform to effect deduction electronically. 

The committee recommends that all accounting officers who did not deduct PAYE should ensure that this money is deducted from the political leaders whether still in office or out of office. 

Under no. 8 - delayed access to salary and pension payroll

The audit report revealed that accounting officers failed to expedite quick access of newly appointed staff to the salary payroll. This was attributed to delays to submit required documents such as the national identification cards. Again, in the main document, we have provided details.

Under 9 - performance of the Youth Livelihood Programme (YLP) and the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Program (UWEP)

The audit report reveals dismal performance of the programme as low recoveries were realised during the period under review. 

The committee observed that most of the district local governments did not have proper recovery plans and data on the beneficiary groups and some funds disbursed to local governments were in respect of the Financial Years 2014/2015 to 2018/2019. 

The committee also observed that UWEP was performing better than the YLP, but the levels of recovery are equally low. As a result, the committee has provided the following recommendations;

Again, I would like to refer Members to page 23 of the main document where we have given about seven key recommendations as a way of making sure we can deal with these challenges. As you emphasised, Mr Speaker, I will very quickly give the recommendations;

The committee recommends that revolving funds for future programmes be covered or guided by legal frameworks to provide for sanctions and detailed program management structure. 

Accounting officers should institute all measures possible to recover outstanding balances including developing clear recovery plans and accountability mechanisms. 

Government should adhere to timelines in the provision of grants to different programmes to realign with the reporting framework so as not to cause distortion in financial reporting.

For future interventions or programmes, the aspect of community ownership, participation and involvement be enhanced through co-funding mechanisms or initiatives. 

In the main document on page 23, for similar or future interventions, accounting officers should institute clear, achievable performance indicators for officers involved in the project or programme implementation. 

There should be budgetary provisions to support supervision and follow-up of the beneficiary groups.

Government, through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, together with the Ministry of Local Government, should evaluate the performance of YLP given the fact that the recovery has remained extremely low. 

Mr Speaker, I will now request you to permit me, based on the executive summary, to look at critical and specific issues on page 8 of the executive summary. It covers the districts of Kaabong, Butaleja and Arua.

Under vote 59 is Kaabong District Local Government, which has an unqualified opinion and under that, query No. 1 is the construction of council chambers at the district headquarters Phase I. 

The audit revealed that Kaabong District Local Government procured a contractor to construct the council chambers at the District Council headquarters under Phase I at the contract price of Shs 365,153,874 under Procurement Reference No. Kaab559/Wrks/20-21/00001. The contract was awarded to M/S Jacqsen Uganda Limited and signed on 28 February 2021, as the start date of executing the contract with a completion date of 23 May 2021. 

The audit reported that the contractor had been paid a total of Shs 328,637,887as shown in the table. When you look at the table I have provided in this executive summary, you will see that on 22 June 2021, this contractor was paid Shs 73,030,775 as the first payment. Just six days after, on 29 June 2021, the same company was paid a second payment of Shs 255,607,112.

Mr Speaker, with the second payment of the amount I have mentioned being made after six days from the first installment, the second payment lacked supporting documents. The accounting officer explained that:

The contract of Shs 365,153,874 was awarded to the company I mentioned with a completion date of 23 May 2021, but two extensions were made with the last one ending on 30 June 2022; 

The works are still at the foundation level. The materials are on site, though a total of 94 per cent payment was made to the contractor;

The first payment of 20 per cent was given as advance payment. The accounting officer regretted making the second payment and therefore, requested the committee to allow him to correct the error by allowing the contractor to finish the work in three months;

The project was stalled by the land in question, which is owned by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the district was waiting for a swap of land titles. However, the soil analysis was done and the report recommended what was needed for the works to reinforce the structure and the design was also reviewed;

The contractor has been elusive, with no effort to complete the project.

The committee observed that:

There was no structure on the ground as the works ended at foundation excavation level despite full payment; 

The district did not have full ownership of the land where the project was sited;

The district did not do due diligence in planning and siting for the project, thus putting the project in an unsuitable area;

The contract was awarded to the contractor who quoted the lowest amounts than what the project would require to complete. Therefore, the execution of the project, as planned, was not possible right from the start; 

The first advance payment was justified, but the second payment of Shs 255,607,112 was paid in total disregard of the law with possibilities of connivance and a few days before the end of the contract; 

The engineer recommended for payments to be made despite withdrawing from the project due to the irregularities;

There was no justification for the extension of the contract, which also expired in June 2022;

There was fraud, as per paragraph 5(c) of the contract, under noncompliance to the completion date that attracts 20 per cent of the outstanding balance of the contract sum; and

Making good the contract is not realistic, considering that there is no valid contract. 

The committee, therefore, recommended the following: 

The accounting officer who approved the transaction and all the officers involved be held personally liable; 

The Accounting Officer for the year under review makes good the loss and ensures that Shs 328,637,887 is deposited on Government account by 12 October 2022;

The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government takes immediate disciplinary action;

Based on the conduct of the company, PPDA should carry out a thorough assessment on its conduct, with a view of blacklisting this company; and 

The committee recommends that Mr Joel Musisi, the then Accounting Officer, be investigated with a view of possible prosecution. 

Vote 557 – Butaleja District Local Government – this has a qualified opinion. 

Query 1: Unsupported adjustments

The audit report noted that the opening balance in the statement of equity was adjusted by Shs 631,011,062. However, the documents and schedules supporting the adjustment were not availed for verification. The committee observed that there was no supporting document to justify the adjustment, thus the accounting officer failed to perform his duty as required by law.

The committee, therefore, recommended the following:

The Accounting Officer should be held liable for failure to perform his duty;

The Accounting Officer desists from such practices that contravene provisions of the law.

Query 2: Unaccounted for expenditure 

The audit report noted that a total of Shs 107,524,840 was advanced to officials to carry out various activities, but remained unaccounted for. The accounting officer took responsibility for weaknesses in advancing money to staff beyond the financial year and explained that the money was advanced for administrative activities like trainings and submission of the accountability was delayed.

The committee observed the following: 

The accounting officer breached Regulation 43(2) of the Local Government Finance and Accountability Regulations, 2007, which requires accountabilities to be remitted within one month;

The list of recipients of these advances was not provided to the committee for scrutiny; and 

Payments to Jenena General Enterprises Ltd for the construction of a house in Butaleja is doubtful as several payments were made on the same day.

The committee, therefore, recommended the following:

The sum of Shs 107,524,840 advanced to the officers be recovered from the respective officers by 30 September 2022;

The Police should carry out investigations into the conduct of Jenena General Enterprises and the district officials involved with a view of possible prosecution; and 

The committee recommends that PPDA investigates Jenena General Enterprises with a view of possible blacklisting. 

Query 3: Implementation of capital works

This is particularly in line with the failure to deliver the desired quantities and specifications of ICT equipment to Nakwasi Seed Secondary School, under the Education Department.

The district contracted M/s Masaka Agricultural Dealers Enterprises (U) Ltd to supply ICT equipment, science kits, and chemical reagents to Nakwasi Seed Secondary School at a contract sum of Shs 207,490,000, out of which Shs 193,636,000 had been paid to the contractor. 

Audit found out the following - Mr Speaker, we have indicated the findings of the audit; so, let me go to the committee observations.

The committee observed that:

The contractor was paid more money than what they delivered and the equipment was less than what was ordered;
It was irregular for a contractor to deliver items after working hours, therefore, prohibiting the district officials from verifying whatever was delivered;
The district paid the contractor almost 100 per cent of the total sum, despite the shortfall in the items delivered.

The committee provided the following recommendations:

The Police investigates the accounting officer involved in the transaction, the District Education Officer and the responsible staff at the Ministry of Education and Sports for these gross irregularities;

The contractor be held liable for contravening contractual obligations and defrauding Government; 

The accounting officer should ensure that all items ordered are delivered in line with the specifications of the contract.

Query 2.2: Construction of an Out-Patient Department (OPD) at Bingo Health Centre II under DDEG. This looks at delayed completion of civil works. 

We have provided details of the audit findings on page 13. When you get to page 14 of the executive summary document, the accounting officer went further to explain that the concerned contractors were called to put right all the defects and those who did not comply were arrested. However, 95 per cent of payment was made depending on the certificates issued from the user department. Inspection was done and the contractor was asked to complete. Unfortunately, they never complied.

Committee observations

The contractor was paid 95 per cent of the contract sum before completion of work, leaving only five per cent as retention, which is paid after the defect liability period;

This payment was irregular and contrary to procurement laws. 

The committee, therefore, recommends the following:

Police should investigate the officers who were responsible for this project. These include the Accounting Officer, the District Engineer, Internal Auditor, CFO and the DHO with a view of possible prosecution;

The accounting officer should ensure that the contractor meets his contractual obligation;

The accounting officer should desist from transactions that cause financial loss to Government. 

Query 3: Payment for unexecuted works

The contractor had been paid a total sum of Shs 131,969,535 out of the contract price of Shs 138,915,299, contrary to the conditions of the contract signed and works were not complete. The amount paid was equivalent to full contract price, excluding the five per cent retention. 

The accounting officer explained that the works were implemented towards the end of the financial year, thus the fear of money being swept back to the Consolidated Fund. The advice was that a bank guarantee is got on condition that the bank releases the money after completion of funds. However, there were no certificates against the payment. 

The committee observed the following;

The contractor had been paid 95 per cent of the contract sum before completion of works, contrary to the requirements of the procurement laws;

Payments were made without certificates.

Recommendations

The accounting officer and all the officers involved in this project should be held personally liable and the police should carry out investigations with a view of possible prosecution;

The accounting officer should ensure that the completion of this project is as planned and in line with the contractual specifications.

Query 3.1: Construction of a general ward at Budumba Health Centre III under PHC

M/s Petex (U) Limited was contracted to construct a general ward at Budumba Health Centre III at the contract price of Shs 99,566,040. A total of Shs 94,587,738 had been paid to the contractor with expected completion date of 30 June 2021. By the close of the financial year, it was found that:

Actually, the work was at walling stage.

Unexecuted works included roofing, fixing of windows, doors, plastering, floor finishing, ceiling works, furniture fittings and all those, as indicated in the document; 

The site had long been abandoned by the contractor; 

There was no project signpost describing the nature of works, source of funding, employer, contractor, project manager and so on. 

The committee observed the following –the observations are not different from those of the previous query, which I just talked about. 

Query 3.2: Construction of a two-classroom block with an office and store at Busolwe Township Primary School under SCD

M/S Dalach Investment Limited was contracted to carry out the construction of a two-classroom block with an office and store at Busolwe Township Primary School at the contract sum of Shs 61,891,755. By close of the financial year, Shs 59,227,390 had been paid with a planned completion date of 30 April 2021. 

Inspection revealed;

Poor quality of windows installed on the building and 13 windows could not even open or close;

Poorly constructed floor and verandas with glaring cracks; 

The concrete slabs at the front door were poorly fixed.

The accounting officer acknowledged the observation made from the inspection and explained the circumstances related to those payments. Again, the reason the accounting officer gave was that they made full payment because they feared money would go back to the Consolidated Fund. The observations are not different from what we gave under the two other queries I mentioned.

Query 3.3: Construction of a two-classroom block with an office and store at Busaba Project Primary School under SCD

M/S ENVE Engineering Consults Limited was contracted to carry out the construction of a two-classroom block with an office and store at Busaba Project Primary School at the contract price of Shs 61,919,390. By the year end, Shs 59,200,570 had been paid to the contractor with an extended completion date of 30 June 2021. 

By close of the financial year, inspection found out that the contractor used iron sheets that were not in line with the specifications. They used gauge 30 instead of 28. Also, there was a poorly constructed floor and the veranda had cracks - not different from the previous one. 

The committee’s observation is, again, not different from the previous ones – as well as the recommendations. 

Query 4: Routine mechanised maintenance of Butaleja-Suni-Lwamboga Road, measuring 5.6 kilometres
The district undertook routine mechanised maintenance of the road I mentioned, totaling to 5.6 kilometres, at the cost of Shs 15,275,190 during the fourth quarter of Financial Year 2020/2021. 

Physical inspection revealed the following:

Lack of a meter drain on the road, which left the side drains flooded on rainy days. For purposes of time, colleagues, you could just look through the bullets.

The committee observed the following:

The works were incomplete;
There was generally poor workmanship.

The recommendation of the committee is not different from what we provided in the previous projects under the same entity. 

Query 4.1: Routine mechanised maintenance of Nabiganda – Leresi Town Council Road, measuring 5.5 kilometres

The district undertook routine mechanised maintenance of 5.5 kilometres along Nabiganda– Leresi Town Council Road at a cost of Shs 16,156,450 during the fourth quarter of the period under review. 

It was found that gravel was heaped up in some of the sections of the road, culverts had not been installed on the road as planned and this left the road susceptible to flooding and erosion. 

The committee observed that the road work was incomplete and there was poor workmanship. I refer you to the previous recommendations I provided. 

4.2 Routine mechanised maintenance of Doho-Namulo Road, which is four kilometres

Here, the road was costed at Shs 11,750,150. You can go through the details of what was done. The committee’s observations and recommendations are not different from the previous ones I provided because all were not complete and had poor workmanship.

4.3 Routine manual maintenance of Nalusaga Town Council-Kanyenya Road (5.3 km)

Here, a total sum of Shs 44,600,000??? was planned to be used. Our finding was that the work was not complete and there was poor workmanship. The recommendations are not different from what we provided earlier on. 

5.0 Lack of contract management plans and reports

A review of 10 procurement files for contracts worth Shs 658,614,057 revealed that the files lack contract management plans and contract management reports. 

Committee observation 

The committee noted that the district did not have evidence on their preparedness to comply with the law in the subsequent procurements. 

The committee recommended the following: 

The committee recommended that the accounting officer should ensure that there is compliance with the PPDA requirements and guidelines. 

Vote 503: Arua District Local Government 

Query 3: Overpayment of gratuity

The audit report revealed variances between the amounts on the payroll and payments to individual pensioners, leading to overpayment of Shs 17,088,304. 

The accounting officer regretted the anomaly and informed the committee that the pensioner in question has since committed to refund the money as per the recovery schedule.  

Committee observations

The committee observed the following: 

The Principal Human Resource Officer was asked to institute recoveries, but did not comply with the Accounting Officer’s directives; 

A monthly deduction of Shs 200,000 was unrealistic as the final payment would be made or the final recovery would be made in 2030, which would take eight years; 

There was sheer negligence by the Principal Human Resource Officer, thus, causing financial loss to Government. 

The committee, therefore, recommended that: 

The principal human resource officer who initially refused to implement the Accounting Officer’s directive to initiate the recovery, make good the loss and ensures full recovery by 12 December 2022; 

The Principal Human Resource Officer be held liable for insubordination;

The Accounting Officer should ensure full recovery of funds as recommended by the committee. 

Query 2: Salary payment of non-existent employees

The audit report revealed that Shs 10,115,392 was paid to 15 staff that neither appeared on the IPPS payroll register nor the necessary documentation in their personal files to support their existence. 

The Accounting Officer explained that out of the 15 staff, 14 files were for employees who had transferred their services to Madi-Okollo District and the other employee is suspected to have transferred services to Terego District, although the file had not been retrieved. The staff were wrongly coded under Arua District Local Government. 

Committee observations 

Out of 14 files presented, four files were cleared as genuine payments; 

They said staff were irregularly paid since they ceased to be employees of Arua District Local Government;

There was negligence as the Human Resource Department did not do due diligence in handling the payment process of these non-existent employees.

The committee recommends the following: 

The Accounting Officer should liaise with the said districts where the officers are said to have transferred their services, with a view of recovering the said funds of the 11 employees; 

The Accounting Officer and all officers involved in this irregular payment should be reprimanded. 

Query 3: Implementation of the approved budget 

Failure to adjust the Arua District Local Government budget following creation of new local governments
The audit report noted the following: 

The initial budget of Shs 98 billion was approved for implementation by the district in the Financial Year 2020/2021. 

Following creation of Terego District Local Government and Arua City, the two received supplementary budgets totaling to Shs 23,000,800,000 and Shs 26,300,000, respectively, and parts of the funds were from the initial approved budget for Arua District Local Government. 

The budget of Arua District Local Government was not adjusted following the issuance of the supplementary budget to the new local governments, leading to some activities being undertaken by Arua District Local Government instead of the new local government entities. 

The accounting officer explained that following the adjustment of the boundaries of the district, guidance was sought from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Local Government, but they had not received any response or instructions guiding them on how the budget could have been adjusted. 

The Accounting Officer said the entity implemented the activities as per the original approved budget, work plan and performance contracts signed by the Accounting Officer. However, the budgets were adjusted afterwards. 

The committee observed the following: 

The Accounting Officer did not take into consideration the instruction given by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on adjusting the budget; 

At the time of creation of the new administrative entities of Arua City and Terego, Arua District Local Government had running contracts, which needed to be completed before handover. 

Recommendations

The Accounting Officer works closely with the new administrative entities for successful completion of the project that was already under construction; 

Arua District Local Government should seek guidance from PPDA on transfer of the projects that are still at design stage or planned projects that have not yet commenced; 

The Accounting Officer should comply with the directive issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  

Mr Speaker, before I move, we have attached, as a committee, details of recoveries that have been made from Arua, Luwero and Kabale District Local Governments. Recoveries have been made totaling to Shs 153,266,609. 

Just as I stated and in the interest of time, honourable colleagues, we will be able to find details as indicated in the main document. 

With that, Mr Speaker, I now beg to move that the committee report be adopted by this House. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, committee chairman. I gave you over 40 minutes and I would like to thank you for the job well done because this is an oversight function, which is very important in this House. 

Clerk, please, ensure that the full report is captured on the Hansard so that in the future, whoever is reading the Hansard is able to follow the record. You do not only capture what the chairperson read.

(The committed report is hereby appended.)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, when you look through this report – I am not an auditor – but you ask yourself how Kaabong and Arua managed to get an unqualified opinion with such issues. With such glaring issues, how did you get an unqualified opinion? Hon. Musasizi will explain what an unqualified opinion is in terms of audit. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have an issue. When recommendations are made, sometimes the only punishment or punitive measure instituted against an accounting officer is a transfer to another district, which is sometimes better – which is “wetter” compared to where they were stealing, which was dry. Now, they are taken to “wet” ones to just grab more. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is going to be your first one to handle. We have shown you – and this is from the report of the Auditor-General, who is an officer of Government, appointed by Government and an officer of this House. Therefore, these are not issues of Hon. Mapenduzi and colleagues. These are issues raised by the Auditor-General of Government. 

When I was reading through the report, Chairperson – and you should have sat here in front, I might call you to answer some issues. Why do we recommend the police to investigate? Why not the IGG whom we can hold responsible here since she is an officer of this House? These are glaring cases where you show someone paid salaries to ghost employees. Someone is paid 100 per cent, when there is no work on ground. Now, the police are into criminal issues – we have agencies for corruption that are clearly known. Why don't we refer to them? I propose that we refer to the IGG. We shall require the IGG to report back on the actions taken.

Rule 63(2) of the Rules of Procedure allows for this report to be debated. I will allow 30 minutes, but colleagues, we should use only one or two minutes maximum to enable many of us speak to the matter before I let the Minister of Local Government and the chairperson of the committee respond to the issues coming up. 

MS KAAYA: Mr Speaker, I stand on a matter of procedure relating to Rule 34 where the report is a representation of the work of the entire committee because the report we are sharing has only one signature –(Interjections) Yes and we are not sure whether that is the representation of the entire committee. 

What he was sharing with us –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, I remember the chair made it very clear that this is an executive summary of the report and he said the report is here. 

MS KAAYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, please, ensure that, indeed, the full report is uploaded on the system. Chairperson next time, upload the full report. 

There are honourable members I wanted to see standing up like Hon. Agnes Apea, former Chairperson of Local Government Commission, but I will first pick Hon. Tibasiimwa - I am looking for former local government leaders. (Laughter)

Hon. Rose Obigah - no, let me first pick from here and then, I come that side. Hon. Martin Adriko, Hon. Akiiki - but chairperson, you have not brought my report. I should not pick you today. First bring the report that I am demanding.

5.23
MR JORAM TIBASIIMWA (NRM, Older Persons Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you rightly pointed out, I worked with the Bushenyi Local Government. There are a few issues I have picked, one of them being the ring-fencing of positions by the different district service commissions. It is a very bad practise and it spreads across very many local governments. 

Secondly, on the release of money to local governments from the centre, which in many cases comes late and it results into such money not being used. (Member timed out.) 

5.24
MS ROSE ABIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you very much. I would like to address the issue of the return of money for paying teachers. For record purposes, I was once a Deputy Speaker in Arua District Local Government. 

For Terego Local Government, I would kindly request for it to be exonerated. The reasons are that the appointment of the District Local Government Service Commission was delayed because of political intrigue. Some of the members were for the Opposition and they were said not to have papers, yet, these were people who had PhDs. 

The second one was the issue of Terego Local Government having money for Arua District and uncompleted projects. Honestly, I do not know why the committee has recommended that Arua District should complete projects in Terego. The evidence has shown that the projects being done by Arua in Terego are in a shoddy state. I request that you allow Terego to be responsible. (Member timed out.)

5.25
MR YOVAN ADRIKO (NRM, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I congratulate the Committee on Local Government, led by my brother, the hon. Mapenduzi. It is true, Mr Speaker, I always disturb you with the issues of Arua District. Today, the truth has come out. 

My prayer is one: how are we going to recover money from those people who embezzled it from the district? It must be recovered with immediate effect because Arua District has lost a lot of money. We are suffering on the ground because people are facing many problems; poor roads and other activities that are not done. 

I request that the committee takes note and that all the money that was embezzled from Arua District should be recovered. 

5.26
MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the committee. On page 4, item 3, there is a mix up between observations and recommendations in the numbering. I think there should be a correction in that.

Secondly, if you go to the recommendation number 4, you notice that they have talked about developing guidelines for timeliness on tenure and approval of membership of the District Service Commission.

Mr Speaker, this is already there, but what is missing, is the effective monitoring of the service commission. Because of the challenges we have - I have worked as a district councilor and secretary finance at the district. (Member timed out.)

5.27
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, ARINGA NORTH COUNTY, YUMBE): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your report is ready, duly signed and I told the Clerk that it would be uploaded today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tomorrow, it will be on the Order Paper. Please, upload it today.
 
MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, I wish I were given three or five minutes as a chairperson to - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, this report will come to your committee. You will handle it from there.

MR ONZIMA: It is okay.  Mr Speaker, the initial idea was that most of these services are decentralised. The Ministry of Local Government and other ministries are only supposed to supervise the activities of the lower local governments. 

However, most of these accountability challenges are emanating from the centre; the ministries are carrying out most of these projects. Most times, they say, for them, they provide oversight and the rest, but that is not the fact on ground. That is why most of these accounting officers that have challenges, have been removed from one. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Vice Chair.

5.28
MS DORCAS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Within one minute, I want to comment on the issue of delayed access to the pension payroll. I know that this is the executive summary. However, I would have loved to look at the details so that we know the kind of justification our accounting officers are giving. 

We have very many pensioners who have to make many trips all over the country, coming to Kampala, going back to the district repeatedly and for many years, without getting justice. 

I would request that this be taken as one serious bit so that we are able to answer the questions from the pensioners. I thank you.

5.29
MS JOYCE ACAN (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have read the executive summary of the committee’s report; it is well elaborated. 

My comment is about the ring-fencing of the positions at the districts. This has come about because of nepotism at the districts by the district service commission. These people normally employ people of their own or the people who campaigned for them. 

Mr Speaker, regional service commissions should quickly be looked into so that we avoid the issue of the district service commission because it is practicing a lot of nepotism. 

Mr Speaker, the contracts of these days are being awarded to the officers, but in different names. (Member timed out.)

5.30
DR FLORENCE ASIIMWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much for the report. 

The issue I am raising concerns contractors. I do not know how these contractors are chosen, but they are becoming a big problem. Maybe, the technical people are conniving with the contractors, but I am of the view that most of these contractors should be blacklisted and the UPDF Brigade should take over construction of these projects. I beg to submit.

5.32
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (Independent, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Chairperson, I would like to make an observation in your report. You have mentioned that some political leaders do not deduct PAYE. You need to come out and state who these are. Are they councillors? Otherwise, the word “political leaders” may remain vague. 

Secondly, the second issue is about ghosts, which seems to be a cross-cutting issue in most ministries where you have ghost teachers, ghost soldiers and now, they have come to local governments. Mr Speaker, I agree with you that we need to use the Office of the IGG so that we can do away with these ghosts. Otherwise, thank you very much.

5.32
MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report. 

One observation is on the low absorption of funds released to the district. The report actually observes that one of the factors responsible for that is either the absence of or malfunctioning of District Service Commissions. 

When I look at the methodology adopted, much as they were looking at the local governments, no attention was paid to consulting with the Minister responsible for Local Government or the Minister responsible for Public Service, yet in His Excellency the President’s speeches one time, he indicated that one of the key bottlenecks to growth and development of Uganda is non-responsiveness of the Public Service. In that regard, therefore, I was expecting, in their recommendation, that they would factor in – (Member timed out.)

5.34
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to make a comment on the under performance of UWEP and YLP funds because of low recovery. Government should come out clearly and clarify to the people if this money is a political gift or it is for paying back. If it is for paying back, they should put in place a legislative framework to enable or compel everyone to pay back. 

Otherwise, as it is now, some of our people are obliging and paying back while others are not paying back. Which is which? As it is now, there is no penalty. What should we tell our voters? Should they oblige and pay back or should they access these funds and just use them as political gifts?

5.35
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to quickly comment on the revenue leakage at the lower government levels. 

This is a clear demonstration of lack of effective internal controls, which I think are due to the thin staffing of the internal audit function at the district level. Despite the increasing workload as we get new administrative units like sub counties, they have to audit schools, sub counties and town councils. 

Mr Speaker, I would have loved to hear, in the report, the committee recommending for an increase in the number of internal audit staff so that they can perform their functions better. I thank you. 

5.35
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is important that we find out all these challenges. The committee has discovered incomplete work; somewhere they have not done anything and these are our contractors.

The challenge is that these people come to districts and they do not want to disclose their Bill of Quantities (BoQs). They under look the people at the district. Therefore, I propose that the Prime Minister directs all contractors to always disclose their BoQs to the district and other leaders in the country because those are public documents. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.36
MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report revealed that over Shs 38 billion was returned to the Consolidated Fund because of failure to recruit teachers and also procure contractors. 

We appropriate monies to do services and provide goods. Therefore, I expected the committee to make sure that they whip these officers that have not done their mandate. 

I also need clarity; how do they treat this money that goes to the Consolidated Fund during the budgeting process? I wonder what that money does. 

Lastly, on page 19, routine maintenance for Nalubaale at Shs 446,000 - I cannot imagine a –(Member timed out.) 

5.37
MS FLORENCE NEBANDA(NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for the comprehensive report. What has been mentioned about Butaleja District is true. We are facing a major problem on the local government side. Recoveries are going to be very difficult because most of the technocrats are the ones who have outside companies and they are the ones being awarded works at the district. Therefore, recovery of the money is going to be very difficult. 

Secondly, the commission is not doing the job it is supposed to do. They are not choosing the right people in the right places with the right qualifications. When they award people who are not qualified, it means they are going to do shoddy work and implementation of Government programmes is going to be very difficult. How I wish the committee would come out with a better action plan to take the accounting officers to court or face the law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, if this happens in your constituency or if it is one of your districts, you have to take keen interest. That is why I picked Butaleja. Let me complete the Butaleja cycle because Butaleja is one of the questioned districts. I need to see leaders. I heard from Arua leaders and if there is anyone from Kaabong, he or she should also rise.

5.38
MR YUSUF MUTEMBULI (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee. Like my sister has rightly said, we have a lot of issues in that district. We have inherited a lot of issues but we shall try our best and see how to address them. 

There is this issue of officers who are acting. In Butaleja from 2006 to date, we have never had any substantive secretary at the District Service Commission. You are assigned duty for one, two, three or five months and if you do not perform to expectations, they assign another person. 

My recommendation, Mr Speaker, is that we direct all local governments that have officers who are acting to ensure that within six months, they recruit substantive officers so that we have services in the districts. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that is a very important recommendation. 

5.40
MR JOAB BUSINGE (FDC, Masindi Municipality, Masindi): Mr Speaker, on the issue of these perennial officer abusers, if you look at the case of Kaabong, the Accounting Officer in Kaabong is currently in Kitgum. He was formally in my district, but he is a troublesome man. Currently, he is under arrest, I think. The Ministry of Local Government should blacklist such people, not just transfer problems.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. 

MR BUSINGE: Secondly, I would like to talk about the issue of ring-fencing positions. This is not a problem of the service commissions. This is the problem of the district political executives and the accounting officers. 

Up to the time this Joel left, Masindi Municipality has never got a substantive Inspector of Schools because of the games played by the accounting officers. This is a problem of politicians and accounting officers, not the district service commissions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Joab, you raise a very important point. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, recycling of thieves! You are not yet known here, so, here they have known you – so, now go and steal in Karamoja. From Karamoja go to Kigezi. Why? That is institutionalisation of thieves. 

5.41
MR CHARLES OKELLO (DP, Nwoya North County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by recognising what you have acknowledged. How can Kaabong, with the same story as Butaleja - Kaabong has an unqualified report and Butaleja has a qualified report? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kaabong is even worse. 

MR OKELLO: Secondly, Mr Speaker, I have looked at the amount of money that was appropriated for roads. I am the Chairperson of the Roads Committee -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where? In Parliament?

MR OKELLO: No. In Nwoya District. If you have a road, say 5.5 kilometers with culverts, you cannot use Shs 11 million. You cannot; you will just be joking. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I did not see - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Siraji?

5.42
MR EZAMA SIRAJI (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This tendency of paying contractors when they have not completed their work is happening throughout the districts. There is a procedure where work is supposed to be paid according to stages. Why are Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) not following that? Those CAOs should be prosecuted for the wrong they are doing because there is no value for money. We are losing Government money on contracts that are not supposed to be paid for. I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Komakech, Hon. Nakimuli, Hon. Nyangweso and Hon. Kisa.

5.43
MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson and the committee for the good work. I actually attended one of their meetings. 

Pader is a hard-to-reach, hard-to-stay, hard-to-attract workers to come in. This has affected heads of departments getting employed in Pader. For example, Mr Speaker, the LC V Chairperson of Pader has no vehicle to move into the district so that he can control and manage the projects of Government. In fact, the CAO at times uses a boda boda to move around the district. 

My prayer is, and I ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if possible, to see to it that Pader gets vehicles to help the LC V Chairperson and CAO to implement Government programmes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, on such reports, we do not have prayers; we have recommendations. You recommend. Prayers are for motions and petitions. 

5.44
MS HELEN NAKIMULI (NUP, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the work well done. 

On page 7, they talked about the performance of Government programmes and recoveries. When local governments are given little money for operational costs, they will not do much. Service delivery needs a lot of money, especially to island districts, not only Kalangala. 

Sometime back, Government sent bicycles to island districts to do service delivery, but we need boats and engines in our island districts for service delivery. 

Much as we query local Governments-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the boats have where to stop, and at some point, you may need bicycles.

MS NAKIMULI: No. In some islands, you do not need a bicycle. You need only feet to move. So, from the district headquarters, you need a boat (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nyangweso?

5.45
MR DENNIS NYANGWESO (Independent, SamiaBugwe Central, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. 

As you rightly observed, there has been a lot of over-reliance on financial audits. When you look at the level of unqualified opinions on these financial audits and the report we are receiving from the committee, it is a paradox. 

I would suggest that we support the Office of the Auditor-General to do more of the value-for-money audits such that they can augment this and we see. Otherwise, value-for-money reports will definitely speak to the facts on the ground. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is what the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury promised when he was coming into office. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you need to share this with the Auditor-General. 

Also, as presiding officers, we had received some of these complaints. Chairperson Mapenduzi, do you remember that meeting we had? We want to have a meeting with the Auditor-General. We want to get value for money. That is what is important. 

Hon. Mushemeza, Hon. Kisa, Hon. Hanifa, Hon. Katusabe and I finish with Hon. Omara. Let us do this quickly, colleagues. 

5.47
PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): On the issue of low revenue in local Governments, I have observed that we may need to revisit the Public Finance Management Act, which in some respects undermines the principles of decentralisation, if we are to improve revenue collection. 

The second point on acting capacities is that it is not only limited to local governments. During the budgeting process, I observed that Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), including Kampala City Authority (KCCA) have people in acting capacities for two years. Therefore, our directive should not be limited only to local Governments, but also ministries. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the issue of acting, acting - Even the people of Uganda Aids Commission who are in the gallery have acting positions. You should be only acting if you qualify for a position. Why not give them positions? Hon. 

5.48
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of contractors across almost all districts is a serious problem and it is costing Government money and time. You find one contractor in a district having several Government projects and once he or she is given money from one project, he or she uses that money to work on the other projects and all this work remains incomplete.
 
Mr Speaker, we should recommend that the committee investigates this matter. Why should one contractor be given several other projects in the same district doing the same work in the same financial year? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Hanifa -

5.48
MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is about the 74 per cent of the expenditures in that financial year, leaving 26 per cent returned to the Consolidated Fund, which is an equivalent of Shs 38 billion. 

My concern is: when it is returned to the Consolidated Fund, how does the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development explain, yet some of the programmes are not yet completed? I want some explanation of that situation. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Atkins -

5.49
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For evil to thrive, you need one ingredient; good men and good women to do nothing. Parliament is not a House of lamentation. 

I want to hear from you that as a result of finding money having been paid to full scale and there was not even a foundation or there was only a foundation, the people responsible are now in Kiira Police Station or Central Police Station. The country cannot continue like this. 

Mr Speaker, there is what in the modern world is called “intermediary”. What we are handling right now is postmortem that no longer works anywhere in the world. We should have about maybe five months and then -(Member timed out.) 

5.51
MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My observation is on the one regarding the funds being refunded to the Consolidated Fund on the basis of the Ministry of Education and Sports failing to recruit teachers. 

There is one big problem. I have interacted with the commissioners of education. They have said that they have been appointing headmasters and teachers, but most of the time, they are rejected by the churches – what they call the foundation bodies. I just want to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister: have we abdicated the responsibility of running the Ministry of Education and Sports to the churches? The commissioners appoint headmasters and teachers, but they are rejected on the account of their faith. We are going back to the 1960s when parties were running on the basis of faith. 

Have we abdicated our responsibilities to –(Member timed out.)

5.25
MR JULIUS TUSIIME (Independent, Rwampara East County, Rwampara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson and his committee for the report. I want to comment on the hybrid procurement. The hybrid procurement leads to responsibility by no one. In the local governments, they think the responsibility to monitor contracts and to look at the work done at site is a responsibility of the ministry. Therefore, the local leaders and the technical people tend to shy away, which leads to the kind of shoddy work.

I, therefore, recommend a thorough review of the hybrid procurement method. Also, importantly, we need to take a keen interest in districts and ministries issuing contracts to one contractor who has a reputation for shoddy work. There is need –(Member timed out.)

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (MS Persis Namuganza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I recommend that we strengthen the IGG’s office and do frequent auditing. When I was still under Local Government, as an RDC, we had ULGA, where Central Government officials attended a meeting on corruption. The accusation was that local governments were more corrupt. Local governments were saying that the Centre was more corrupt – that they tell us to send back. 

When we continue with this kind of corruption – they say corruption comes from there – we shall not achieve anything. I think the issue is for us to have close monitoring of these funds to know whether it is someone from the Centre instructing them to embezzle funds and we get them. If it is from the local governments, we should get them. Otherwise, it will be business as usual because this debate has been on for a long time. (Member timed out.)

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You wondered whether with all the observations made, the Auditor-General was right or wrong to give the unqualified opinion. 

Important to note is that these are financial audits and the basis of the opinion is basically on compliance of the generally acceptable accounting principles, compliance with the law and best practices. If there are no material departures in the financial statements, the Auditor-General comes up with the unqualified opinion.

There is a Member who said that we need to move from financial audits to value-for-money audits -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable minister.

MR MUSASIZI: I think this is where emphasis should be. Also, considering the current circumstances, Parliament should interest itself in doing real time audits; monitor the project as it is going on. Do not wait for the project to end and then, you begin doing postmortem examinations. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee chairpersons, you have heard. Honourable colleagues, this financial year, we have facilitated you to move. Please, move on the ground.

5.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Rusoke Businge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I concur with the findings of the committee because those are the same findings we have and we are seriously taking action. For example, it is true there is pointing of fingers, knowingly, because there is no excuse that when a contract is centrally given, a district engineer should not supervise it. He is paid for that. 

I found a problem at Kiruhura, where all the money to complete a project of Shs 1.7 billion was paid at a single go and, unfortunately, the contractor died two weeks later in an accident. The CAO is on interdiction, but we are also cheated by the Judiciary. In such a situation, I do not see why a case would take a month for someone who authorised the money. He would be put in and his property confiscated, but the case is still lagging. We interdicted the District Education Officer – the principal signatory – but up to now, there is nothing done.

This problem must be handled squarely, with each ministry complimenting the other. For these shoddy seed schools being built, the engineers of the Ministry of Education and Sports are paid for monthly monitoring. What do they monitor when shoddy work is going on? 

I am on record, Mr Speaker, for refusing to open a school in my district and compelling the district to complete all the furniture because they had said “the contractor is dilly dallying - let us take it up”. I have refused to-date. They are now at 90 per cent completion. 

We have also acted as the Ministry of Local Government because, unfortunately, everything is pushed to local government. However, I want to tell you that the Ministry of Public Service is part of the irregular recruitments. As the Ministry of Local Government, we have spearheaded actions. 

We have nullified all the irregular appointments of  the parish chiefs in Kagadi. The same was done in Kamwenge where the Human Resource Officer had migrated all the teachers and taken their Shs 3 million and forced them to keep waiting for the Shs 100 million for PDM. We forced them back and put the Human Resource Officer in jail. 

We have gone to interdict the former Deputy CAO of Kagadi, who irregularly recruited 75 teachers. This is syndicated thieving. That is why we must wake up – for all the ministries to compliment the Ministry of Local Government. Who put these teachers on the payroll? It is the Ministry of Public Service. Every three months, they were alternating the correct teachers with the shoddy ones. 

We have arrested the CAO of Ntoroko and I will be there this Saturday to nullify all the 500 appointments. As the Ministry of Local Government, we need supplementary effort. Even you, Members of Parliament, do not wait to bring matters here on the Floor. Act in your own districts. If you went there after hearing all that and put the CAO to task and called for an emergency meeting, all these problems would not be maturing. The moment we wait to bring everything on the Floor -(Interjection)- Inform me. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is my time, please. I do not have much time. Since you allowed the Member, let her give you information.

MS ABER: Thank you, Mr Speaker.
	
MS RUSOKE: Be brief. (Laughter)

MS ABER: Mr Speaker, as I speak to you now in this House, the CAO of Kitgum District is in custody for mismanagement of the Parish Development Model. The same CAO was transferred from Kaabong. It is alleged that he was interdicted; the same CAO was transferred to Kitgum and right now the payment of salaries for the public servants in Kitgum, two months down the road, is pending. 

I would like to let the minister know that sometimes the steps which are taken are implemented on a short-term basis. Can we ensure that the steps taken are implemented and followed up by the ministry so that these officers do not go back door and get back to work and again continue with the same mess they have created? I thank you.

MS RUSOKE BUSINGE: Very good information; where truth is I always say it. So, as the person now who is in charge of workers, I would like to assure you that I am not resting. Please give me information on time. I will do what is humanly possible to sit with my senior and we act.

We want to give room to our civil servants to take action. I want to assure you of that one. So, I would like to give you an example of syndicated thieving which you must also look out for.

These officers overpay certain institutions and then they go back to ask for money. It is true. A case in point is Fort Portal City, where an acting treasurer has been paying in excess of Shs 40 million, Shs 50 million, Shs 13 million and Shs 25 million throughout the year. 

Today I went to look for these officers in the Ministry of Finance to give me the release which was given. How could someone, in their normal senses, pay excess regularly in quarter one, quarter two, quarter three?

I am ready to take them on; trust me. You give me the list of the monies that you sent and I find these people just joking around - overpaying and going back to share the money. We should take them on and we need your support. 

Finally, I concur with the committee that we should make a parliamentary resolution about the tendering of hybrid. I have a case I am handling; someone was given a secondary school for Ntoroko, Bundibugyo, Bunyangabu-Kiyombya Secondary, Kabarole St Paul’s Seed Kasenda. How can this person have the capacity of running–imagine  the schools would have been completed in 2020 March, but they are still dilly-dallying!

So, let us join hands when there is a problem. In Kaabong, let us go as a team and complement one another, put these people in jail and compel the Judiciary to act - not taking such a long time when they are paid money. They have all the judges and magistrates that they need. They are partly the reason why this is taking place. I would like to promise this House that the issue of transferring culprits ends today. 

I am on record having shared that with my senior minister; we are going to leave no stone unturned. Transferring a thief from one station to another? I promise, we are going to end that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS RUSOKE BUSINGE: Now on revenue collection, I would like to assure you that lousy local government staff are the cause. I went and commissioned a road machine in Nansana Municipality where revenue was collected, saved and they bought their own grader. This can happen everywhere.

So, let us take the bull by the horns so that we can bring these people to book. Now I am supposed to go to Arua, Maracha - I am coming for them and please support me to have them arrested and sentenced. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is our colleague, Hon. Victoria Rusoke, Woman MP Kabarole District and Minister of State for Local Government. Honourable Minister, we shall hold you to your word. And this takes you to what I talked about; why ask the police to investigate when we have the IGG? The Police have a lot of work. I am referring to those who are provided for in the law, but they have others that support like the State House Anti-Corruption Unit and others.

MR OJARA MAPENDUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Just to very quickly make a few clarifications and also respond to a few things. But before that, permit me to very sincerely thank members of the committee for their sacrifices and commitment. We have a team of very passionate Members of Parliament on this committee. We have been able to traverse the entire country and this audit report covered about 139 entities. These are just 14 that we have presented and the rest we will be able to present as soon as possible. 

The Members have demonstrated a lot of commitment and I want to thank them. However, there are a few things that you touched and we take note of your advice. Let me just quickly get back to two or three things:

Just as the minister put it, there is a big problem with UgIFT (Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers) project and we have indicated that in the big report; where many district entities are implementing this project including construction of schools, seed secondary schools and health facilities.

We have also recommended in the big document that we have provided for members - just as we have recommended unless we put a total ban on this approach - the hybrid procurement method. The problem we have found is that the contractors that are given these projects are majorly sent to the districts by the ministries. So, they are dictated upon and the districts do not have options of opening up. So, lists of contractors are sent and those are the contractors selected from among them and given contracts. They are extremely pig-headed; they do not respect the districts and then you find one company handling contracts in several entities and they do not listen to the districts.

The other thing that is important to mention is - just like Hon. Kisa put it - if we do not act tough, not only on local governments, but also on officials at the central government level who interfere with the works of local government, we are not likely to give services to the citizens of this country. 

A Member raised a concern whether the main report is available. This report was uploaded more than a week ago; you can check for yourselves. It is a big report of about 132 pages. 

The other question was about political leaders. These are the district chairpersons and members of the district executive committees, the LC III chairpersons, municipal council and city leaders. These are the political leaders we are talking about.

Finally, a Member said there are already guidelines that should ensure the functionality of the district service commission. We agree, but we have indicated in our report, where you find a district deliberately refuses to have members of the service commission. 

Let me just give Ntoroko District as an example; where the political leaders blatantly rejected the Commission for over a year. What happens when the leadership of a district deliberately refuses to have members of the service commission? So, we are saying there must be clear conditions that would subject districts to comply with these demands. Otherwise, thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairman. Colleagues, this is a very good report. I want to thank the committee chairperson and members for a job well done - (Applause) - and the minister, for the strong commitment. Honourable minister, this encourages us to do our work, especially when we know we have your support and we are going to work with you. So, we will give you support. I saw the Prime Minister nodding; she was very happy. She will give you support where you need inter-ministerial collaboration, so you will have to work together.

Honourable members, I put the question that the Report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) on the report of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2020/2021 on districts of Kaabong, Arua, Pader, Butaleja, Luweero, Karenga, Ntungamo, Kapchorwa, Isingiro, Sheema, Kabale and Bushenyi and the two municipalities of Bushenyi-Ishaka and Kabale, be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As per Rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure, honourable minister, I expect an action-taken report in three months, but I want to assign this to both the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of State for Ethics, for purposes of IGG working closely with you, so that we have a very clear report. 

The Minister of Local Government will coordinate the rest – he is the lead minister – but we wanted the minister of ethics to be involved because of the IGG component; some of these actions are beyond. 

Yes, hon. Musasizi?

6.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, additionally, as Ministry of Finance, we have an obligation to prepare a Treasury Memoranda arising from this report and bring it back to the House.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Ministry of Finance is added to that list. So, they are three ministries – Local Government, Finance and Ethics. Of course, Prime Minister, as the Leader of Government Business, will coordinate all these. Thank you. Honourable minister, do you have anything to add?

MS RUSOKE: I want to reaffirm, Mr Speaker, that I love this job – (Laughter)- and on Saturday, after tomorrow - the MPs of Ntoroko will bear with me that I have already alerted them to be there - I will give my ultimatum to the district chairperson to appoint the district service commission within one month, not even three or four and to officially nullify the 500 positions that were illegally created.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, honourable minister, your commitment means by the time the chairperson of PAC (Local Government) reports here, we shall be having a District Service Commission in Ntoroko.

Colleagues, the people from Uganda AIDS Commission have been seated here since morning. I want the Prime Minister to listen to this report because after, she has a statement, which we talked about yesterday. I want her to update the House on that statement. So, let us handle that report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND RELATED MATTERS ON THE ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON HIV/AIDS SERVICE DELIVERY IN THE COUNTRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, 15 minutes please. This report has been uploaded so we have read through it. Go to the observations and recommendations.

6.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND RELATED MATTERS (Ms Sarah Netalisire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I go into the report, allow me to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee. Allow me to also lay a copy of the report.

Mr Speaker, as you have ably guided, this is the Report of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters on the assessment of the impact of COVID-19 on HIV/AIDS service delivery in the country. I will go straight to the findings.

During engagement with Uganda AIDS Commission, the committee held meetings and during our interactions, we discovered that Uganda has made tremendous progress in combating the HIV/AIDS epidemic, with a reduction in new infections, HIV prevalence, and AIDs-related mortality over the past 10 years.

We also discovered that Uganda is among the eight countries globally that achieved the 90-90-90 targets by 2020. Here, we mean that 90 per cent of the people living with HIV/AIDS test and are aware of their HIV positive status, 90 per cent of those who are tested are enrolled into care and 90 per cent of those have their viral load suppressed. Those countries are listed there: Botswana, Cambodia, Denmark, Iceland, Singapore, Sweden and the UK. 

However, Mr Speaker, by the end of 2021, Uganda had an estimated population of 1.4 million persons living with HIV and related deaths had declined by 61 per cent, from 56,000, in 2010 to 22,000 and new infections had declined by 60 per cent, from 94,000 to 38,000. However, with the impact of COVID-19, the country has witnessed a surge of HIV infections from 38,000 to 44,000, in 2022.

In addition to the above observation, Mr Speaker, children and adolescents are lagging behind, in regard to accessibility of HIV services and as such, their outcomes are poor, compared to adults. 

The indicators for HIV prevention, diagnosis, treatment coverage, retention and viral suppression do not only have low coverage among the adolescents, but also have stagnated or registered minimal progress over the past five years. 

Furthermore, it is important to note that 43 per cent of pregnant mothers living with HIV are adolescents and young women.

The National HIV Strategic Plan target was to achieve 95:95:95. At least 95 per cent of those who test HIV positive should be aware of their status, 95 per cent should be enrolled on treatment and their viral load should be suppressed. 

The country is on track to achieve the targets and by June 2021, Uganda had reached 94 per cent - that is testing and knowing their status; 92 per cent being on treatment and 84 per cent was on suppression. However, we realised that there is need to strengthen viral load services to match the demand.

Mr Speaker, despite these achievements, the epidemic remains generalised and heterogeneous across geographical, socio-economic and demographic population subgroups, implying that there are challenges that need to be addressed.

Mr Speaker, we observed that His Excellency, the President of this country, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, is still the champion when it comes to elimination and the management of HIV/AIDS. He has gone as far as launching the HIV Presidential Fast-Track Initiative aimed at ending HIV by 2030. 

The committee also found out that donor support over time has been declining. We have lost crucial donors like the Governments of Ireland and Denmark which were contributing to the HIV/AIDS basket fund. Currently, only the United States Government through PEPFAR (The U.S. President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief) is still on board and provides approximately $400 million. 

The HIV/AIDS financing projections for 2020/2021 to 2025, based on the national strategic plan, show a total need of $4.1 billion currently. Uganda AIDS Commission has commitments of $2.8 billion leaving a funding gap of $1.3 billion.

Government support towards the HIV response is at eight per cent only with donors at 84 per cent and private sector contributing also 84 per cent. There are figures detailing how much money has been got in all the financial years. 

It is notable to highlight that funding to the Uganda AIDS Secretariat, as the coordinator of the national response, has been chronically low. For the last three financial years, Uganda AIDS Commission has been provided less than their requested annual budget of Shs 25 billion. For instance in the Financial Year 2019/2020, Uganda AIDS Commission only received Shs 7 billion out of Shs 25 billion.

In 2020/2021, Uganda AIDS Commission received Shs 11 billion out of the Shs 25 billion. This Financial Year 2022/2023, they are hopefully waiting to receive Shs 15 billion leaving a gap of Shs 10 billion. 

The committee notes that donor funds have largely been used on vertical programmes and not addressing challenges in the health system such as recruitment of medical personnel, infrastructure development, increasing public awareness and information dissemination, among others. 

The committee further observed that the financing gap of approximately $120 million in the Financial Year 2021/2022 up from $ 77 million in the Financial Year 2020/2021 closely relates with the current international financing trends. 

Reduction in donor funding is due to global trends and challenges in the global economy. Globally, priorities are changing and we have been told that our donors are now looking into handling issues of climate change and security. 

Domestically, Uganda's economic growth and progression into the middle-income status means that its eligibility for grants will change and conditionalities such as co-financing will be introduced. 

During our meetings when we got this information from Uganda AIDS Commission, we invited the Ministers of Health and of Finance. To our disappointment, Cabinet had a resolution and directed the Minister of Finance to initiate the amendment of the Uganda Revenue Authority Act to enable the Minister of Finance operate the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund. 

According to the letter that we received from the Ministry of Health, the Minister of Finance was requested to make sure that the two per cent revenue collected from the commodities that were identified to fund the AIDS Trust Fund, which would total to about Shs20 billion, was to be collected and remitted to the AIDS Trust Fund to cater for the funding gap. 

However, we received a letter from the Minister of Health that was written by the Minister of Finance to His Excellency the President clearly indicating that he was not ready to get this money to be put on the account for AIDS Trust Fund. He indicated that this was not an emergency and, therefore, the money will be collected through the normal budgeting process. 

When you look at the way the budgets are being considered, it is going to take us many years to realise this money. It is our fear that as Uganda moves to the middle income status, as hinted to us by His Excellency, we shall stop benefiting from grants that come from donors and we shall go into cost-sharing. If we are not prepared as a country, 1.4 million Ugandans who are living positively and surviving on these ARVs on daily basis will be hit and we may start having challenges. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to lay a copy of this letter on the Table for the House consumption. 

We are recommending that:

Government should expedite the implementation of the AIDS Trust Fund strategy and provide guidance on how to support the processes to operationalise this Fund.

 Government should also address the effects of donors’ withdrawal to support the HIV interventions by addressing the chronic underfunding to the Uganda AIDS Commission.

A National Health Insurance Scheme should be established to integrate all available external private and public providers.

6.2 looks at the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on HIV interventions. I will go straight to (a), which looks at the increase in new infections in the COVID-19 era. 

The committee established and noted that HIV infection among the general population increased from 38,000 to 54,000 in 2022. This is a big setback to the achievements that the country had registered. We have highlighted the districts showing the new prevalence rates. 

The 54,000 cases of new infections recorded in the COVID-19 pandemic era are attributed to disruption in the HIV/AIDS service delivery. Government COVID-19 intervention measures failed to integrate HIV/AIDS communication and services and lack of access to private measures like voluntary testing and counselling, condom distribution, outreach services to the youth, among others.

There was also the prolonged stay at home for adolescents. The COVID-19 pandemic and the subsequent guidelines disrupted the HIV/AIDS services affecting the preventive and treatment components of HIV/AIDS. They also affected and reversed gains achieved under the 90:90:90 campaign. 

The committee found out the following under the various components:

No outreaches. Over all, the COVID-19 pandemic – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, we shall not continue like this; you can see the time. The purpose of uploading a report early – I have seen most of you read when she is reading. We cannot have this culture. That is why we upload the report early. Honourable chairperson, you have five minutes to conclude.

MS NETALISIRE: Mr Speaker, the recommendations under failure to have outreach services are:

 We should evaluate the effectiveness of the current HIV response strategies, identify and address these gaps that have led to the increase in the new infection rates.

Government should design and implement an appropriate Behavioural Change Communication (BCC) campaign to remind Ugandans that HIV/AIDS is still real. 

Disruption in counselling and testing services 

We also recommend that HIV/AIDS services must remain crucial during and after COVID-19 or any other outbreak to mitigate the impact of HIV/AIDS prevention and control services in Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, we also note that there was a reduction in the condom uptake and so, we are recommending that:

Government should revamp the campaign to promote the use of condoms by sensitising the population about their effectiveness as an HIV prevention method. 

HIV focal persons should always be equipped with the most up-to-date data on HIV/ AIDS. 

Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission (PMTCT)

This area was also affected greatly. According to the data that we received last week from United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), we have discovered that 6,000 babies were born during COVID-19 with HIV in the two years. This is the data that was released by UNAIDS about two weeks ago. 

We recommend that:

Government should trace and test all children that were born between March 2020 and December 2021 and those found positive should be enrolled on life-saving therapy. 

Government should also continue and enroll the provisions of PMTCT services across the country. 

Male medical circumcision was also affected during this time. We recommend that:

We re-launch voluntary medical male circumcision across the country. 

The committee urges Government to integrate the cultural and/ or any other form of circumcision into the voluntary medical male circumcision. 

In this area, Mr Speaker, allow me to use one minute to elaborate or explain why the committee feels that the cultural form of circumcision should be integrated. I come from Bugisu subregion and in this area, we do cultural circumcision. Originally, we had issues with having one knife to circumcise many young boys. We fought this and today it is one knife for one young boy. 

The challenge we have is that in the region, one knife-one boy –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I seek for your protection – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you are protected. 

MS NETALISIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rushing so that we catch up with time.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think some of you who are laughing are not circumcised. (Laughter) The campaign should start with Parliament. The Chief Opposition Whip can lead it. This is a chief Imbalu – we shall send the Member for Namisindwa to check whether you have done the job. Chairperson, continue. (Laughter)

MS NETALISIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am saying this as a very important point because we have achieved in having one knife for one young boy, but we still have the culture in the Bugisu subregion. 

My brother, the Chief Opposition Whip, and those who watched the circumcision inauguration programme that took place a few weeks ago will bear witness with me. They were interviewing some young boys and cultural leaders about what happens after the healing process. These young boys are supposed to have sex and it is the process of washing away the bad omen that they may have - (Interjections)

This is an area that I want us to focus on. It is important. One of the young boys was interviewed and he said, “I am not going to use a condom to sleep with this girl because then it will not help me to cleanse myself.” The elder was also interviewed and he said, “Yes, after circumcision and after healing, this is another culture that you are supposed to perform.” 

Mr Speaker, without protection - we are in the circumcision period now – it is an area where we feel these young boys are endangering and exposing themselves to HIV infections. 

Therefore, as a committee, that is why we are recommending that we inculcate the cultural aspect of circumcision into the medical one while sensitising our communities to stop doing this. My brother is here and he will help and guide me if it is a lie or not, but that is what we witnessed. 

Treatment and care

Mr Speaker, so many of our clients fell off treatment and care during the COVID-19 lockdown. When they fell off, we had issues to do with the drug resistance. It has been observed that 120,000 persons living positively in Uganda are on line two and 160,000 Ugandans are on line three. 

To treat one patient on line two, you need Shs 350,000 per month and for you to treat a client on line three you need Shs 700,000 per month. With this drug resistance, we feel that it may be a challenge if we have many HIV patients who run into stage two or stage three of care and treatment. 

Therefore, as a committee, we recommend that continuous promotion of counselling, guidance and psychosocial support should be encouraged. This is because most of these people who fall out from line one and go to two and three are mainly children and young adults. Hence, their adherence levels are very poor. 

We recommend that line listing of lost clients for follow-up to the community level should be promoted. 

We also recommend the use of locator forms filled by health workers to ease tracking and follow-up of these clients. 

Mr Speaker, we have the impact of COVID-19 on related deaths. It has also been observed that we had many related deaths that came in during the COVID-19 pandemic. Some of them came because people would not take drugs because they had nothing to eat. When they fell off their treatment, most of them succumbed to death during this period. 

We had socio-economic effects that came in. We can relate these ones to many of our young girls who got pregnant during this COVID-19 season. This means that most of them had live sex.  They had no antenatal care and, therefore, were not able to be tested to find out whether they were positive or negative. 

Therefore, it gives a lot of work for us as a country to ensure that these young girls and boys are identified. Those that are positive should be enrolled in care together with their children. 

Key populations

The committee found out that during the COVID-19 lockdown, commercial sex work went high. We also noticed that the number of lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transsexual gender increased. This was mostly seen in Kalangala, Bukedea and Jinja.
 
The commercial sex workers came out very clearly and spoke to the committee. They told us that they know their status, but unfortunately, the people they go with do not know their status and that in most cases, they do not care even when they are told. 

We visited Kalangala, a water-surrounded area, where we encountered one woman inside and 10 men queuing outside. As a country, we need to up our game. 

We also recognised an increase in gender-based violence, mainly among discordant couples. This was also because many men stayed at home and there were so many demands that came from wives – managing the home – yet the men were unable to work. 

Mr Speaker, with discordant couples, you find a man is HIV-positive and the woman is negative. During lockdown, they all stayed at home and wanted to engage in sexual activities, but most of the women, for fear of their lives, ran away from their homes and those who stayed in the homes, were battered, hence high cases of domestic violence. 

We recommend that Government should develop a comprehensive response strategy to ensure adequate attention, care and protection to all persons. 

We also visited some refugees and realised that our country is a hosting country to many refugees. This disrupts the services that are provided because many people who come from other countries partake of the services that are provided. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, I hope you are concluding.

MS NETALISIRE: Yes, Mr Speaker. We recommend that Government should develop a comprehensive response strategy to ensure adequate attention, care and protection of all the refugee population as well as taking into consideration the peaceful coexistence between the refugees and our hosting communities. 

Conclusion

The national multi-sectoral HIV response has made tremendous achievements in terms of reducing new HIV infections and AIDS-related deaths and the country is aiming at ending AIDS by 2030. However, the 700 new infections that occur weekly, mostly among adolescent girls and young women, is still unacceptably high – of course, this includes the 100 babies that are also born with HIV and AIDS due to their mothers being started on ART late and some of them falling out. 

We appeal to Members of Parliament and everyone out there to use every opportunity, when they address their constituents, and sensitise the public and give them information on how HIV is transmitted and how to protect themselves from getting it. 

We also request honourable members to assist in dispelling myths and misconceptions about the cause of HIV, how it is transmitted and the lack of a cure. 

We encourage Government to design a campaign strategy for the education sector, especially in schools and the public. 

Mr Speaker, with the impact of COVID-19, the country has witnessed the surge of HIV infections from 38,000 to 54,000 in 2022.

There is a need for Government to urgently increase funding to the Uganda AIDS Commission and launch a vigorous HIV prevention and treatment campaign if the gains we had registered over decades are to be consolidated. 

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, Uganda AIDS Commission as the coordinating entity,  in the last release, received money for wages only. There is no money that was allocated to them for moving out to ensure that the setback caused by COVID-19 is addressed. 

Mr Speaker, technology is in place. No baby is supposed to be born HIV-positive. Once a mother is enrolled on treatment on time, they will suppress their viral load; it will be non-detectable and once it is undetectable, you have 90 per cent chance of not infecting another person. Having 6,000 babies deprived of health because of HIV and AIDS is not right. 

As a country, we must take the bull by its horns once again and make sure that we end AIDS by 2030. We want to thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and your team. This is a thorough report. Now, I do not want to reduce this to issue of circumcision because Hon. Nambeshe is trying to make corrections. (Laughter)

However, it is very important and I have noticed that whenever we have colleagues from Bugisu having functions, very few of the males attend – you fear you will be grabbed and circumcised. (Laughter)

I went to climb Mt Wanale with some colleagues when I had visited Bungokho, after we had buried the mother of Hon. Wandwasi. Guys kept looking at me trying to see properly, “Is he circumcised?” (Laughter)

They wanted to grab me so my security had to be alert. Therefore, colleagues, if you are ready to visit Bugisu – please, Hon. Gilbert Olanya, ensure you have sorted out issues by removing the housing. (Laughter) It is for your own safety (Laughter).

Colleagues, I will open up the debate on this for 20 minutes; it is a clear report. However, if you are a member of the committee, do not stand up. If you have already spoken, do not stand – so that I first pick colleagues who have not yet spoken. I will start with Hon. Noah Mutebi – and if you are not circumcised, do not stand. (Laughter)

6.47
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is for the men, please. 

MR MUTEBI: I want to thank the committee for the submission. First, I want to begin with the non-funding of the Uganda AIDS Commission. If you give only wages to the AIDS commission to perform their function, it means you have given them money to sit in offices. I appeal to Government to fund Uganda AIDS Commission so that they can perform their duties. 

The second is about the increase of AIDS from 38,000 to 54,000. This was due to the prolonged stay of adolescents at home. We cannot rule out the poor parenting -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Musasizi will answer issues of financing. 

6.48
MR BENARD SEKYANZI (NRM, Budyebo County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to talk about circumcision. This act should be done medically.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, are you circumcised? 

MR BENARD SEKYANZI: Yes. (Laughter) I would like to implore the House that we should be messengers and educators to the public. 

The public knows that if you are circumcised, you are free and you cannot acquire AIDS. Therefore, we need to educate our people that circumcision just reduces the chances of acquiring HIV, but it doesn’t stop one from getting it. So, we need to educate our people. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I will require some of you to lay evidence on Table if you continue –(Laughter)

6.49
MR SOLOMON ALINGA (NRM, Too County, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also underwent the same knife; so, I speak from experience. 

Mr Speaker, as a country, we have come from far in fighting HIV/AIDS. And we are known all over the world as Uganda, that we have done good work. I would pray that we maintain the same because as we see the report, it means that Government is trying to underfund the Uganda AIDS Commission. How can you pay salaries for work not done? Everybody is paid because of the work that he or she is going to do. However, if there is no work to be done –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am going to pick all of you, colleagues, who have not spoken. Those who have spoken, we shall negotiate. For men who are circumcised, I will consider you. (Laughter)

6.51
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I want to thank the UPDF. Last Sunday, they provided free HIV/AIDS testing and SMC in a medical camp that was organised by the Namugongo Anglican Church. Based on the percentage that has increased, Mr Speaker, I want to really plead that we support the district HIV/AIDS committees.

To be sincere, there is no more drumming about HIV/AIDS; if it is there, it is little and that makes our young people to relax. If we did that it would be possible. Unfortunately, like it has been said, the funding from the private sector is dwindling. I also must recognise the contribution by TASO Uganda in Teso subregion. It would be very important that we have an independent – (Member timed out.)

6.52
MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Government should encourage the participation of cultural organisations in addressing the effects of HIV/AIDS like Buganda Kingdom, Busoga, Tooro, among others, and it should fund them. 

Let me take this opportunity to thank the Kabaka of Buganda, His Highness Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II, who is at the forefront of fighting HIV/AIDS in Uganda and the whole of Africa. Thank you.

6.53
DR NOAH MUSA (Independent, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. First of all, I thank the committee for the report. 

We know that as a country, we have done very good work as far as the fight against HIV/AIDS is concerned. And for a very long time, HIV/AIDS treatment and prevention has been funded mainly by donors. With the current global economic situation, we know we are not going to get a lot of resources from the donors. 

My view is that Government really needs to consider and fund the Uganda AIDS Commission. A total of Shs 25 billion versus Shs 1.4 million people! I think that is little money. So, my recommendation is that Government needs to provide resources to fund the commission since they have the technical capacity to do the work. Thank you.

6.54
DR TWAHA KAGABO (NUP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I commend the committee and the chair, for the substantive work and the report that they have given to us.

Allow me to appreciate the effort by Government; it has laboured to fight HIV/AIDS. But on the same note, I want the House to take note that much as this has been done, the understaffing in the Uganda HIV/AIDS Commission and all the health clinics is making our people to receive poor quality service, because they are understaffed. They rely on refilling to these people three-monthly and six-monthly, which in the end, affects them not being supervised because they are supposed to attend and each time they attend –(Member timed out.)

6.54
MR STEPHEN SSERUBULA (NUP, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. 

Mr Speaker, we have challenges, for example, with the police and the lower courts. There are very many defilement cases, but you do not find the culprits or suspects at police or prison, because some police officers are mediating between the defilers and the parents and they let these people go scot-free. At the end of the day, our girls are left victims. 

Secondly, there is fear when it comes to testing. Men use women as their mirrors. When you tell them to test, they say to their partner; “You test then I will know whether I am fine.” At the end of the day, obviously, we normally have such cases. 

So, Mr Speaker, there is a serious concern to encourage men to go and test –(Member timed out.)

6.55
MR CHARLES MATOVU (NUP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report. But I will give an account of the constituency that I represent, specifically, Bussi Island, where I have over 3,000 people who are HIV/AIDS positive. And perhaps, you have noticed that during the COVID-19 lockdown, the resurgence went up, but there were no interventions at the local council level. 

So, we suggest in one of the recommendations that we put centres that can provide such services in such times. And then it is very illogical, Mr Speaker, in this era, to talk of the posterity that is going to waste because of the infection, yet we have all the –(Member timed out.)

6.56
MR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One, there are over 6,000 new infections and these are mainly from teenage pregnancies. How sure are we that young girls, some of who are in school, are receiving services for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS?

Two, the lockdown locked many people on antiretroviral medicines out of their clinics. Did the report delve a little bit on the possibility of multi-drug resistance? 
Three, TB and HIV/AIDS are twins. Did this report shed some light onto TB and HIV/AIDS collaboration and co-infection?

 Finally, given the financing constraints –(Member timed out.)

6.57
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the chairperson together with the committee. 

I found that there was a gap in the care. While you mentioned care, then you needed other sectors like the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to help, especially after COVID-19 and also the drought. You remember that almost the entire country was affected by drought. 

Many of our people who are HIV/AIDS positive, refused to take medicine. Some of our homes were actually crowded with people who are suffering from HIV/AIDS. Even the Prime Minister will testify that I wrote to her. I also wrote to the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. You see your people dying –(Member timed out.)

6.58
MS STELLA ISODO (FDC, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. According to the report, the prevalence of HIV/AIDS increased during the COVID-19 pandemic. At the same time, there is a lot of drug stock-out at the health centres, particularly health centres III. So, there is need for the Ministry of Health to look at the supplies of drugs at the health units.

I beg to submit. 

5.59
MS KEVIN KAALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to add my voice thanking the committee for the good report that they have presented to us. 

Mr Speaker, these days, there are lots of useless adverts on TVs, radios and campaign messages on HIV have really been wiped out completely. I want to encourage that organisations like TASO be empowered so that they can go back to schools and run HIV campaign massages, including on radios and TVs because people nowadays are taking HIV as any other disease. They are not thinking that - (Member timed out.)

7.01
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Thank you for the report because it is rare to see the effect of a disease on a disease.

Anyhow, Mr Speaker, the issue of cultural setbacks still stands especially on the discordant couples. When the wife is negative and the husband is positive, it is shaming for the woman to come out and say: “I will not give birth”, but decides to remain in the marriage. Sometimes, the cultural leaders and the husband’s family mistreat those women without knowing. 

Then, we have provided money for mindset change. I would request that some of this money be used to sensitise our people because when you look at how people fear to show off; how people fear to pick drugs –(Interjections)- During COVID-19 people did not have transport –(Member timed out.)

7.02
MR TOM AZA ALERO: (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. How is HIV/AIDS spread? Think of the influence of social media, immoral pornographic materials among the youth and peer groups. The use of alcohol, drugs like marijuana, mairungi; chewing and so on, all help in spreading HIV/AIDS. 

Now, the role of parents and school head teachers, senior women teachers and senior male teachers is to talk to the youth.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, most of us men hire boda-boda men to escort our wives to the hospitals for antenatal clinics. Instead of us going with our wives and we are tested, we hire boda-boda men to go and escort our wives - (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Hon. Engola?

7.03
MS BETTY ENGOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for the report they have just presented. 

Mr Speaker, what has happened has happened. I want to make a comment on the committee’s recommendations. I think the recommendations are very good. And so, I urge Government to take up those recommendations because that will lead us to a solution to handle the AIDS scourge. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. 

7.04
MR DONALD KATALIHWA (Independent, Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The current celebration that we have on the reduction in the prevalence of HIV is as a result of efforts that were done by different stakeholders between six to 10 years ago, where you would see civil society, Government and other development partners working together to fight the scourge. 

However, Mr Speaker, I now ask myself: Where are we going wrong as a country? We have this whole agency, which is in charge of controlling HIV/AIDS, but we do not have money as a country to fund this agency. Mr Speaker, are we not sitting on a time bomb when we say we have no money as a country for the drugs yet we know there are very many Ugandans who are supposed to be getting those drugs? 

Mr Speaker, it is really a very big embarrassment when you look through our budget and find the country not having enough money for Uganda AIDS –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us hear from Hon. Chemutai?

7.05
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report, and Government, for the efforts that it has put in to ensure HIV/AIDS reduces. 

I want to make a comment on what the chairperson said about circumcision in Bugisu. We also circumcise the males in Kapchorwa and also the circumcised boys believe that when they sleep with a girl, they heal faster. So, what we have done of late to stop them from HIV infections is that, immediately after circumcision, we call a doctor to come and inject them –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just conclude on that point; it is important information.  

MS CHEMUTAI: Thank you. What I was saying is that after circumcision, this is what we do: the boys are injected. A doctor comes around to inject all the boys who have undergone circumcised with PPF so that the wounds heal faster. It takes like two weeks to heal as opposed to the previous times when the wound would take more than one month to heal. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for the information. 
Yes, Hon. Ssejjoba?

7.07
MR ISAAC SSEJJOBA (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the work well done; for presenting to us a very good report. 

However, I would like to request Government to leave this business of saying they don’t have money. When it comes to the health of Ugandans, we must prioritise. It is good the Minister of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development is here. They should come out and provide money to cater for the health services, particularly HIV/AIDS.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to call upon my brothers and sisters in this Parliament, but are from Bugisu Region – they are doing a very good job to circumcise, but they should sensitise our young people to avoid that business of –(Member timed out.)

7.08
MS RITA ATUKWASA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbarara City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee members, for the report that has highlighted these salient, but rather prevalent issues. Mbarara City posts very high; actually indicated above the national prevalence levels. Being the good advocate of HIV that I am, I have always taken responsibility. 

Mr Speaker, pertinent to say is the issue of funding. For all the campaigns that we have endeavoured to do with Mbarara Hospital, we noticed that they do not have kits. I have actually been helped by private practitioners such as Reproductive Health Uganda, City Medicals and others. So, it is very pertinent. 

Most young girls now actually fear more getting pregnant than contracting HIV. That means even the numbers that have been captured-(Member timed out.)

7.09
MS NAOME KIBAAJU (NRM, Sheema County North, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Chairperson, for a good report. I just wanted to think out loud whether it is not possible for us to target schools since the medical camps have come back so that our young boys can be circumcised. I think in a school environment, the children can come together and encourage each other and be circumcised. I want to thank you for this interaction and I am very glad to speak because I do not usually make noise here in Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, before I call the Leader of the Opposition, is there any colleague who has not spoken today and would like to speak? 

Hon. Donald, you did not conclude your point. Conclude it well.

MR KATALIHWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was raising a very important issue. Why should Ugandans really wait for emergencies to happen like how it happened during COVID-19 to plan for this country? When COVID-19 came, we got billions of money to fight it, but we have failed to have billions of money to fight the pandemic that we have been with for the last 30 years.

Mr Speaker, I really want us to agree as a country and as the legislative assembly of this country that we should have money, whether supplementary or any other, for Uganda AIDS Commission so that we fight this scourge instead of sitting on a time bomb. For example, we are talking about drugs, but we are relying entirely on donors for all the drugs for our people. The day USAID pulls out, all our people will die and all our children will get HIV/AIDS. As a country, I really need to submit that we should -(Member timed out.)

7.11
MR GEOFREY MUTIWA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to talk about two issues.

One is the issue of sensitisation. You may realise that there is no visibility when it comes to issues of HIV on social media and also on radio stations across the country. I want to encourage Government to design adverts that can encourage our people and educate them about the dangers of HIV/AIDS. I believe by doing so, many of our young people will get the information and they will be able to avoid contracting and also engaging in behaviours that can make them contract HIV/AIDS.

The other issue is about drugs –(Member timed out.)

7.12
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to salute my sister, Hon. Netalisire, the Chairperson of the HIV/AIDS and related diseases Committee, for this good report. Allow me to go at odds with the mythology she tried to bring out concerning the Imbalu cultural celebrations we have in Bugisu. The truth of the matter is that we have those traditional stories, but culture has been very dynamic and it has undergone lots of changes because of our cultural institution, the Inzu Ya Masaba. 

By the way, the late Umukuka launched an aggressive behavioural change campaign. A number of experts, including one you mentioned, our own Dr Watiti, have actually organised, mobilised and identified all the surgeons. They have taken them through a series of workshops and now they know they should use one knife per candidate.

The truth is that there are some very reckless young men who, after circumcision, still go back to the myth. They think that after circumcision, the organ has become a kind of metal, which cannot contract HIV/AIDS. So far so good, the campaign that has been launched is paying off.

Mr Speaker, we have an HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act and in this Act is enshrined a fund called the AIDS Trust Fund. This Government we are in has deliberately failed to enforce this fund. This fund could be helping on the budgetary allocations like the paltry Shs 15 billion which is allocated to AIDS Information Commission. They are supposed to get Shs 25 billion annually, but they have been getting only Shs 15 billion consecutively for the last three years. Therefore, they cannot discharge their coordination and oversight role.

The donor support funding could be dwindling because of our claims that we have reached middle income status. Whenever a country attains such a status, you are assumed to have what it takes to generate enough funds to support organisations like the AIDS Information Commission and even the AIDS services that are supposed to be rendered.

What could be done now is to identify, to test -because during those lockdown measures, there were a number of children that were born positive with HIV/AIDS. It should be a deliberate move by Government or by the line ministry to identify, test and enroll those children and have them helped because at that time, there were quite a number that were victims of HIV/AIDS. 

   
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, conclude.

MR NAMBESHE: As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I call upon Government to become serious on operations of Uganda AIDS Commission because they have been paralysed due to inadequate funding. Something must be done and drastic steps must be taken. Now that the Rt Hon Prime Minister is here; hon Majegere, you should move at breakneck speed in addressing this challenge of inadequate funding to this very important commission. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Leader of the Opposition, I want to give guidance that we have different types of reports and statements. Reports from committees are reports of the House because the committee is composed of both sides. As Leader of the opp, you are bringing in new issues. These are issues you should ask your Members who are on the committee that when you reach the committee, you should raise A,B,C,D so that they are captured. 

Statements from ministers is where I will be giving you more time because it is one side bringing and I expect the other side to also respond. However, on reports of committees, I do not want to make it a culture that as a must, I should pick the LOP. No. You have your shadow minister and your Members on the committee who should be representing your views. I just want to make that clarification so that next time we do not take much time on such issues.

On issues of financing, Hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I know the donors have warned and given timelines that they are about to pull out. You may find that one of the mitigating factors is because they are seeing that we took a step back; after knowing that we have a funder, we went and slept. We left it to the donors and donor fatigue is very crucial in such decisions. 

Honourable Minister of Finance, if we give only salaries, then we are cheating Government. They can as well close offices and remain at home because the salary is assured since they do not have what to do when they come to office. Honourable minister, can you intervene?

7.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me first also join our colleagues to thank Hon. Sarah Netalisire for the good report. 

We are operating under difficult times. The key economic indicators keep running away from us, but in exceptional circumstances like the HIV/AIDS report presents, we give consideration. I want to undertake that I am going to pick it up, see the areas which cannot wait for next quarter and find a solution. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. That is encouraging. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do you want to say anything on this? If not, I should not disturb you, but call the chairperson.

7.20
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee, the chairperson and members for the good report and good recommendations. Unfortunately, the Minister of Health is not here. As usual, I will coordinate to make sure that the committee recommendations are taken on by Government to see that our people benefit. (Applause)

Since the Minister of Finance has undertaken to see that those areas where we can look for funding are funded, that will be my commitment to the House. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. In reference to Rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure, we shall be looking at the action taken. Chairperson, you do not need to respond; your issues are very clear so use one minute.

MS NETALISIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to take this opportunity to thank you for according us space on the Order Paper. I also thank my committee members for the good work done and the House at large for being here this late to support the committee through this. (Applause)

Members, if you go through the whole report - I was summarising because of time - the issues of TB have been highlighted on page 18. So, if you go through the report, you will find that all the issues you raised have been captured. 

Honourable minister, as you have indicated, we will get back to you as a committee and show you the areas that need urgent attention that cannot wait so that we can move together to ensure that we put an end to HIV/AIDS by 2030. I have been given one minute and I want to respect the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have just entered the House; moreover you are the Shadow Minister of Health.

MS NETALISIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the House. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters, on the assessment of the impact of COVID-19 on HIV/AIDS services delivered in the country, be adopted by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations chairperson, for this maiden report. (Applause) Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as you recommitted per rule 220, in three months’ time, this House will expect action taken. I thank you for the commitment. 

Colleagues, yesterday the Prime Minister committed to bring a statement on the alleged torture, beating and killing of fishermen by UPDF Fisheries Unit on Ugandan water bodies and indeed she has fulfilled that. So, I would like to amend the Order Paper to allow her make that statement as she promised - and the one for water ambulances. We will start with the one on the alleged torture. 

STATEMENT BY THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER ON ALLEGED BEATING, TORTURE AND KILLING OF FISHERMEN BY UPDF FISHERIES PROTECTION UNIT ON THE UGANDA WATER BODIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The statement is uploaded.

7.24
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Rt Hon. Speaker, allow me to present a statement emanating from a question that was raised by a colleague, Hon. Etuka Isaac, as a matter of national importance.

As guided by this House yesterday, I coordinated a meeting today, the 24th between the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and I would like to state as follows:

The alleged misconduct of UPDF personnel in enforcing legal fishing practices on Ugandan water bodies are isolated cases of indiscipline, which have been investigated and those found culpable have been charged in the military courts. 

On alleged beatings, torture and killings, to me, and the committee that we had in the morning, this is blackmail by cartels of illegal fishermen who are using the media and some politicians to hide the truth. The fact is: Government is trying to restore the fish population in our water bodies for the good of all Ugandans. 

The UPDF code of conduct enhanced by standard operating procedures for the Fisheries Protection Unit prohibits torture, killings and mishandling of suspects. 

The deaths that have been reported are as a result of:

Self-drowning of illegal fishermen due to phobia of being arrested. 

The use of undersized illegal boats that are unstable on water and vulnerable to bad weather. 

The UPDF Fisheries Protection Unit will continue to carryout compliance enforcement to remove all those that are fishing without licenses and bad fishing practices.

Mr Speaker, Government through the Ministry of Agriculture Animal, Industry and Fisheries will continue to sensitise our masses. I beg to state.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence to present the marine ambulances so that we can-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. The one on marine ambulances is for information, but this one I have MPs especially from fishing areas. So, I will need a few comments from the MPs from such areas. For example, I know we have Nakasongola - I will allow Hon. Noah, Dr Batuwa. Please let us do this quickly. I will allow you 10 minutes.

7.29
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Prime Minister for the report. I want to disagree with my own Prime Minister that the beating of our people in the lakes is blackmail. It is not true that it is blackmail. 

These people are being beaten by our army. I belong to NRM. I am in Government, but they are beating us. At the same time, these people are also engaged in fishing. The UPDF is engaged in fishing. Go to Lake Kyoga; you will find them. Go to other lakes; you will also find them.

I wanted to disagree with her, but I support Government. However, I want the truth to remain. I want to submit. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

7.30
MR BENARD SEKYANZI (NRM, Budyebo County, Nakasongola):	Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my beloved Prime Minister for the statement. However, as my colleagues said, the truth remains the truth. The fact is that our people sometimes mishandle our fishermen.

Indeed, I took an initiative to go and meet these protection units around my constituency. We agreed that if they are patrolling the lake, they should go with cameras such that if there is any alleged information that they are beating these people, we shall go to the cameras and check.

These people totally rejected this and on the 7th of July this year, we lost one person called Saul Kizza from Irimba. I went there myself and said: “Let us check because they are saying you are the ones who did this and you are the one who dropped this person into the lake.” Indeed, there was no information from the chief guard.

So, somewhere, Mr Speaker, these people are mistreating our people. They are corrupt. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have heard you. Thank you. Please, Clerk, strictly two minutes.

7.32
MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I know our Prime Minister does thorough work, but here allow us to kindly correct the data you have. It is unfortunate. It is not that these people who drown have phobia. They are beaten; their heads are hit hard until they drown. It is good to accept what is bad and we correct it. 

I live in Kawuku and I meet fishermen every other time. Before coming here, I was working for Uganda Joint Christian Council (UJCC). I used to visit Kikuube; I still get calls from these fishermen. Let us restrain the UPDF from beating people. Yes, we can stop illegal fishing, but to kill somebody for fish is, honestly, not worth it. Thank you so much.

7.33
DR ABRAHAM ISAMAT (NRM, Kapir County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is a serious problem in a place called Kakor near Lake Bisina in Kapir County.

Just recently, people were ordered not to go to fish. Unfortunately, that particular area is very prone to drought. As we speak now, the community is starving. There have been efforts by the Office of the Prime Minister to send some little food, but the situation is worrying. So, they have told people that just in case someone is got in the lake, that person will be killed.

So, it is my humble request to the Office of the Prime Minister that as they implement the orders or directives, let there be an alternative for those people because the situation is really very bad. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.34
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am commenting on the side of our communities. Sometimes, they take the law into their hands.

In my district, there is a roadblock as you enter Bundibugyo. Because we have Lake Albert, we have so many business people who trade in fish. We know that they banned trading in the small fish, but these are the very people who continue bringing in the small fish. The officers at these roadblocks are also corrupt; they continue making sure that these people cross with the fish. 

However, I think it is two-way. How are we going to handle these officers who allow such practices to continue, yet they know it is illegal? How are we then going to continue sensitising our communities to stop so that they do not go to the markets and bring the illegal fish, which they were stopped from bringing? 

I think the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should pick interest and go and visit all these places where these markets and lakes are so that they continue monitoring how this illegal fishing is being practised. Thank you.

7.36
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To me, the Prime Minister did not get the right information since she only heard from the ministry people. She did not involve the representatives of the community. If she was to invite representatives of the community to that particular meeting, I am very sure the story would have been different.

Mr Speaker, the truth is that the UPDF are very rough on the lakes. I would like to move a motion that this report of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister does not depict exactly what is on the ground. So, she should go back and involve representatives of the communities down there, together with the ministries, so that she gets the rightful information about what is happening on the lake. 

I move that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister withdraws this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please, honourable member.

7.37
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have interacted with a number of common Ugandans and I know the fishing community, indeed, belongs to this category. I wish to state that many of those have a lot of confidence and faith in our Prime Minister. The moment she declines to help, they will really run out of options. 

The other day, we were here debating the Fisheries Bill. The position of the minister was that we should keep UPDF there. The entire House was against that and the minister conceded that we should have professionals managing and those professionals should be trained by the police, not UPDF. 

With all humility, interact with these communities. In Masese, Jinja, where I come from, they will give you the true impression. Whoever informed you on the issues in the statement really misrepresented the common man in the fishing community. Almost all homes that are along the lake in my constituency have struggled and have been highly victimised and beaten. They have lost beloved ones in the hands of the UPDF. 

So, this is a very big issue and if they are watching the news, they will not have confidence in you. I also urge that maybe you retract the statement and come back with a good one such that you instil hope in our people. You are hope to many families. So many people want you and so many people believe in you. So, the moment they see you misrepresenting their position, they will lose faith. Thank you.

7.39
MR CHARLES MATOVU (NUP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Perhaps, I am feeling sick of the statement because –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But again, you are not sure because you are just saying “perhaps”. How are you feeling? (Laughter)

MR MATOVU: I feel terribly bad. The constituency I represent has several landing sites across including Bussi Island. On a daily basis, I get calls of torture by UPDF soldiers. Some of them come dressed in paraphernalia that does not include even their names. They confiscate our people’s fish, their nets and beat them to near death.

Some of them even hide their identities. They text me and say, “We have to see you in secrecy because we can’t divulge this information.”

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I beseech you; whenever you want to go and visit any of these island places, go with us. Let us engage with the people that deal directly in these businesses. You will find how much they have suffered. Until now, most of their parents are still incarcerated. Thank you. 

7.41
Mr bosco okiror (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uganda is a country that has embraced the rule of law. It is, therefore, disheartening that you have these fragments of torture meted out by some of our uniformed officers. 

In such a scenario, I want to appreciate the statement that has been given by the Prime Minister. However, in this House sit the representatives of the UPDF. The Prime Minister has put it to us that those who have committed some of these heinous acts have been brought to book. The sub judice rule does not bar us from naming such persons. 

This House, to the best of my knowledge, is only left to know that they have been brought to book, but the naming of such characters who have dented the image of the UPDF and this country should also be brought forward. It is very important such that they are perhaps dissuaded from performing some of these acts next time. 

Being brought to book is a blanket statement. I really feel for the Prime Minister. If the UPDF can be tasked - matters in the court martial, we do not discuss the merits, but the persons who have committed these acts. Ugandans should be able to know that these are the errant officers who are denting the image of our country. I appeal to you. Thank you. 

7.43
Ms Helen nakimuli (NUP, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also want to thank the Prime Minister for that report. The report you gave us is really lacking because this very morning, I received information that somebody was shot by a UPDF - somebody wearing military uniform; FPU or Marine Police. 

These two men were in between Kimi and Koome landing sites trying to get their nets out of the water. These men in uniform came to them asking, “Where is your licence?” The other one said, “Our licence is at the landing site with our boss.” The officer said, “I want the licence now.” The two gentlemen pleaded and said, “Let's go back to the landing site and get the licence.” 

As they were going back, one was shot. He was rushed to Kisubi Hospital then to Mulago. I have just received news that he is now dead. What report is that now? What are you telling the country? What is happening? 

A lot is happening on the lake. These people are giving you lies. Last time, we were asking and they said, “We want evidence.” When they get to these people, they take away their phones. They cannot take pictures, record videos or audios. Their phones are even thrown into the water.

We have to do something. Let us not lie to this country and the people we represent. 

7.45
Mr nulu byamukama (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a lake. Ours is Lake George –

The Deputy Speaker: Do you have a lake? Are you the people who have land titles on lakes? (Laughter)

Mr byamukama: Our lake, as a country, is Lake George. I want to speak out of experience that UPDF initially did a good job. I have come to believe that these days they are doing all sorts of things because of corruption. They are doing business. 

I used to buy fish from the lake and we had good fish. However, what we now get from the lake is really small fish, which tells you that the managers on the lake are doing business. 

I would request the Prime Minister to go back and do counter intelligence. This is what UPDF used to do. See what UPDF is doing. This is the force that we trust. 

You had to take UPDF to the people to do activities of Government and indeed, they are showing a very different picture. I would request the Prime Minister to go back and redesign and to see how our people can be saved and the entire country. Thank you. 

7.47
Mr godfrey onzima (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not know that many of my constituent members are fishing around Lake Victoria, until one of them called me that they had a problem around Garuga. He was caught fishing, tortured and towed with his boat. They told me they had waited for about two weeks, but he had never appeared. That is when I drove and met them. They were very many. 

When I tried to follow up the issue, I was told that he was using a net that was not supposed to be used –

The Deputy Speaker: Under size.

Mr onzima: Yes. Secondly, that he was fishing in an area where he was not supposed to. I agree to the fact that fishing is a very big sector that gives us money that must be managed and controlled by Government. On the other side, fishing is also a livelihood for very many Ugandans. 

If there are some groups of people who are fishing in a particular area that Government does not allow fishing to take place in, I believe that Government should come up with an alternative for those kinds of people, to see how these people can survive. However, to say, “Don't enter,” and they torture them, I think that is not a good thing. These are Ugandans who need to survive. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, mine is a suggestion. Statistics could be taken on a particular group of fishermen who fish in a particular area where fishing is not allowed. These people should be given what an alternative way of livelihood. Thank you.

7.49
the opposition chief whip (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Mr Speaker, I am going to be very brief. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I know I cannot blame you for the whole statement because you are a very busy person. Definitely, you have technocrats. 

However, the truth of the matter is that if you internalise the statement, it exudes lots of arrogance. Mr Speaker, you will recall - those of us who have been around and were in the 10th Parliament - that this House has received incessant grave concerns about the brutality that is occasioned on the fishermen; to the extent that the presiding officer directed that the Fisheries Protection Unit should withdraw from the water bodies. 

It even culminated into a subcommittee of Cabinet being constituted to investigate the alleged brutality and harassment on the water bodies. Where it ended is that we saw in print and electronic media, UPDF through their leadership on the water bodies, arrogantly replying: “We can’t withdraw.” It was in 2020 - awash in all print media. They arrogantly said they can never withdraw unless the directive comes from “Mr Above”, His Excellency, President Museveni. 

Madam Prime Minister, you are a very compassionate person. I know that. I have been around you for some time. Take your time, like the Members have requested, go to all these Members’ constituencies and establish – Jinja, for instance. By the way, I am a resident of Jinja. I know these things happen. These UPDF officers have lost the human face they had in the late 80s; it is no more. They are so brutal. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to allay the fears of our colleagues. During the meeting we had, we were informed that this Parliament appropriated money to install cameras on the lakes. For example, for Lake Albert, we shall have the cameras fully installed and operational in December this year. On Lake Edward, we shall have them in February next year and for Lake Victoria the procurement process is on-going. 

Therefore, these cameras will help us to get the culprits - both those that are using illegal fishing gears and those errant soldiers of ours who will be doing the acts of torture.

Mr Speaker, I hope that once these cameras - because it was a directive by this Parliament and the President that let us stop this once and for all. 

Therefore, I would like to assure you that we shall continue to move together with you. We shall go and do counter intelligence and see whether the report these people gave me is right or not.

As for the shallow waters, I was told they are a no-go zone for fishermen because that is where our fish breed. When you say that there are some areas where fishermen are not allowed to go, those are the shallow waters because that is where our fish breed from. 
I will interact with you more and more and we shall go on ground to help our people. We shall not leave any stone unturned. Thank you very much.  (Applause)

STATEMENT BY THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER ON MARINE AMBULANCES

7.52
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, yesterday, I committed to come back and give the House a report on ambulances. You will recall that I was the Minister of Health, when this decision was taken by this House. The issue was brought by the Hon. Hajji Iddi Isabirye, the Member of Parliament from Bunya South, Mayuge District.  

The Government of Uganda, together with development partners, procured 14 marine ambulances. The marine ambulances will be distributed to 13 districts where the Ministry of Health has already identified the docking sites.

The distribution list is as follows: 

Obongi District – River Nile; 
Serere District – Lake Kyoga; 
Kumi – Lake Bisinia; 
Amolatar - Lake Kwania; 
Kalangala – Lake Victoria; 
Buvuma – Lake Victoria;
Jinja – Lake Victoria and River Nile; 
Mukono – Lake Victoria; 
Namayingo – Lake Victoria; 
Buliisa – Lake Albert; 
Mayuge – Lake Victoria; 
Kabale – Lake Bunyonyi;
Ntoroko – Lake Albert; and 
One will be used by the National Medical Stores.  

The marine ambulances for Ntoroko and National Medical Stores will be delivered in the first week of October 2022. The Minister of Health has a memorandum of understanding with the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to coxswain the marine ambulances. Those are pilots.

Mr Speaker, we had a meeting today with the Minister of Health and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs. We agreed that the Minister of Defence will provide courier trucks with hooks to transport these marine ambulances to the different districts.

The launching of these marine ambulances will commence next week, 31 August 2022, starting with Jinja and Mayuge. All other districts will have received the marine ambulances by 13 September 2022. 

This Parliament appropriated Shs 4 billion for the emergency services in the Ministry of Health in this country. We have agreed that part of this money will be used to facilitate the operations for marine ambulances. Government is committed to providing emergency medical care to the people living in islands. Thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. This is what we need, as a House, to deliver on what you promised. I am glad you have done it.

On the 15th of September, during the Prime Minister's Time, the first question will come from me on how far you have reached in delivering these ambulances. This is because you have said they will have received them by 13th of September. 

Therefore, during the Prime Minister's Time of 15th September, the first to start should be you giving us an update on the delivery of these ambulances. 

Honourable members, you should have cross-checked with your constituents, the districts listed, to confirm that indeed the Prime Minister has delivered on her word.

With all this, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. However, the committees I told about the meeting, please ensure we hold the meeting. I would like to thank you for sitting in for long because we had long business. Thank you. 

(The House rose at 7.56 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 August 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 