Wednesday, 28 August 2013 

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I want to inform you that the Clerk has issued the Parliamentary Calendar for our activities between now and May 2014. I want to appeal to the committees to work expeditiously so that we all keep within our calendar whose copies will be distributed to you in your pigeonholes. 

2.58
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. Last weekend, I was hosted to one of the local FM radio stations in Busoga and there was a concern from a number of callers. We have got Isimba Falls which is along River Nile but the government is planning to put a dam along this river where the falls are. There is a concern that is being raised by the public that whereas these falls are on the eastern side of the river, that is on the Busoga side, the indication is that the dam is being constructed on the western side hence switching to Kayunga side yet when they were constructing Bujagali, people got excited because there is what we call “ebigenderako”; some economies of scale or benefits that come in terms of royalties establishment of such amenities. The public is concerned and we are wondering why this dam is being shifted from where it is supposed to be constructed and the benefits being deprived of the right beneficiaries. 

It is against this background that I am requesting the minister for energy to come up and explain to the country what is happening, what the community should expect as far as those benefits are concerned and what we should expect when this dam is shifted from where it is supposed to be.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Muwuma. The matter is very serious, I have been avoiding going to Kisozi Sub-County because I can’t answer that question which you are asking. It is in my constituency but I have been avoiding going there because I cannot explain why Isimba of Busoga is now in Buganda.

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’ujunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I must say that there is no shifting a dam from where it is supposed to be. As we speak now, discussions are ongoing about the design of that dam. The dam will be placed where it is technically more suited.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Minister. I think that is a very evasive answer.

MR WAIRA: Madam Speaker, the minister should not give us just a political answer like that. I don’t know why he stood up because for us what we are saying is that the source is in Busoga, and we wanted the minister to commit himself here that actually the dam will be where the source is and that is in Busoga. That is what we want not political statements.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister should be straight forward because these things of deceiving the people of Busoga that they are going to get projects then eventually they are shifted to another area - this is not the only case. Even Itanda Falls, the State Minister for Environment was almost being harassed because of the project which they had said would be in Itanda but had ended up going across. 

We, people from that area, are actually tired of being deceived and when the projects are implemented they are put on the other side. So let him be straight forward.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the people of Uganda are not satisfied with your answer. We demand an explanation which is clear about where Isimba Dam is going to be. So we want you to come back with a statement.

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, I take your ruling and advice but I would have wished to hear the minister make a commitment to that effect. We capture it on the Hansard and our members on the government assurance also capture it that he made a commitment to this effect. People are accusing leaders from Busoga that they are sleeping when things are going wrong. Everything is being taken and we are watching. We want to have a record that we can bank on to tell the public that we are doing whatever it takes to ensure that things that are due to them remain.

MR LATIF SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, this is a serious issue. If you have the source in Busoga, most of the benefits should be for the people in Busoga. What the minister should do, if he is serious that the project is in Busoga, is to take Members of Parliament together with the technical team and then they demarcate the area so that we can know that it is exactly in Busoga and the benefits are for Busoga because the country is for all of us.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Members, Kiira Dam is on Buganda side, Nalubaale on Buganda side, and Bujagali on Buganda side. That is why the Basoga want answers now.

MR KYANJO: Before the minister comes in, Madam Speaker, we want to avoid a situation which was here yesterday over land demarcations. This time the people of Buganda are fully behind the Basoga in getting clearance of this dam. If the minister is not ready, he should not rush with the answer, he should give us an assurance, as hon. Muwuma has said so that we wait for a comprehensive answer and we rally behind the people of Busoga in this query. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Minister.

MR D’ UJANGA: Madam Speaker, as I said at the beginning of my statement, as we speak now, the design of this dam is being discussed and it is not very accurate to say that the dam is either in Buganda or Busoga. The dam is across a river.  So it is everywhere - (Laughter) – [Mr Kyanjo: “Order.”] - There is no order!

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, this is Parliament and it is not a nursery school. A river is not a lake. For the minister to come here and say that the dam is across the river is to make us look like nursery kids. It is across the river but also across the boundaries. We are talking about boundaries but not the waters of the river. Is the minister in order to fool this House?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, give us a date when you will come and tell us about the location of the dam - the exact site.

MR D’ UJANGA: Madam Speaker, as I said that as soon as we conclude and agree on the design, we will share this design with the concerned – (Interjections) - yes, the design has everything to do with it because the rock formation determines where the power house should be and it is the power house that we are discussing and not the dam. The dam is across the river but the power house can be on the left or the right bank. Now, you do not just put the power house where you feel like. It depends on the rock formation and geology and so on.  

So, this is being done and we are discussing this at the moment. When we finish, I will discuss this issue with all the concerned and I hope I will convince them why the design is like that. 

I cannot give you a date now, but within a month, we should be ready –(Interjections)– yes, within a month; we want to finish the design in two weeks and so a month is adequate. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. That is a government assurance and since we are busy with the budget and as we finish the budget, you will bring that answer. Hon. Akena, two minutes and hon. Atiku, two minutes.

3.06
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance and this concerns the situation of fire fighting equipment in the great municipality of Lira. Over the years, we have gone through difficulties of fires which we are unable to fight. 

In 2007, when NduguRugunda was in the Ministry of Internal Affairs, we had a big fire on the main street and we had to contact Gulu and Soroti but none of those two towns could send us their fire services because they needed them for the airport.  

Early this year, we had a big workshop which also covered a vocational training institute which caught fire and there was nothing we were able to do. 

About a month ago, the Police informed us that fire fighting equipment had arrived and that at any short notice they would be in Lira. Subsequently, they were asked to send personnel for training but up to this date, the fire fighting equipment has not arrived and just last week, a major hotel in Lira known as Hotel Panafric caught fire and a large part of the hotel got burnt.  

I am raising this issue so that Government can at least inform us whether or not this equipment is in place and if it is in place, why is it that it cannot be released? 

It is something very painful that equipment is supposed to be there, it is allocated to the municipality and it takes more than a month to move from Kampala to Lira and in that time, we are losing property and a lot of businesses are at risk.

THE SPEAKER: I hope that we can get an answer from the minister for internal affairs about the use of fire fighting equipment. I know we have been talking about it here that we needed them everywhere but he says they are not accessible although they are in the country. Let us get information from the minister for fisheries.  

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am former Minister of State for Microfinance in the Ministry of Finance and I am standing to give information regarding a loan which was negotiated and passed from the Ministry of Finance supposed to procure or establish fire fighting stations in municipalities and urban areas. 

Why I vividly remember this is because Lira and Kiboga were part of the areas that were going to receive it. So what we have to do, Madam Speaker, is to task either the minister for finance or the minister for internal affairs on how far they have gone in making sure that these fire fighting stations are established. This is the information I had.  

THE SPEAKER: Information from Local Government.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The fire fighting equipment for the 22 municipal councils of Uganda has been procured. As I speak now, it is being cleared from Mombasa to be brought to Kampala –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to speak. You want to know where the fire fighting equipment is and he is saying that he knows where it is. Let him tell us. Let him finish.

MR MWESIGE: We have requested the minister for finance to provide money for clearing and payment of taxes so that this equipment can be in Kampala. It will not take even a month before it is brought to Kampala for distribution to all municipal councils so that municipal councils and Police in the towns are equipped to fight fires as they arrive.

THE SPEAEKER: Thank you. Hon. Atiku?

3.11
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance. I would like to bring to the attention of this august House the rare opportunity of the total eclipse of the sun in Uganda. The epicentre of this eclipse is Uganda and in particular Packwach in Nebbi District in West Nile as reported in today’s The New Vision, page 35. The title is, “World attention on Packwach ahead of the eclipse.” Other towns like Arua, Soroti, Gulu and Masindi will also provide great viewer points. 

The United States Aeronautic and Space Centre (NASA) has confirmed that Uganda will provide the best centre point of viewership. This will happen on November 3rd this year as explained in the story and the potential for tourism exploits in this rear opportunity is immense. Experts say, if well marketed, Uganda could host more than 30,000 tourists and potential investors in the few days of the eclipse. 

Madam Speaker, records also show that in 1999, the United Kingdom attracted 400,000 tourists who went to view the eclipse and their economy earned over £4 billion. In June 2001, Zambia also was a viewing point and over 20,000 tourists visited Zambia and of course, their tourist industry benefitted. Australia last year hosted over 40,000 visitors and their economy earned over $45 million from tourists who visited those countries. 

I bring this issue to the attention of the august House to seek the support of the House to direct the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities as the lead ministry to embark on marketing this nature-given opportunity widely as a matter of urgency.

Secondly, the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should liaise with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and other relevant agencies of the state to ensure that all necessary arrangements are put in place in good time. For instance, all embassies and missions of Uganda abroad should be put on notice to use this opportunity to market Uganda. You are aware, Madam Speaker, that some time back, we spent billions of money to market Uganda but I pray that this complements what Kiprotich did recently. Therefore, in the same vein, Members of Parliament are called upon to mobilise their constituents since this comes once in a lifetime and many people are interested. I remember studying it in geography and I pray that Members do take this opportunity to mobilise also the constituents in Uganda to visit Pakwach and West Nile in a way of promoting local tourism. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I see the minister for tourism; I hope she has noted the wonderful opportunity and also the chance to visit Nebbi, for those who have not been there, and irrigate the local economy. 

Hon. Members, in the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Busaba Primary School in Butaleja. They are represented by hon. Wangolo and hon. Nebanda. They are welcome. (Applause)

I also want to inform all sectoral committee chairpersons to attend a meeting of the Budget Committee tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock in the morning to handle the corrigenda to the budget estimates for financial year 2013/14. So, please assemble there at 10.00 O’clock in the morning to handle that which is related to our budgeting. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I just want some bit of clarification. Rule 34 of our Rules of Procedure provides the time for the Prime Minister and it allots one hour from 3.00 p.m. Some of us are ready with questions to put to the Prime Minister in fulfilment of this rule. Today is a Wednesday and it is now about a quarter past three; is it possible that this rule be applied or when shall we start applying this rule? Maybe, for the information of the minister, I can read Rule 34. “Prime Minister’s time:
    (1) There shall be time designated as Prime Minister’s time commencing at 3.00 p.m. every Wednesday. 
    (2) During the Prime Minister’s time -
    (a) the Prime Minister may make a statement, or 
    (b) Questions may be put to the Prime Minister relating to matters of government policy or the general performance of the government and government agencies. 
(3) 	In the absence of the Prime Minister, a minister may make a statement or answer questions put to him or her.
(4) 	The Prime Minister’s time shall not exceed forty five minutes. 
(5) 	The Leader of the Opposition shall have a right to comment or reply.”

So, can we have a statement from the Prime Minister or can we now give questions to the Prime Minister? 

3.19
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the question by the hon. Member and under the circumstances, the Prime Minister’s Office is not ready. But we need to make some adjustments in our programme and consult with the Office of the Speaker so that we see how best to implement these regulations.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, is the Prime Minister in order to claim that he is not ready and yet he knows very well that this Parliament operates on Rules of Procedure. Is he in order, therefore, that he should stand on the Floor of Parliament to declare his ignorance about the Rules of Procedure as Leader of Government Business? If he is not ready with the statement, we are ready with the questions.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you are putting the cart before the horse. I think it is our responsibility to reflect the item on the order paper so that they can prepare but it is not there. So, at some stage after the budget process, we will reflect it and they will start afresh but now they are not ready. Next item 

I) REPORT OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY LAKE VICTORIA BASIN COMMISSION SECRETARIAT POPULATION, HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENT (PHE) PROGRAM MEETING FOR MEMBERS OF THE EAST AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY (EALA) AND NATIONAL PARLIAMENTS WHICH TOOK PLACE AT LAICO REGENCY HOTEL, NAIROBI, KENYA 25-26 JULY 2013

3.31
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 25th to 26th July, a Ugandan delegation attended a very important meeting: “The Lake Victoria Basin Commission on Population, Health and Environment” in Nairobi. I was privileged to chair this meeting on behalf of my country as the sitting chairperson and out of the 32 members of Parliament from the member states, we had five members from Uganda. Hon. Ninsiima – 

THE SPEAKER: I thought you are just laying the report. Lay it and then we shall circulate and speak to it later. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that guidance and I am happy to lay this report on the Table. However, I also want to state that we were tasked, as a country, to come and create a forum on population, health and environment which at an appropriate time, we shall call on members to subscribe to and launch it as a member state. Therefore, I am happy to lay this report on the Table as attended by our members. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We shall appropriate time for speaking to it later.

II) BANK OF UGANDA FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012

3.32
THE VICE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Bank of Uganda financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay. 

III) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT OF THE UGANDA BUREAU OF STATISTICS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

3.33
THE VICE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Bureau of Statistics for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay. 

IV) REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MANDELA NATIONAL STADIUM LTD FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER, 2012

3.33
THE VICE CHAIRMAN COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Mandela National Stadium Ltd for the year ended 31 December 2012. I beg to lay.

V) MBARARA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY HARVARD GLOBAL HEALTH SCHOLARS PROGRAM FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR THE 15TH MONTH PERIOD ENDED 30TH JUNE, 2011

3.34
THE VICECHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay Mbarara University of Science and Technology Harvard Global Health Scholars Programme financial statement for the 15th month period ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion of the Auditor-General thereon. 

VI) MBARARA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY MASS EVALUATION OF THE IMPACT OF THE VOUCHER AND ACCREDITATION APPROACH ON IMPROVING REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH BEHAVIOURS AND HEALTH OUTCOMES, UGANDA PROJECT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE PERIOD 15 APRIL 2010 TO 30 JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.34
THE VICE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table Mbarara University of Science and Technology mass evaluation of the impact of the voucher and accreditation approach on improving reproductive health behaviours and health outcomes, Uganda project financial statements for the period 15 April 2010 to 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General.

VII) MBARARA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, IMPROVED PAEDIATRIC IN-PATIENT MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY IN RURAL UGANDA MGA SUB-AWARDS REFERENCE NO. 216502 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE 13TH MONTH PERIOD ENDED 30 JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL

3.35
THE VICE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table Mbarara University of Science and Technology, improved paediatric in-patient morbidity and mortality in rural Uganda sub-awards reference No. 216502 financial statements for the 13th month period ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon of the Auditor-General.

VIII) MBARARA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY MASS MEDICAL EDUCATION SERVICES FOR ALL UGANDANS PROJECT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE PERIOD 27TH MONTH SEPTEMBER 2010 TO 30 JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

3.35
THE VICE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table Mbarara University of Science and Technology mass Medical Education Services for all Ugandans project financial statements for the period 27th month September, 2010 to 30th June, 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor General. I beg to lay. 

IX) ENTEBBE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.36
THE VICE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru) Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table Entebbe Municipal Council statements for the year ended 30th June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor General. I beg to lay. 

X) MBALE REFERRAL HOSPITAL AUDIT REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012

3.36
THE VICE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table Mbale Referral Hospital audit report and opinion of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2012. 

XI) UGANDA LAND COMMISSIONS FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.37
THE VICE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table Uganda Land Commissions financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon of the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

XII) POPULATION SECRETARIAT AND DEVELOPMENTAL LINKAGES REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH AND GENDER AND RIGHTS PROJECT UG7U101 UGA7U606 AND UGA7U505 REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2012

3.37
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru) Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table Population Secretariat and Developmental Linkages reproductive health and gender and rights project UG7U101 UGA7U606 and UGA7U505 report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012. I beg to lay.

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On item IV, I seek guidance on whether the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Mandela National Stadium Ltd was for the year ended 31 December 2011 or 2012? 

THE SPEAKER: It is for 31 December 2011. So honourable members, all these are sent to the committee for perusal and report back. 

In the VIP Gallery, we have hon. BagumaIsoke, former Member of Parliament. He is here to watch the proceedings. (Applause)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/14 FOR THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

3.39
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Mabel Bakeine): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the file that contains the minutes that were used in the proceedings to scrutinise the ministerial policy statements financial year 2013/14 and it contains other related documents that were used in the discussions. I beg to lay. 

This is a report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2013/14. 

In accordance with the provisions of Article 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and in line with Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, the committee on Public Service and Local Governments is mandated inter-alia to critically examine ministerial policy statements and recurrent and capital estimates for ministries, departments and agencies that follow under it and to make recommendations thereto. 

The committee considered vote 005, ministry of Public Service; vote 146, Public Service Commission; vote 011, Ministry of Local Government; vote 147, Local Government Finance Commission and vote 501 – 778 for all local governments in Uganda. 

We critically examined policy statements and budget estimates from ministries, departments and agencies and raised issues for response by the ministers and chairpersons. The committee proceeded to hold meetings with the ministers, chairpersons and their technical teams to discuss the effective ministerial policy statements, budget estimates and other matters incidental thereto and now reports to the House. 

Vote 011: Ministry of Local Government and vote 501 – 778 Local Governments

The Ministry of Local Government in financial year 2012/13 was allocated Shs 157.319 billion out of which Shs 6.926 billion was for wage recurrent, Shs 7.740 billion was for non-wage recurrent, the capital development composed of Shs 8.0404 billion as domestic funding while Shs 134.613 billion was donor funded. 

In addition, Shs 79.011 billion was unconditional grant; Shs 1,773.033 billion was conditional grants and Shs 3.494 billion was equalisation grant for local government. The ministry reported several achievements in the last financial year, 2012/13.

The ministry continued with its work of promoting local government administration and development, policy planning and support services to support local governments in the war-ravaged areas of Northern Uganda and implementation and supervision of major projects in selected local governments. 

The committee, however, observed in this report, among others that the majority of committee recommendations in the previous reports remain outstanding. Notably, councillors, speakers, deputy speakers and LC III chairpersons and vice chairpersons remain un-facilitated. Local council I and II elections have not been held to-date. Also equalisation grants have remained stagnant at Shs 3.4 billion and a lot of money has been returned to the consolidated fund yet critical staffing positions have remained unfilled. For instance, in the fiscal year 2011/12, Shs 33 billion was returned in form of unspent balances from local governments.

Hon. Members, for committee observations and recommendations on this vote, you can refer to page 13. The committee, however, recommends the following on this vote: 

On creation of new districts, the committee recommends that for any new district to be created in future, Government should provide a clear-phased programme with justification and acceptable proposals for the financing, equipping and staffing of all new structures. The committee further recommends that the ministry of local government should ensure equitable sharing of assets and liabilities between the mother districts and the new ones at the time of splitting.

It also recommends that the ministry of local government should come out with clear strategies of strengthening service delivery in local governments and, where need be, an affirmative action especially for funding critical areas should be looked into.

On remuneration of speakers, deputy speakers, district councillors and vice chairpersons of LC IIIs, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance provides funds amounting to Shs 20 billion in the budget to cater for the facilitation of councillors in local governments as proposed by the President. The ministry of local government should finalise the modalities of payment of these funds to the beneficiaries. The committee further recommends that LC V and LC III chairpersons’ remuneration be enhanced. 

On elections for the local council I and II leadership, the committee recommends that ministry of finance, planning and economic development makes provisions in the budget to pave way for the election of the LCs I and II in this financial year 2013/14.

On inadequate staffing levels in local governments and hard-to-reach areas, the committee recommends that Government fills at least up to 55 percent of the staffing structures of the local governments to enable them provide better services. The hard-to-reach package should apply to all civil servants in those districts across the board and should be increased from 30 percent to 50 percent to make it more attractive.

On the inadequate local revenue generation, the committee recommends that:
    (a) Mobilisation and management of local revenue should be investigated to ensure that there is proper and correct utilisation and accountability in order to avoid corrupt tendencies.
    (b) The local structures such as internal audit should be strengthened to do their work.
    (c) The Local Government Act should be reviewed to make local government public accounts committees independent.
    (d) Local governments should be paid agents’ fees for taxes they collect on behalf of URA.
    (e) Fees on boda bodas be reinstated.

On late releases and return of unspent balance at financial year end, the committee recommends that:
    i) The ministry of finance, planning and economic development effects timely releases to local governments in respect to the last quarter.
    ii) Section 19(2) of the Public Finance Accounting Act, 2003 be amended in order to be in harmony with the Appropriations Act, 2011 allowing local governments to utilise unspent balances at year end up to a later date determined by the Secretary to the Treasury and in any case not later than the 31st day of October. The unspent balances can be appropriated by the local government councils in the subsequent financial year budget estimates and audited by the Auditor-General

On bicycles for LC I and LC II chairpersons, the committee recommends that Shs 8.577 billion be provided to local governments to procure bicycles for the remaining 59 districts. In addition, the ministry of local government should monitor the process to ensure that bicycles reach the right beneficiaries. 

On total transfers to local governments, the committee recommends that Government should establish the local government development fund as per the Mahara report to mitigate development financial constraints in local governments. It also recommends that since local governments are the service delivery centres, they should be supported with the resources they require to deliver on their mandate. The committee also recommends that in the mean-time, the local government transfers should not be less that 38 percent of the national budget in any given financial year.

Wage component of the unconditional grant
The committee recommends that Government provides additional Shs 46 billion under the local government payroll to enable local governments increase their staffing levels up to at least 65 percent in order to improve their effectiveness and efficiency in service delivery.

Non-wage component of the unconditional grant
The committee reiterates its recommendation that Government provides additional Shs 21 billion under the unconditional grant to enable local governments effectively monitor and supervise government programmes.

Equalisation grant

The committee recommends that the equalisation grant be increased from Shs 3.4 billion to Shs 6.6 billion as the minimum. 

Vote 147: Local Government Finance Commission

The Local Government Finance Commission was appropriated a total of Shs 3.93 billion in the financial year 2012/13 out of which Shs 3.808 billion was for recurrent expenditures and Shs 0.122 billion was for development expenditures. 

The commission reported some achievements in the financial year 2012/13, notably, captured data for nine new local governments into the local governments’ fiscal databank; provided technical support – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what she is reading is the summary but you have the report. No, who does not have a report?

MS BAKEINE: I am summarising, this is the executive summary.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am also interested in the summary because I am a teacher and I know what a summary is. We started from the first page and she took us to page 13 and we were following very well but now we do not know where she is. Let her help us and tell us the page where she is because we are going to debate this report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have the complete report in your hands; that is what you are holding. She has made her own summary but the report is there in your hands in full. Proceed.

MS BAKEINE: The commission reported some achievements in the financial year 2012/2013. Notably, captured data for nine new local governments into the local government fiscal data bank, provided technical support on the process of collection of property rates to 20 town councils, held negotiation meetings with six sector ministries and local governments and carried out consultative meetings in respect to equitable distribution of grants to local governments, among others.

The committee notes in this report that its recommendation on local government financing and other related areas aimed at enhancing capacity of local governments in service delivery continues to stagnate. Hon. Members, refer to page 20 for the observations and recommendations on this vote.

The committee recommends that the review be prioritised by the Commission and that the Commission liaises with the minister of public service and the minister of finance, planning and economic development to fast-track the review and implementation of the allocation parameters.

On the advisory role of the Commission, the committee recommends that the Local Government Finance Commission Act be amended by adding a provision emphasising how and when the Commission will play its advisory role.

Vote 005: Ministry of Public Service. 

The ministry of public service in financial year 2012/2013 was allocated Shs 318.541 billion out of which Shs 2.502 billion was for wage recurrent, Shs 290.714 billion was for non-wage recurrent while Shs 19.075 billion was for development expenditure. There was also an allocation of Shs 5.6 billion for pension arrears and Shs 0.65 billion for taxes.

The ministry reported several achievements in the last financial year 2012/2013, most notably the roll out of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System, roll out of performance agreements, roll out of Result Oriented Management and Output Oriented Budgeting Framework, the signing of the contract for the construction of the National Records Archive Centre and designs for the Civil Service College, which were approved by the World Bank.

The committee, in its report, observes among other things that the establishment of the National Salary Commission and the conclusion of pension reforms have over delayed. Hon. Members, refer to page 29 for committee observations and recommendations.

On staffing, the committee recommends that the ministry of public service liaises with the ministry of finance, planning and economic development, the public service commission and other relevant ministries, departments and agencies such that the waiver is expedited and those who have been successful in their acting capacities are confirmed in their positions.

On vehicles for entitled officers, the committee recommends avoidance of double facilitation. On operationalisation of the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Act, 2010, the committee recommends that the sum of Shs 1.250 billion be sourced to enable the ministry of public service provide benefits to the former Vice President and Prime Minister.

In the long run, the committee recommends that a study be carried out by a panel of experts composed of officers from the ministry of finance, planning and economic development, ministry of public service and Attorney-General’s Chambers with a view of amending the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Act, 2010 to avoid double drawing of benefits from the Consolidated Fund.

On pension and pension reforms, the committee recommends:
    (a) That pension reforms be expedited and implemented within the financial year 2013/14 to avoid a repetition of the previous scenario where evaluation results of one study are rendered unreliable due to lapse of time.

    (b) Those responsible for looting pensioners’ money should be brought to book and restitution be done.

On salary arrears, the committee recommends that:
    (a) Public service ministry should develop a clear strategy to determine the number of existing staff/public officers at a given time.
    (b) The government should provide Shs 5.2 billion to effect payment of residual salary arrears for traditional public servants and teachers, as required by the ministry.

Vote 146: Public Service Commission

This is page (x) of the executive summary. The Public Service Commission in financial year 2012/2013 was allocated a total funding of Shs 4.516 billion. Out of the total budget, Shs 1.298 billion was for wage recurrent, Shs 2.507 billion was for non-wage recurrent, while Shs 0.712 billion was for capital development expenditure.

The Commission registered some achievements during the financial year 2012/2013. Notably, it handled 5,076 cases of the 3,500 cases suggested. The Commission also filled 1,614 vacancies of the 1,200 vacancies targeted. They have also reduced districts without functional district commissions from 21 to three as at 30 June 2013.

Madam Speaker, for observations and recommendations, please refer to page 35.

The committee recommends, on the non-functional district service commissions that the commission be facilitated with Shs 0.386 billion to ensure all districts have functional district service commissions and that the members are inducted.

On public service restructuring, the committee recommends that the Bill of the establishment of a National Salaries Commission be expedited within this financial year to standardize the salary structure of the public service in Uganda. 

On remuneration of civil servants, the committee recommends that civil servants’ salaries need to be enhanced across the board to make it commensurate with the current cost of living.

On capital development, the committee recommends that the Public Service Commission should utilise Shs 0.238 billion set for capital development expenditures. The committee recommends that government should secure Shs 2 billion to enable the Public Service Commission to acquire land to build a block for office accommodation. This will save the government continued rent expenses.

Domestic Arrears: The committee recommends that the required Shs 75,623,796 be provided to the Commission in the financial year 2013/14 to offset domestic arrears.

Our committee this morning met with the Budget Committee together with staff from the Ministry of Finance and harmonized our figures. I can report that the figures were reconcilable because the corrigendum was integrated into our figures. I now beg to supply, Madam Speaker.

We want to supply because our figures are right; they have reconciled with those – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson of the committee, we cannot do selectively. Yesterday, we agreed that the Budget sits and comes back to us with a report pertaining to all the ministries. Even ICT was okay, but we still agreed to wait for the report of the Budget Committee.

MS BAKEINE: Madam Speaker, thank you for the guidance. In conclusion, let us wait for the Budget Committee to harmonise the positions and they report. I beg to report. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the committee. But just some clarification - you talked about some vehicles and also about Members of Parliament. I don’t know how Members of Parliament came to be in that report because I thought it is – the question in the local governments is that they are obliged to use local government funds to buy cars for the CAO, the town clerk and so on. But I don’t think – I want to know about the MPs and the cars, which you talked about in that report. I still wonder how MPs came to feature in that report.

MS BAKEINE: Madam Speaker, this was our observation and let me read it now because it will take us to the recommendation. The observation reads thus: “The committee notes that the ministry intends to procure a vehicle for the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service, the budget of which appears among the unfunded priorities. The committee further notes with concern double facilitation for MPs who also hold other public offices as far as transport is concerned.”
So, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: We have now understood it.

MS BAKEINE: I think I can now move. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you honourable chairperson and your committee for that good work. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary number more than one third of the members. Let us just have a few comments for about 10 minutes.

4.03
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have just heard your direction to the House that the shadow minister, being a member of the committee cannot respond to the report. But you will recall that this is a matter we have debated for a very long time in this House. So and over the years, you have always granted the shadow minister opportunity to make comments especially on issues of policy nature in terms of the alternative views they have. 

So, I am wondering whether it is not something to consider again so that you can grant the shadow ministers that opportunity even though we know – because the argument then was that they needed to go to the committees and benefit from the information that might be given there and that that would help them to give an informed perspective of their analysis. If they don’t go to those committees, they certainly will be talking without the benefit of information from the line ministry.

So, Madam Speaker, isn’t that something you would like to consider again by giving the shadow ministers the opportunity?

MS KAABULE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for the good presentation. The issue I want to talk about is on the review of remuneration of civil servants. I am of the view that we should carry out a total restructuring of the public service to allow a reorganisation of all sectors and also carry out a salary survey so that we can all be at a market rate. Otherwise, if you are talking about only considering the standard of living, then some of the sectors may be up and others low. I think we need a reorganisation of public service and a salary survey. Thank you so much. 

4.04
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would like to comment on a few items. One is the hard-to-reach areas. I would like to know the criteria for identifying the hard-to-reach areas because an area like Koboko is in the extreme north west of Uganda and they have been advertising jobs especially for doctors and planners again and again and nobody is attracted there. So, can Koboko be given a hard-to-reach area status so that we can also have some staff in place to serve our people in Koboko?

I am happy that local government has been put together with the public service. You find that in local governments, there are positions which are supposed to be filled. To my amazement, they are not given money. Outside there, there are a number of positions which are not filled in our local governments especially in Koboko. Who is responsible? Why do we put the positions there without the corresponding money?  

Lastly, regarding the transfers of money, this may go to the ministry of finance but I believe the local government ministry can tell us what they have done to fill the gap. For example, in the last quarter of this last financial year, local governments never received money and yet those plans which were supposed to be covered in the last financial quarter are now pushed forward. What brought all those differences?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we shall share out the opportunities. Those who miss out on this one will speak on the next one and those who miss out on that one will speak on the third one. 

4.06
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. My comment is on the delay to have the local council I leadership established. We are having so many challenges especially in my constituency. Many people are complaining too much. They claim these LC leaders have overstayed and their time of leave has gone beyond - some of them now belong to different parishes but they are still holding stamps of villages that belong to other parishes because we have created other parishes. I want to agree with the committee that we need to get funds to carry out these elections.

The hard-to-reach areas: The criterion that we are using to select these hard-to-reach areas is a little bit disappointing. When I see a district like Kiryandongo - with due respect to my people from Kiryandongo - appearing on the list as a hard-to-reach area and then you look at districts like Yumbe and Moyo and they are nowhere to be seen, it makes me think twice about the criteria we are using to select the hard-to-reach areas. The criteria must be clearly known and clearly spelt out. 

Also, the allowances that we plan to give to these civil servants who are in these hard-to-reach areas should be maintained. People get money for one month, for the second month, three months and after that, the allowance is not given to them and this demoralises the people and they run away from these areas.

Lastly, the delay of release of funds –(Member timed out.)

4.08
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My comment is on the official residence of the Vice-President. I expected the committee to come up with a recommendation in line with the official residence of the Vice-President. If you look at our neighbouring countries, like Kenya, the Vice-President has an official residence. Why say this? As the vice-chair of the committee on the presidency - the mission statement of State House is clear but we are trying to get clarification. Unfortunately, the officials of State House told us that it is public service to cater for the residence of the Vice-President. So, public service, could you tell us where the official residence of the Vice-President of this country is? 

Secondly, I want to talk about the emoluments of the LC III chairpersons. The LC III chairpersons are doing a good job for this country. They need to be empowered to help us with the work to mobilise the communities to do work as far as government programmes are concerned. But when you look at the Shs 300,000 the government pays these chairpersons plus taxing them, it comes to Shs 270,000. I think the minister for local government needs to do something to see how to enhance the remuneration of these LC III chairpersons in their respective sub-counties in this country.  

The last one is on the issue of late releases. I am a member of the local government accounts committee. Monies for the fourth quarter - could Finance give a specific date or time when this money should be released to allow local governments do their work in time? Monies go in May to almost 31 June; what do you expect these local governments to do?

4.10
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I always pass by well-built markets on the roads but they are idle and deserted. And they say that these markets were built by funds from CAIIP. And you wonder - they are idle and deserted. In some cases, even the women who use these markets leave these well-built markets and shift to another place. So, I am wondering: why is the government going ahead to construct these markets when the markets are not achieving what the government wants? 

I have realised a problem that Government cannot differentiate between - because there are those markets which are used by the road users and there are markets used by the community. So, if you put there a market to be used by the road users and you put it far away, the motorists will not drive to that market. The motorists prefer where the market is close to the road.   

So I would suggest that if the problem is the space, the ministry of local government and ministry of works could come together and agree because in most cases these are road reserves. You agree with ministry of works and you even get a land title and you put a market where the road users can easily access these markets so that we can achieve what we want. 

Secondly, we realise when we look at page 9 that there are so many projects in this ministry and I wonder whether they have the capacity. The other issue is that you find that these projects overlap. You can look at DLSP; it is working on accessing –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are rationing time so that as many people as possible can speak. Also we have a time problem.   

4.13
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the committee for the good work they have done. My concern has been on the issue to do with the local council I elections. The committee’s recommendation regarding this is that the ministry of finance, planning and economic development makes provision in the budget to pave way for the elections of LCs I and II. I believe the stage at which we are in the budget process, the ministry of finance may not be in a position to provide those resources in this regard for the elections of the LCs and yet they are very important. In my constituency, there is a great concern and they were asking me as an MP what is happening. Some us who are coming from regions where NRM has had the majority in terms of support, there is a conflict between those who won in NRM primaries as flag bearers, and even other parties who won primaries in different regions. So there is a big conflict - they look at themselves as chairmen already. There are those who already are there, so they are already conflicting. There is no work going on. I feel that there should be something in form of a statement and an assurance from Government in this regard whether we should have these LCs or there is not going to be elections.

How I wish to see either the minister of local government or the Prime Minister coming up with a statement in regard to whether we shall have these elections or not. Otherwise, we are already abrogating the Constitution.

4.15
MS SARAH MATEKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work. But I have a few issues to highlight. As you are aware, most of these urban councils have to implement the physical plans such as making of the roads. To implement them, they have to compensate people to put up these roads. I would have wished to see something on compensation to help these urban councils pay off people. 

I have seen most of the time you have put a lot of money in municipal councils and you have not thought about town councils especially when it comes to public health. I have seen you giving them kits,among other things, but you are not thinking about town councils and the plans you have to upgrade them. I have been here for two years and we have been talking about the salary review commission - I am failing to understand how long it will take to have this in place. 

On the issue of speakers and deputy speakers, I don’t know whether we are going to pay them arrears because this was mentioned in the last financial year. I am wondering whether we shall get the arrears for the speakers and deputy speakers in the districts. 

Finally, I am wondering what criteria are used in allocation of road fund and other funds that go to urban councils, especially. You will find that an urban council like Ntungamo gets a lot of money for the road fund, and you find Kisoro town council gets less. What is the criterion that is used?

THE SPEAKER: I want to introduce hon. Mariam Otana; she is a Member of Parliament from Liberia and she is the Chair of the Committee on Gender. (Applause)

4.17
MR STEVEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The committee was telling us about the issue of the bicycles for the LCs and my concern is that the LCs we are giving the bicycles have not been elected. The former LC leaders who are still serving - I think the courts of this country gave a ruling on them. My recommendation would be that we first finish up with the elections and then we distribute the bicycles to the rightful people. 

Secondly, I hope that when the current LCs get the bicycles and the new ones are elected, they will hand over the bicycles to the new ones because they may walk away with the bicycles and we will be faced with an issue of again buying new bicycles for the new ones. On the issue of the one percent VAT for the local governments; this is something that was done long time ago but I don’t know what has happened with the ministry. 

The minister is here, I think the minister should have done this because the local governments now with meagre local revenues they have cannot manage to run the transactions in local governments because then the one percent increment in VAT was purely meant to substitute graduated tax and other taxes which are now dwindling. 

But for the central government to even deny the “babies” they have with the local governments the one percent, I think is greed of the highest level. Maybe, the minister should work hard to make sure that the local governments are given this. Then for the councillors, in most of the local governments, especially, the LC III, the councils are not sitting today because they cannot afford their allowances. We are in this House but when we go back to our constituencies, you find that the work of the LC II chairperson is not moving. In some sub-counties, the technical people are just concocting the minutes so that they get the funding. The councils cannot sit because they cannot afford the allowances. I think the government should do something on how much we should be giving to LC III councillors. Otherwise, these local councils are not sitting because they don’t have the funding. It is something which should be looked into by the ministry of local government.

Then on late releases of funds, it is an issue at every end of the financial year. You remember in this House, last year, it was said that there were savings which were made from local governments and yet that was not a saving. It was money which was not remitted to the local governments towards the end of the financial year –(Member timed out_)

4.20
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I request for two more minutes. I am concerned with a point on page 21 of the report where the chairperson said that the proportion of local government transfers to the total national budget has seen a further decline of 15 percent this financial year. I am wondering where the spirit which started decentralisation in Uganda has really gone. If they are budgeting for 15 percent to go to the local governments, where most of the problems are, we are making a big mistake. 

If I can give an example; one time in Masaka, I had 980 kilometres of road under the district and of course there were thousands for the lower local governments. The central government had just a tenth of that, meaning that really we are defaulting on this one. We are doing a lot of disservice to our people if we are not budgeting for local governments.

THE SPEAKER: One more minute. He used to be a chairman.

MR SSEMPIJJA: The other issue is most of these monies; the 15 percent that we are talking about now, 90 percent of this is for recurrent expenditure in most districts. Imagine if you are building a house and you buy materials for just Shs 10 million and you pay Shs 90 million for labour; how do you understand this? This is what we are doing. Most of the monies are going for recurrent expenditure. Even last financial year, in the last quarter, the districts never received money for development budget and there was no explanation given by the ministry of finance.

I wanted to submit so that people really know what we are doing otherwise we are already - as I said one time when I went to Denmark, the –(Member timed out_)

4.24
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report given. Year in and year out, I always complain about the hard-to-reach areas. I am happy that you one time came to Kabale and you visited Lake Bunyonyi. When you visited Lake Bunyonyi, I think you saw how rough it is to work across that lake. We have areas in which if someone is going to visit, there is no other way you can pass apart from first going to Rwanda and then you come back to your village. In other words, you may even need a visa to cross the border and get back to your home otherwise you cannot even come to town. So it is my prayer again that local government visits this and makes sure that Kabale is also part of the hard-to-reach areas.  

In as far as local revenue is concerned, it is true local councils do not have enough revenue but even where you are trying to get the revenue like the way I am seeing approvals on bodabodas that they should also start paying that local revenue, we are going to get a scenario of what we used to see during the time when we paid graduated tax – finding all the bodabodas being taken off the road and families going hungry because they did not pay tax.  

Secondly, these bodabodas pay tax when one is buying and also pay tax in the fuel they consume. Now this becomes like triple taxation. I believe that bodabodas are for the youths who are even suffering to pay back to the person they bought it from.  I do not think it is good for us to go for the bodabodasas far as revenue is concerned. 

The other thing I want to talk about is health. I understand the recruitment of health workers, doctors, nurses –(Member timed out_)

4.26
MS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I will start by thanking the committee for the work well done.  

I have a few issues to raise: one, on pages 29 and 30, the committee recommends that the staff or the officers that have been acting CAOs or town clerks and they have done it successfully be confirmed in their various positions. What is the position of the committee on the issue of gaps in the career progression we have in local governments? For instance, in the department of finance, in order to be chief finance officer, you must have worked as a principal person for some required years. But you know in the department, you have only senior finance officers and then chief and so there is already a gap. What are you doing to bridge that gap? 

And two, thank you so much for thinking of facilitating LCs. I hope it is not stopping at LC V only because we have to facilitate local council III leaders who monitor our projects and even the money we send to local governments. They are all the time with our voters and so we need to support and facilitate them. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, the ministry of public service - when it gets to the issue of pension, I do not think it is being handled in the right way because it takes so long and you find a mzee or mama spends a lot of time and the little money he or she has is spent travelling from Kole to the ministry of public service. It takes a lot of energy and at the end of it all, they end up dying without “eating” – (Member timed out_)

4.28
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee chairperson and the members of the committee for this report.  

However, the committee has noted that a lot of money to the tune of Shs 33 billion was returned to the Consolidated Fund as unspent balances. I think we need to make a very strong recommendation on this because local governments, as you are aware, are underfunded and the money released from the ministry of finance sometimes is released very late when local governments have already made commitments and I think many projects are left hanging. 

I, therefore, need to make a recommendation in addition to what the committee has recommended that there should be a closing balance and an opening balance for the local governments so that we avoid returning money to the Treasury because even when the money is returned, we do not know whether it is properly utilised.

There seems to be some connivance between the ministry of finance and some officials because why does ministry of finance, if they have no ill intentions, release money late?  

The ban on recruitment in local governments should be lifted because – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have other reports and so other Members will contribute on them.

I want to ask the chair, if she has any comments - but before that, I have only three questions. One, as a result of our outreach programme, I want to know from the minister for public service whether he will provide cars for his staff who are from the central government because the local governments are now obliged to buy cars for the CAOs out of the funds of the local governments and yet they are employees of the central government. 

The second one is that in the same outreach programmes, we were told that the centre has taken all the lucrative revenue collection sources and left them with the scrap. You took the lucrative revenue collection areas and you left them with scrap so they cannot collect anything.

Then the last one is to the ministry of public service. I would like to know why the former Vice-President, Dr Kazibwe, has not got her benefits. I was embarrassed when I went to the husband’s funeral and she said it in public that we denied her benefits as a former Vice-President. I hope someone will be able to answer that and correct it.  

We finished on local governments and Members will speak on foreign affairs and the others. There are two other committee reports to receive.

MS BAKEINE: Madam Speaker, I listened to all arguments in the debate and they were actually supporting or augmenting our own recommendations. I can only see that it is my ministers plus the minister for finance who should come and explain because there is where we have this decline of transfers from 20 to 15 percent and yet - thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the minister to respond to the policy issues? Let the minister answer.

4.33
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for the job well done. I must say that the recommendations they have made as far as local governments are concerned have added immense value to the work of the ministry and without hesitation, we support their recommendations and we are willing, as a ministry, to do our best to have them implemented. 

There are a number of questions and issues which hon. Members raised from the Floor and as far as I can recollect, one of the Members wanted to know why funds were not released in the last quarter to local governments. This question can best be answered by the Minister of Finance but it is true. My understanding of our running of the budget is that we spend money which we collect. So, if the Uganda Revenue Authority collects more money, definitely we shall have adequate funds to spend. If the URA has a shortfall, there will definitely be shortfalls in the money that will be disbursed to government departments for expenditure. That is the answer I can give for now but perhaps the ministry of finance later, when they are summing this debate in the budget, will give a better explanation.

Madam Speaker, my colleague, hon. Onzima came to the Floor here and gave an elaborate explanation on LC I elections. We had a problem of holding LC I elections on time because the budget then in 2011, which the Electoral Commission required, was Shs 120 billion which Government could not clearly afford. So, we came to this House to request the House to review the law so that the cost could come down and at that time, we had an estimate of about Shs 49 billion and Parliament obliged and did amend the law. When we amended the law, the ministry of finance informed us that the only money they could raise for LC I elections is Shs 19 billion. So, even the Shs 49 billion could not be got - (Interjections) - if you could allow me to answer the issues that have been raised. 

As I speak, by this morning, the bill from the Electoral Commission to hold local council elections had risen to Shs 73 billion. So, it appears to me that going by the current legal regime, which we have, we may not hold LC I elections because the funds are clearly not enough. So, I wish to propose that you allow the ministry to go back and sit with the Electoral Commission and propose radical steps in reforming the law so that we tremendously and fundamentally reduce the cost. Even if it means holding LC I elections by lining up behind the candidates, if that can help us have the elections, we shall do it. So, if this Parliament allows, just give us time and we go back to the drawing board and propose reforms. We will come back to you so that you can consider them so that we have elections that are cheaper but also democratic - (Interjections) - this is my time to respond; if you could allow me to.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, allow the minister to respond to the issues raised.

MR MWESIGE: The hon. Member raised the question of physical plans. It is true that when town councils are carrying out physical plans, sometimes they affect the land rights of the people. This is something that we are planning and thinking about in the ministry. We shall definitely come up with proposals to the committee. 

It was not possible to raise the Shs 21 billion to pay the speakers and deputy speakers and local councillors as Government had wanted because as you know as Members of Parliament, the priorities which Government set this financial year are energy generation, construction of roads, education of course and health and others. So, we could not, within the framework of this financial year, accommodate an increment of Shs 21 billion for payment of councillors. Our intention is to perhaps consider this in the next coming financial year and we have explained it to the local government leaders in their forum called the Local Government Association. They have understood and accepted it. 

The hon. Member for Kisoro wanted to know why in the road fund, more monies are allocated to other town councils like Ntungamo than Kisoro and I would like to recommend, Madam Speaker, that this question be raised when discussing the report on the ministry of works because the road fund is managed essentially by the ministry of works and they will have better answers to give.

It is true that the one percent increment in VAT was actually meant for local governments and I would like to say that I support this recommendation. Perhaps through our budget committee and the ministry of finance, we should have it actualised so that local governments can get their fair share of VAT and this collaborates with your question, Madam Speaker, where you asked why lucrative taxes are collected and managed by the central government and yet local governments are collecting less lucrative taxes. That is something that we should see and try to realign. I cannot give a conclusive answer now.

It is not true that local councils do not sit, as some Members have alleged. Local councils do sit but because of limited funds, instead of having two meetings – (Interruption) – local councils do sit. I monitor them and I have local councils in my constituency and they have sittings. The only difference now is that –(Interjections)– I am sorry I am not taking the information. 

THE SPEAKER: It is a point of order.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been forced to put my minister to order particularly when he was commenting about the functionality of lower local governments. In my constituency, I have got seven sub-counties and out of these, about five of them have not regularly sat as per the Local Government Act just because there are inadequate resources to facilitate the meetings. Across the districts, if my constituency is the Wakiso of Arua and there are many other sub-counties outside Ayivu County like Terego, Madi-okolo and Vurra which are far away from the urban centre, I am sure the conditions – 

THE SPEAKER: But what is the point of order?

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Minister in order to tell us that sub-counties in his constituency are having regular meetings and therefore lump all sub-counties in the whole country and compare them with the sub-counties in his constituency? Is he in order to mislead this House when in my constituency lower local governments do not have regular meetings and are not functioning well? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the minister is the one who is in charge of the local governments and I think he has the information relating to the local governments. So, please complete your answer. Hon. Members, let him answer.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The last question I would like to answer – 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the minister, I stand on a point of procedure, pursuant to Article 176 of the Constitution. By prescription, the Republic of Uganda is managed on the basis of the local government system. A number of issues alluded to by the minister directly impact on this provision and equally negate the Constitution of Uganda. Is it in order, by procedure, for the minister to speak in open ignorance of points of clarification?

THE SPEAKER: But you can’t force a clarification on somebody. Minister, please complete. 

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The last issue I would like to comment on is the question of unspent balances. I share the concerns of the Members but we have had dialogue with the minister of finance and we have finally resolved this. Local governments and other government departments which have not utilised their balances by the end of the financial year will be allowed up to the end of October in the following financial year to spend the money. So that issue has been resolved and there should not be any problems in this coming financial year. 

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Sezi Mbaguta): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the team for the job well done and understanding what the ministry of public service does. There are issues that have been raised that relate to; carrying out salary survey and the organisation of the civil service. That is a continuous process and we do take note of that. 

On the issue of hard-to-reach areas, the criterion that was determined has been operating for some time. But at the moment, we are reviewing the hard-to-reach policy so as to develop a new criterion because of the concerns that Members have raised. The process is on-going and we shall report back to Parliament after reviewing it –(Interjections)– let me complete my submission. 

As I said, the hard-to-reach districts were identified and gazetted and currently we are reviewing the issue of hard-to-reach areas basing on the concerns that have been raised and also the experiences and lessons we have had. 

On the issue of recruitment, it is based on availability of the wage. We cannot only recruit based on the wages provided; whether you are at the centre or at the local government. 

Acting in a post of a higher level does not necessarily mean that you qualify to fill that position because sometimes you are placed in that position as a matter of emergency to hold the sector. 

I would also like to talk about the benefits of the former vice presidents. There are a number of benefits that we are supposed to pay and I want to confirm that the allowances; the fuel; provision of staff and medical facilities are being paid for the former vice-president Bukenya. We are paying those allowances; close to Shs 4.6 million. We have actually paid up to Shs 83 million to those benefits. But there are other benefits like the vehicle and provision of a house – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am talking about Dr SpeciozaKazibwe, former vice-president. 

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, we have also provided payment for former vice-president Kazibwe and where we have a hitch is in provision of motor vehicles until we have been provided with the funds for it and for purchase of the house. But the daily maintenance allowances have been provided. We actually pay them every month – 

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Minister, I think there is a problem – 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I am disturbed by the response of the minister of public service. This is a matter of the law; we made it here; those privileges are not coming from the air. Therefore, once we pass a law, there should be commitment by Government. How can you come to this House and labour telling us stories and yet Her Excellency Specioza Kazibwe should have a house by now and a vehicle. It is such a long time since she vacated that position. In fact, His Excellency Bukenya should also have got similar benefits by now. The law does not say that you give the benefits in bits and pieces. 

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek clarification from the ministry. But first, let me give her an example. When I was in Kenya, the former President received a fully facilitated house with everything in it – plus two vehicles. 

Based on that, I seek clarification from the minister –(Interjections)– some people are asking me what I was doing in Kenya. I am on the committee of the East African Community so we travel throughout the five countries. 

So, Dr Specioza Kazibwe, the former vice-president has not been given any assistance. We read in the papers when Mr Kazibwe died, they were demanding Shs 7 million and the body had to be kept in Nsambya Hospital – 

THE SPEAKER: That is not true; that is not true. (Laughter)

MS KWAGALA: Okay, may be the papers were not clear on that. But we need to know when the former vice-president will be paid. She comes from my constituency and I was her voter. She has not been compensated after ten years; when will they do it?

MS OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek clarification from the minister. There were circulars sent to CAOs stopping the payment of the hard-to-reach allowances including my district. I was disturbed when the minister was explaining as if the payment of the hard-to-reach allowances was still going on. So I need clarification from the minister. We are now aware that the payment of hard-to-reach allowances is no longer going on for teachers, medical personnel and all the others who are supposed to receive it. 

MRS SEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to talk about Uganda and not Kenya. The former vice-presidents have been paid their immediate allowances every month and we have not been provided with resources of purchase of a house or provision of a house allowance and purchase of a vehicle. 

On the issue of hard-to-reach areas, we defined what hard-to-reach means and the resources were decentralised to local governments. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a clarification from the chairperson of the legal and parliamentary affairs committee.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the minister. Now that you have cleared that those benefits are matters of law to which those leaders are entitled, would you consider getting money from the non-wage component in your ministry to cater for these benefits since they are provided for by the law in this Budget?

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, if there is a ministry that has a very low non-wage component, it is the ministry of public service. We shall continue to work with the ministry of finance to work on the benefits of the former vice-presidents. 

And as I said, on the issue of hard-to-reach areas, I want to confirm to this House that the resources were decentralised to local governments.

On the issue of pensions – 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear the point of procedure from hon. Mwiru.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have attentively listened to the debate about the entitlements of our former leaders, and the minister seems to defeat the spirit of the law. This is because it now sounds like a casual matter – the way she is talking. For instance, the former vice-president, hon. Kazibwe was a vice-president some time back. We have had other vice-presidents since then and yet we have not provided for their benefits. Is it procedurally right for the minister of public service to treat this matter casually as though we were going to depend on her mood when she comes to the House to take this matter seriously?

THE SPEAKER: Yes. Hon. Minister, this is really a very serious matter. Someone who left office more than 10 years ago has not got her benefits and no effort is being made.

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, in the case of Dr Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe, the issue was more of legal before we could – we had to sort out the legal issues and it took a long time but they were sorted. It is only recently that they were cleared and we were able to start paying her. We could not start earlier than that.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of CAOs – providing them with vehicles, I would like to – 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear the point of procedure from hon. Muwuma and then from hon. Kawooya.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all hold hon. Mbaguta in high esteem but the way she is handling these matters is too casual. Hon. Speciosa Naigaga is my voter and every weekend I interact with her family and relatives. But they keep asking what is happening; and yet they are 99 or even 100 percent supporters of the ruling party. But when you begin giving such general answers, it gives us a hard time to explain. Please, be specific on when these people can get their entitlement instead of glossing over this issue because it sends wrong signals. 

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the interest of time and members having raised the fact that this matter is of importance, I wish to move that the minister comes back here with a comprehensive report showing why – (Interjections) – I am continuing and, Madam Speaker, I need protection. The report should show why it has taken Government all this time and when is Government going to ensure that Dr WandiraKazibwe and others get all their benefits paid to them. I beg to propose.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we really need serious answers with time lines. So we are giving you a fortnight to come back with an answer on how we are going to proceed on that matter. 

So hon. Members, other than recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 011; recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 147; recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 501-778; recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 005; recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 146; I put the question that the rest of the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report partially adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014 FOR THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

5.00
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I present the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, I would like to tender in the apology of my committee chairperson, hon. Dr Sam Okuonzi and his vice, who have not been able to be here because they travelled abroad.

At this juncture, I have the pleasure to present the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the ministerial policy statement on the budget estimates for financial year 2013/2014.

In accordance with the provisions of Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and in line with Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Foreign Affairs is mandated to, among others, examine and comment on policy matters affecting ministries covered by it and examine critically, government’s recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of procedure I am raising is in regard to the report being presented by the member for Zombo. I have looked around on the front bench and I do not see his minister. So when we debate this report, who will respond?

THE SPEAKER: Who is in charge of the ministry of foreign affairs today in this House? 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, Government is run with a system. All of us need to understand what is happening; if a minister is not here physically, he is represented. The government is present. At the moment, hon. Kamuntu is holding the fort of foreign affairs and that means Foreign Affairs is represented. If the person is not here physically, do not be alarmed.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable chairperson.

MR OMWONYA: Thank you for that clarification. This report covers the following votes: vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and votes 201-234, missions abroad.

Madam Speaker, the methodology the committee used included: 
    i) We critically examined previous and current policy statements from the ministry, analysed previous committee reports, considered the national development plan and raised issues for response from the ministry.

    ii) We held meetings with the minister and technical staff of foreign affairs. The meetings were held to discuss the ministerial policy statement and other matters incidental thereto.

I now beg to lay on Table the minutes of the meetings the committee held with the minister and staff of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I beg to lay.

In the same vein, I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2013/14 on Table. I beg to lay. 

I will move to vote 006, ministry of foreign affairs headquarters and votes 201 - (Interruption)

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My colleague is presenting a report for the Committee on Foreign Affairs for the ministerial policy statements but when you look at votes 006, ministry of foreign affairs, the recurrent expenditure says Shs 25,014 and under the same vote, the total development expenditure is Shs 0.67 which is a total of Shs 25,684.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Chairperson has not even reached where you are, you are jumping ahead. Allow him to present the report - he has not reached there.

MR OMWONYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will now move to Vote 006, ministry of foreign affairs headquarters and votes 201-234, missions abroad. 

The mission of the ministry is stated there and I do not need to read it. The strategic objectives are all there. 

Performance of the budget for the financial year 2012/2013 and the outputs for the financial year 2012/2013 are on page 2. I think Members should be able to read that. 

Regarding the funds appropriated to the ministry for the financial year 2012/2013, the tables below show the amount of funds appropriated for the ministry of foreign affairs and missions abroad. For vote 006, ministry of foreign affairs headquarters, the money appropriated for the wage bill was Shs 3.604 billion. Non-wage was Shs 6.406 billion and development was Shs 0.192 billion. The total released for the ministry of foreign affairs headquarters was Shs 10.202 billion.

Vote 201-234, missions abroad, the wage bill was Shs 12.995 billion and non-wage was Shs 47.336 billion. Development was Shs 7.494 billion, giving a total of Shs 67.825 billion.

What I have talked about are the funds appropriated for the ministry. Funds released for the headquarters were Shs 3.325 billion making a percentage of 92. For non-wage bill, the money released was Shs 10.143 billion giving 100 percent release while development was Shs 0.149 billion giving a percentage release of 78. The total release was Shs 13.617 billion, giving a percentage of 98.

For the missions abroad, the wage bill released was Shs 13.710 billion giving 100 percent. Non-wage bill was Shs 51.864 billion giving 100 percent while development was Shs 7.494 giving 100 percent. So the money released for missions abroad was 100 percent.

Achievements of the sector during the last financial year 2012/2013

Bullet 4.2.1 is promoting regional and international peace and security. The achievements of the ministry are contained on pages 4 to 6. I think my colleagues can read that. We move to 4.2.2, that is, the promotion of commercial and economic diplomacy. That is contained on pages 6 to 8. 

In paragraph 4.2.3, we find mobilisation of bi-lateral and multi-lateral resources for development. The achievements are contained on pages 8 and 9. On paragraph 4.2.4 is the promotion of international law and commitments and ensuring reporting obligations on international trade treaties and conventions. That is contained on pages 9 and 10.

On mobilisation and empowerment of the Diaspora for development, the committee was informed that the ministry worked with various stakeholders to finalise the National Diaspora Policy and Compendium on Diaspora Investment. This involved participating in the best practice visit and feasibility studies on issuance of international Diaspora passports.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the copy of the National Diaspora Policy; Broadening opportunities for Ugandans abroad and in Uganda for national development. This is the final draft and I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

I also beg to lay on Table, the CD – but before I do that, I beg to lay the compendium on Diaspora investment and business opportunities. I beg to lay.

Further, I now beg to lay on Table, the CD on investment and business opportunities together with the flesh on the compendium on diaspora.

Madam Speaker, at paragraph 4.2.6, there is the provision of diplomatic protocol and consular services at home and abroad, the achievements are contained in pages 10 and 11.

On the promotion of Uganda’s public diplomacy to enhance our image abroad – maybe I need to read this out. It says that in line with this, the committee was informed the ministry achieved the following: it finalized two publications that is the historical assessment of Uganda’s diplomacy since 1962, in a book entitled, “Uganda and the world.” The book provides historical information for half a century of the foreign policy of Uganda.

The ministry also finalised a book, “Uganda at the Security Council, 2009 and 2012.” Copies of both publications are here with me and I now beg to lay them on Table.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, “Uganda and the World: half of a century of foreign policy – 1962 to 2012.” I beg to lay. In the same vein, I also beg to lay “Uganda in the UN Security Council: Jan. 2009 to December 2010.” I beg to lay.

On strengthening institutional capacity and the ministry and affiliated institutions – this is contained in pages 11 to 12. However, at (ii) of paragraph 4.2.8, I want to inform the House that the ministry undertook consultations on the feasibility of establishing the Uganda Institute of Diplomacy and Internal Affairs (UIDIA). I beg to lay on Table a copy of that feasibility final study report entitled, “The Uganda Institute for Diplomacy and International Affairs – UIDIA.”

On page 12, you realize that the ministry came up with key plans or proposed activities and programmes and activities for the financial year 2013/14. This information is contained in pages 12 and 13. Members should be able to read that.

On page 13, we have the policy measures to improve the efficiency of the ministry, at paragraph 4.4. The medium term plans are contained on pages 13 and 14. It starts at paragraph 5 of page 13.

Madam Speaker, let me now talk about the committee observations and recommendations. One of the recommendations is about the categorization of the ministry of foreign affairs. The committee observed that the ministry of foreign affairs and missions abroad are under the public administration sector despite its substantial contribution to the non-tax revenue of over Shs 9 billion annually to the Consolidated Fund on top of negotiations for loans, grants and attraction of foreign direct investment. As a result of this categorization, the ministry of foreign affairs and foreign missions constantly suffer due to low budget ceiling and budget cuts, which should not be the case given the importance of that ministry in the protection and marketing of the image of Uganda abroad for tourism and investment.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the ministry of foreign affairs should be relocated to the economic sector.

On properties of Uganda abroad, the committee noted that the Government of Uganda continues to incur heavy costs every year in rent of mission premises and official residences despite efforts that the ministry is making to streamline the policy on acquisition, maintenance and management of Uganda’s property abroad.

In line with the above, the committee was informed by the ministry that a Cabinet memo on the legal framework and modalities for financing and the development of properties is before Cabinet awaiting consideration. The committee, therefore, recommends that Government expeditiously considers the Cabinet memo on the legal framework and modalities for financing the development of Uganda’s properties abroad.

The committee noted that there is need for the ministry of foreign affairs to carry out a study to streamline the legal implications of the transfer of the management of Uganda’s properties abroad, from Uganda Property Holdings Ltd to the ministry of foreign affairs. However, the committee was informed by the ministry that the study required an independent consultant and additional funds together with authorization to carry out that study in collaboration with the ministry of finance, planning and economic development.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the ministry of foreign affairs should be granted the authorisation and facilitation required to carry out the study so that the management of Uganda’s properties abroad can revert to the parent ministry.

On appointment of foreign service officers, the committee observed that the lack of participation by the ministry of foreign affairs in nominating heads of missions leaves a big gap in the process. Besides, career diplomats who have served in the ministry and reached the highest level in which case they can be appointed to head missions abroad stay at the headquarters because they cannot be appointed to these positions.

The committee recommends that the ministry should be involved in the process of nominating heads of missions and in the recruitment of technical officers to work at the missions. Staff who qualify to head missions should also be given the opportunity to utilise their potential.

The committee appreciated the fact that the appointing authority has a prerogative to appoint heads of missions. However, the committee notes that there is need for a balance between political appointees and career diplomats to enable the missions to operate smoothly. 

The committee therefore recommends that there should be a balance between career diplomats and political appointees at a ratio of 60 percent to 40 percent respectively. At the moment, there are only two career diplomats who are heading missions abroad –(Interjections)– they are two. 

The committee further recommends that the appointing authority should appoint heads of missions without necessarily designating them to particular countries. An ad hoc committee of retired diplomats should then be set up to assist the appointing authority in nominating heads of missions. This one is because recently, some diplomats were appointed but up to now, they have not been deployed. 

Foreign Service Allowances

The committee is concerned that although it had been informed that beginning financial year 2012/13, foreign service officers would receive between $2,000 for English speaking countries and $2,500 for non-English speaking countries per year per child as an education allowance for four children under the age of 18, this item has remained unfunded. 

The committee would like to re-echo last year’s recommendation that the ministry of finance, planning and economic development provides funds for the education allowance to enable the children of these foreign service officers acquire quality education. The committee is also concerned that the amounts of funds proposed above are still very low compared to the cost of living in cities abroad. Besides, the foreign service allowances were last reviewed in 2011 and the cost of living in cities abroad has increased since then. Due to this, foreign service officers do not live with their spouses and their children. This increases their risk of exposure to HIV/AIDS and diminishes their commitment to work. 

The committee further recommends that a review of the foreign service allowances be done expeditiously to enable foreign service officers carry out their work effectively.

Development of Infrastructure

The committee noted that Uganda has continued to open new missions in several countries despite the fact that the existing missions are in a poor state. Most of Uganda’s missions are dilapidated and some have been condemned. Besides, Uganda has got land abroad such as in Burundi, Brussels, Ethiopia, South Sudan and Tanzania which needs to be developed.

In view of the above, the committee recommends that the existing missions should be renovated and the plots allocated to Uganda be developed.

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should create a retention account for all the NTR collected by Uganda’s missions abroad and use it only for the development of properties abroad.

Payment of contributions to international organisations

The committee noted that the ministry has outstanding arrears amounting to Shs 29.627 billion but has received only Shs 11.867 billion to pay part of the arrears and this year’s outstanding arrears. The ministry had agreed that the ministry of finance, planning and economic development would pay directly but they did not do this for the last three years. This has an effect on the ministry’s budget since it increases the budget ceiling. Besides, the amount allocated still leaves a huge amount of outstanding arrears amounting to Shs 17.76 billion.

The committee recommends that the ministry of finance, planning and economic development should make the payments to international organisations directly and promptly instead of passing them through the ministry of foreign affairs. The balance of the outstanding arrears should be cleared to enable Uganda participate in these organisations effectively.

Structure of the ministry of foreign affairs    

The committee observed that the staffing levels of the ministry headquarters and missions abroad shows 40 vacant positions that due to underfunding by the ministry of finance, only 12 positions are listed in the recruitment plan for this financial year.

The committee recommends that the ministry of finance, planning and economic development should provide funds to enable the ministry of foreign affairs to fill all vacant positions so that it can operate effectively.

Attraction of investment by missions abroad

The committee observed that whereas the ministry of foreign affairs plays its role in lobbying and attracting foreign investment in the country through its missions abroad, they are not well facilitated to carry out this important function.

The committee recommends that the ministry of foreign affairs should liaise with the ministries of finance and trade, industry and cooperatives to train and send commercial attachés to the missions abroad to enable them fulfil their mandate of promoting inward direct foreign investment.

The committee further observed that foreign investors do not have a one-stop centre for registration of their businesses and they have to go through cumbersome processes which are frustrating.

The committee further recommends that Government should upgrade the Uganda Investment Authority into a one-stop centre and provide adequate facilitation to enable quick and timely registration of foreign investment.

Promotion of tourism in missions abroad

The committee observed that despite efforts by the ministry of foreign affairs to promote tourism, there is very low investment in tourism promotion and infrastructure in Uganda as compared to other countries in the region. For example, Uganda invests only $300,000, Rwanda $5 million, Tanzania invests $12 million and Kenya $23 million annually. 

The committee recommends that Government should scale up its investment in tourism infrastructure so as to adequately exploit the potential in the tourism industry. The committee further recommends that ministry of foreign affairs should identify countries which bring in the highest number of tourists and liaise with the ministry of tourism to post tourism attachés to handle promotion of tourism in Uganda’s missions abroad. 

The committee further observed that there is duplication in the promotion and attraction of tourism in the country since this function is carried out by several agencies such as the ministry of tourism, Uganda wildlife authority, Uganda tourism board and the presidential initiative on tourism.

The committee recommends that Government should make an effort to harmonise the agencies involved in the promotion of tourism to avoid duplication of services. 

Proposed allocations for the vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters and votes 201-234, missions abroad for the financial year 2013/14   

The following are the proposed allocations for vote 006, Ministry Of Foreign Affairs (headquarters): Recurrent expenditure of Shs 25.014 billion; development expenditure of Shs 0.67 billion giving us a total of Shs 25.684 billion.

Votes 201-234, missions abroad: The proposed allocation for recurrent expenditure is Shs 72,648,000,000, while development expenditure is proposed to be Shs 15,644,000,000, giving a total of Shs 88,292,000,000.

In conclusion, I now move that Parliament approves the following estimates for the respective ministry and missions abroad for the financial year 2013/14: Vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs recurrent expenditure Shs 25,014,000,000; development expenditure Shs 670,000,000 giving a total of 25,684,000,000 for ministry of foreign affairs headquarters. 

Missions abroad; these are votes 201 to 234, recurrent expenditure of Shs 72,648,000,000 while development expenditure is Shs 15,644,000,000 giving a total of Shs 88,292,000,000. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chair and your committee. Hon. Members, the report has been signed by the minimum one-third of the members. 

5.36
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, People with Disabilities Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The document is not paged but I would like to comment on something on page 9. The item talks about promotion of international law and commitment as ensuring reporting obligations on international treaties and conventions. When you read the responses here – (Interruption)

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for this report. However, matters of budgeting are about figures. When you look at page 5 in the executive summary, the chair says “In conclusion, I now move that Parliament approves the following estimates for the ministry and missions for the financial year 2013/2014 as follows: vote 006 Ministry of Foreign Affairs –

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MS TAAKA: The point of procedure is about the figures which are quoted here, under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, it is Shs 25,014, it is not stating whether it is billion or million.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, leave the issue of the figures. Today, we are dealing with policy and when we get the corrigenda, we will deal with the figures.

MS NALULE: I was commenting on page 9 on promotion of international law and commitments, ensuring reporting obligations on international treaties and commitments. When you read the content of this paragraph, there is nothing mentioned on promotion of international law as well as reporting on international treaties and conventions. I know very well that this country has ratified most of the core treaties, with the exception of that one on enforced disappearances. Several times, we have not got any report from the ministry of foreign affairs and the updates about the obligations with the international treaties and conventions. 

What is here is just the agreements we have signed with the several countries and nothing else. Can I request that the ministry brings to us an updated report on the reporting obligations and the promotion of the international law? 

5.40
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 4, the committee says that Uganda diplomatic missions abroad continue to be a vehicle through which the ministry promotes investment, trade and others.  Unfortunately, even when you enter buildings that are owned by Uganda and house other missions, you will find the image of those other missions and not the image of Uganda, for example, the High Commission in London where you will find promotion of tourism in Rwanda rather than Uganda. 

Under development of infrastructure, the committee correctly points out that existing missions are in a poor state and most of Uganda’s missions are dilapidated and some have been condemned. This is the image of Uganda abroad. Is it any wonder that we cannot attract any investment coming to Uganda because this is the image? How do you tell people that we have so much at home when your image there is that of dilapidation and rot? 

The committee correctly points out that the investment in the tourism sector is very low compared to other nations within the region. We cannot reap where we do not sow and so the government should put money where its mouth is; put money in tourism, put money in foreign affairs, develop our missions and project a positive image of Uganda. That is the only way we will attract investment.

5.42
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. As you are aware, Uganda is a very hospitable country but I want to restrict myself to page 12 among the key and proposed activities where the committee was informed by the ministry that it plans to carry out, among other activities: to support all regional and international efforts towards peace and stability in the great lakes region. We have had a number of cases where our people are mistreated in South Sudan especially the business fraternity. These cases have been passed over in our country; our people are very uncomfortable especially those who work in Juba. 

The minister in charge of foreign affairs should come out to mend the relationship between Uganda and South Sudan. Otherwise, Uganda may continue hosting other foreign countries and the people coming here and whereas our people go outside there to carry out business and they are cleared on the borders with all documentations, they are mistreated and there are no plans to help our people working there. So as we pass this budget and consider this ministerial policy statement, the minister should come up with a clear plan to maintain the relationship between Uganda and those countries. Thank you.

5.44
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for this report and my concern is on page 16 concerning the images abroad created by poor infrastructure. 

About three years ago, in the Eighth Parliament, we visited some missions abroad and there was a particular condemned structure in Brussels, Belgium. This year again, we visited missions abroad and the situation in which we left it is the same dilapidated situation we found it in and I am looking at development expenditure. 

I would like the minister - it would be good for us to know whether in his plans, such dilapidated and condemned structures are a priority because they portray a very poor image of Uganda and it is something that we could repair as a country.

Secondly, there are allowances to do with foreign service officers on page 15 which have not been honoured. It is a lonely world outside there when we visited these foreign missions. We discovered that many officers did not have their families with them simply because they could not afford it, and even their children were not getting the education that a foreign officer’s child should be getting. 

I would like this country to take it as a serious issue that when these people leave their families behind, many of them suffer broken families which is not the intention of working in a foreign country. So, I would like the ministry to treat this with the seriousness it deserves. Let us give these people the allowances so that their families remain together and the image of this country is respected by the other foreign officers because they compare –(Member timed out_)

5.48
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. My concern is about the education allowance for the children of the foreign service officers. It is very unfortunate to send someone abroad and you mistreat this person from there. It is very unfortunate and we call on the ministry of foreign affairs and the ministry of finance to give them the money.  

My other concern is on the promotion of tourism. It is very unfortunate that it is true we are putting in very little compared to the neighbouring states and even globally and yet this is where the country should be getting a lot of money. 

That said and done, the other annoying thing is about the mention of the presidential initiative on tourism. I have chaired the committee for some time and at one time, we found out that this initiative wanted to get much more money than the entire ministry. When I saw this thing in the report, I really felt very bad.

When we are talking about duplication of services, I do not see the necessity of the presidential initiative on tourism because the ministry is already in existence. So allocating money would be very unfortunate. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekuma, then I go to hon. Nyakikongoro – your foreign person is not and I know that - (Laughter) – hon. Amongi and then hon. Nsubuga. Let us start there. Two minutes each.

5.53
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. However, when you look at page 4, it shows that foreign missions abroad last year received 100 percent release from the ministry of finance. But my concern is, Madam Speaker, that the committee that you chair, last year approved Dr Isamat as head of mission to Japan. As we talk now, Dr Isamat is still languishing at home in Ngora. 

I would want to find out from the chairperson and the committee about what is happening? Why do we still have Dr Isamat languishing at home and yet somebody else has taken that position in Japan? I need that clarification. Let me allow information.

THE SPEAKER: Information from the member for Buyende.  

MS KADOGO: Thank you, colleague for giving way. I want to add on what my colleague has said. He is not the only person that was appointed - there are many that were appointed to head missions abroad like Peter Mubiru, Zake Kibedi and they have remained at large and I expected the committee to talk about their fate but they have not mentioned anything. I would also like to know the criteria used to give some embassies money because other embassies were not given like that one of Kuala Lumpur and yet there are new embassies which were given like the one of Mogadishu. I thank you.  

MR EKUMA: Honourable colleague, thank you for that information. I really want to find out the criterion used to pick some heads of mission who were appointed at the same time and some are rightly executing their duties but our own are still at home. (Laughter)

Hon. Prime Minister and head of Government Business, you stated here that you were going to handle these issues - our concerns since we needed the Minister for Foreign Affairs here. We really want you to explain to us –(Interjections)– please, I will take your information.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable from Bukedea. I thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to state that I am very disturbed that on the foreign service officers, I have scrutinised their lists from 1986 up to today but you find that over 98 percent are Banyankole –(Interjections)– yes, and I want to tell you that for us in Kasese since God created this world, we have never had any foreign service officer – (Laughter) - and I also want to bring to the attention of this House that actually the recruitment of this foreign service officers is not premised on merit but on which tribe you actually come from. So, it would be – [Ms Ntabazi: “Order.”] Order on what now? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MS NTABAZI: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that I stood on a point of order, ordering my brother to sit down. I happen to come from the same region as hon. Nzoghu where we have the whole minister for health for this country, where we have –(Interjections)– leave that alone – where we have a minister for local government for the whole of this country. We have the minister for primary education for this country. We have the chief of staff of the army of this country from Kasese. We have hon. Kajara, the minister for finance for this country –(Interjections) 

Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order, and Members should understand what a point of order is and what a point of information is because we are senior Members. We should not behave like children when we stand here to speak for the nation. 

Is it in order for an honourable member elected by people to deliberate for the whole country to bring in tribalism, sectarianism, nepotism and all that you talked about? Will this move this country, Madam Speaker? Is he in order to divert my reasons to tribalism? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he was talking about these people in the foreign service. He worked with someone in the missions. Please, conclude. 

MR EKUMA: Madam Speaker, these people were approved and were appointed but they have not been deployed. I have not seen the provision in this budget to facilitate these people who are seated at home. They have no funds to run their families – (Member timed out.)

5.52
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is from page 14, on the properties abroad. The ministry is talking about a policy of acquisition, maintenance and management of Ugandan properties. Madam Speaker, you will realise that we have lost a lot of money in Ugandan properties abroad. I understand there is even property that was demolished and the money for demolition was much more than what we would have used to put up a building. So, I want to know from the minister how soon this policy will come on board so that we can ensure that we do not lose more properties.

I also want to raise an issue on the education of the children. First of all, when we interacted with our foreign service staff in one of our embassies in Washington, we noted that Uganda has cut off employment for the spouses and in return, they have also stopped the spouses from working in Washington. This means that the little salary paid to the foreign service staff is not enough to even support their children and they see this as a disservice. Can Uganda do something about that? 

Madam Speaker, I also want to raise the issue of dual citizenship. You passed a law here in Parliament and we thought that it was going to help our people. However, in the USA right now, if you are found with two passports you are taken as a terrorist. This has become a problem to our people and I think the Ministry of Foreign Affairs needs to work on this.

Finally, I want to comment on the NTR collected by missions abroad. Washington, which I visited, gets money from issuing passports and visas but their machine is down –(Member timed out.)

5.54
MR KENNETH BBOSA KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County, South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to re-echo the voices of my colleagues to thank the committee for this wonderful report. I want to restrict my contribution to item 5, which is still in light of the development of infrastructure. 

You may note that on a number of occasions, we have sent Members of Parliament to visit these missions abroad and they have come up with reports detailing the state of our missions abroad. I do not know when the minister in charge plans to give us feedback from the findings from those reports that our own Members of Parliament have come up with. 

Hon. Kamateeka stated clearly what is happening in Berlin; I believe in the other missions abroad, there is a lot that needs to be reported back to Parliament basing on the reports that they did bring to the House. So, I call upon the minister to work expeditiously to come and inform us how far they have gone in addressing the issues as presented in the reports from the committees of Parliament that have gone as far as visiting these missions abroad. I thank you.

5.55
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County, South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to state that the issue of the missions abroad has been at the forefront of this House since last Parliament. I think it is the right time that we should be told by the committee whether there is phased work going on. This is because in the last Parliament, I remember even the ministry had stated on this Floor that they were already working on the mission in Brussels. 

Can the committee tell us whether there is any work at all in any of the foreign missions, especially Brussels and London because those are key missions? All the European Union work is around Brussels and the ambassador and the embassy in Brussels deal with all that. It is a co-ordinating mission. We have a very prime plot, which is dilapidated, and we were promised in the last Parliament that work was going to be completed within two years. I would have expected that today you tell us that work is finished with this embassy and these are the remaining embassies.

As a House, Madam Speaker, I think we need to put our feet down and each financial year, we must approve money on condition that at least one embassy is either going to be renovated or going to be worked on. Otherwise, we are going to keep talking and talking and the minister will come here and make promises and nothing will happen. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to ask the committee whether the issue of women and girls being trafficked is being handled by embassies and missions abroad. In India, for instance, the Police arrested the trafficked girls but even the mission was not aware. (Member timed out.)

5.58
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern is from page 14, on the medium-term plans. During the olden days of Idi Amin, Uganda got land in Riyadh and that plot of land has been lying there without any development on it. Two years ago, we visited Riyadh and we were told that the authorities were about to take that piece of land. Can the minister inform this House on this? You can imagine, right from the Idi Amin days, this land has been there and it belongs to Uganda but it is not developed and the country that gave us that land is concerned. Do we still need that piece of land or not?

Secondly, when we come to analyse policy issues of ministries, I would like to get confirmation from Government as far as our citizens in South Sudan are concerned. Can Government assure us, as we debate their policy statements, that our Ugandans in South Sudan will continue to be safe? If they are not, we should know because in this country there are very many Sudanese who move freely. They are in our schools, in our markets, they are running clubs and nothing is happening. What I know is that diplomacy is reciprocal. Diplomacy must be reciprocated; if these people cannot reciprocate our diplomacy, then I think it is high time we also took decisions.

Lastly, this House should be assured again; we should not gloss over the issue of foreign service officers’ children. I want to know whether this amount of money they have mentioned – the US$2,000 and US$2,500 -is included –(Member timed out.)

6.00
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division, South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will make three very brief points. One, the conception of dual citizenship; is it constitutionally dependable? Can a Ugandan with dual citizenship of US and Kampala vote either way? That is an important challenge I am throwing to the Government. 

Secondly, I strongly welcome the proposal for an institute for diplomacy in Uganda. A number of our missions accommodate workers abroad without any charisma capable of attracting people to Uganda. What are those people doing in New York if they do not have the capacity to talk persuasively to those people to come and visit Uganda?

Another important point is about our international commitments. I was once the Vice-President of Global International, an international organisation embracing legislators committed to the environment. I saw the problem we have abroad. The people in our missions should be able to check on our governments concerning their commitments on international protocols, especially on the environment. I am talking about the Bamako Convention, the Rio de Janeiro Convention and the Ramsar Convention. 

As we speak, Uganda is one of the countries that have not complied with resolution No.40, which says that every member of UNEP must make sure that every prevailing policy in their country is protected. Our President, in negation of that, is talking about the destruction of Mabira. (Member timed out.)

6.03
MS SARAH MWEBAZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concerns are on the development of infrastructure. 

The committee has told us about the existing plots in these countries including Ethiopia, Burundi and Tanzania; that is where I want to concentrate. These countries have got polices on land. Our country has got vacant plots of land and in these countries, if land is not developed within a particular period of time that land will be taken back to the Government. So, the Minister of Finance, who is not here, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs, represented by the Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Moses Ali,should note. 

We are talking about existing properties, we are talking about houses, but we shall also lose plots of land. We were in Dar-es-Salam where our mission has got land, but they told us they have been given a timeframe to develop it, otherwise it will revert to the Government of Tanzania. We went to Ethiopia and we were told the same thing. 

Another issue is on tourism, highlighted on page 17. Under point No.9, promotion of tourism in missions abroad, the committee told us how Uganda has invested US$300,000 compared to other partner states in the region. This is embarrassingly low. We have got development partners who want to come and develop the tourism industry in the East African Community –(Member timed out.)

6.05
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I may not go to specific recommendations because whatever the committee has covered, basing on the interactions with our people in Washington, is perfect. 

I want to come back to our minister. I agree with hon. Amongi that the issue is not that the committee is raising anything new; I want to imagine that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs knows all that is documented in this report. I also believe that these issues have been continuously raised in the hearing of the ministry officials. So, there is need to investigate the seriousness of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on issues regarding our missions abroad. 

The problem is with the ministry. That ministry knows well that our foreign missions’ structures need to be renovated but what is the problem? It is unfortunate that the ministers are not here. The Prime Minister said that someone is going to respond, but we need an action plan from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; let them give us a comprehensive plan on how they plan to deal with these issues. If we do not get that plan, I assure you that the same issues will be brought back to Parliament – (Interruption)

MS AMERO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give is that while I was serving on the Committee of Foreign Affairs, a whistle-blower was brought to this Parliament from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs with a lot of pertinent issues that needed to be dealt with expeditiously. 

On the issue of land, which members have been speaking about, we have land in Sudan, which was bought using taxpayers’ money, but the title which was presented to the committee was not authentic at all. There was nothing to show that it was a land title yet that was presented by the minister. So, something needs to be done in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The issue is bigger than what we see. The Member has been talking about land that we own in a number of countries. We were with the Ambassador of Uganda to Burundi, Ambassador Kyaligonza. The land we were given is very strategic; it is at the shores of Lake Tanganyika. However, we were told that people are not willing to take it up because the money being paid in rent benefits some of them. 

Members have complained about harassment of our people in Malaysia. We approved the ambassador to Malaysia, but he is still languishing here; there is no mention in the report about any plan to send our ambassador to Malaysia. These are the challenges that face the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

MR ALEPER: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, you recall that you chaired a meeting where most of these issues were raised.  (Member timed out.)

6.12
MR KENNETH LUBOGO(Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek clarification from the chair of the committee, and I thank them for the report. 

I have listened to the colleague from Bukedea talking about someone who was appointed and was never deployed. I have listened to the same issue from hon. Kadogo, which was reiterated by my brother, hon. Muwuma. This takes me to the recommendation on page 15, which says, “The committee further recommends that the appointing authority should appoint heads of missions without necessarily designating them to particular countries”.

I would like to understand from the chair of the committee what is meant by heads of missions being appointed without being attached to a particular country. What do you want them to do? Isn’t that the same problem being discussed by colleagues, that people were appointed but were never deployed? Is the committee recommending that this should continue to be done? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have another report to deal with. I think for this one, we can stop there –(Interjections) - wait; there is something I want to say. 

Honourable members, it seems we are a very generous country; we are donors. In Washington alone, we spend US$20,000 per month on rent for the staff. So, when you multiply that by 12 months,it comes to US$240,000. Go to London and multiply the donation for rent for staff.Go to Brussels and multiply the rent. You will find that we are donating millions of dollars every year to landlords in all those capitals. 

Now the Minister of Finance has said we should stop renting; what does she intend to do about the properties and our staff abroad? Why don’t we acquire the properties? The money we are spending on donations could have bought properties by now. So, I want to know from the minister what she says about that.

Honourable members, we have been offered property in the following places: In Washington, they offered us three times and they took it back because we failed to use it. Properties in India, China and Rwanda all went. The following are in danger: the properties offered to us in Addis Ababa, Riyadh, United Arab Emirates and South Sudan. Those we have but are undeveloped are in Brussels, Abuja, Juba, and Dar-es-Salaam. 

The following missions require immediate uplift: Ottawa, Kinshasa, New York, Washington – By the way, in Washington we are in “Kikuubo”. You know there is Embassy Lane but we are in “Kikuubo” somewhere. We even do not put our flag outside because we are in a wrong place. The other missions are Pretoria, Copenhagen and London. We also need to acquire new properties like in Moscow, Brazil – where we have no presence – Australia. I do not know how we can continue saying that we are marketing Uganda when this is what is happening. 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a procedural point. This committee has presented a wide range of issues but let us turn to page 14. I wonder whether it is procedurally right for a committee to take a decision or convince Parliament to take a decision for a ministry to be relocated to another sector. 

The committee recommendation reads, “The committee recommends that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be relocated to the economic sector.” I seek procedural guidance, before we approve their recommendation, whether it is right for Parliament to take a decision that a full ministry is put into a sector. If it goes to the economic sector, it will be like a department. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You know, our ministries and institutions are classified. Parliament, for instance, is under administration. So, I think the committee’s point is that it is an economically viable ministry – it is generating money for the country including nontax revenue and money from the visas and others. So, it should be classified as one that brings money to the economy. Does the committee chair have any comments? Let us hear from the acting minister.

6.18
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I thank you for guiding the House. I also thank the committee chairperson and members for an excellent report. I thank you all, Members, for your very useful contributions. 

The recommendations that have been made are implementable and most of them are acceptable to the ministry. I want to synthesise because about 18 Members contributed on this and the recommendations on page 14 are also quite a number. I propose that I respond on the recommendations as submitted by the committee and synthesise the issues raised by the Members during their contributions.

On recommendation No.1, which is on page 14, about the reclassification of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs from being in the public administration sector to the economic sector, this is a recommendation we can look at; only that the justification for asking for it does not automatically follow. The ceilings for ministries are debated and agreed. Clearly, you could increase the ceiling for a ministry even when it is in the public administration sector. However, the fact that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs contributes through non-tax revenue and in a way generates funds in revenue as pointed out – Shs 9 billion to the Consolidated Fund annually – could be an argument to look at its classification. 

The recommendation on Uganda properties abroad; yes, this issue has also been raised by Members during their contributions. It is very true that as I am talking to you, Government is reviewing the role of Uganda Property Holdings Ltd, which has been managing Uganda’s properties abroad. Its own legal status is being reviewed and when that is done, this recommendation will definitely be handled as well. 

There is a recommendation that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should allow a study to be done. Once Uganda Property Holdings Ltd is reviewed, then even this independent consultant recommendation will be handled along that line.

On appointing of foreign service officers, the committee recommended that the ministry should be involved in nominating heads of missions. There is no harm in this, but the only substantial point is on political appointees and career diplomats. It is true that there is a combination, but what proportion should it be; should it be 60/40 or 40/60? Again, this is a matter we can debate. However, as I just mentioned, there are members who are career diplomats who are appointed ambassadors and there are also ambassadors who are political appointees and the two are complementary.

On the allowances, it is very true that the allowances paid to Ugandans working in our missions clearly require revision. You know, if money were to be enough, it would lose its value. So, sometimes the scarcity of money is by definition. (Laughter) The money is very scarce and the allowances paid can be improved as the economic situation improves. 

I also want to comment on the recommendation that the existing missions abroad – 

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of procedure being raised.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I am responding to the recommendations, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of procedure by hon. Yaguma.

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the importance of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; given the fact that this Parliament approved three ministers in the docket of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; given the seriousness of the issues raised in the report; and given the way the acting minister is handling the issues, I would like to move a motion under our Rules of Procedure, rule 50 (b) and (c), that we postpone the debate until at least one of the three ministers appears to take serious note. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have received the report and debated it, really we cannot stop now. In fact, the person who should be in the dock is the Minister of Finance. I think that is where the questions should go. Let us finish the policy issues, please.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. Actually, we take the recommendations of the committee very seriously and also your contributions on the Floor of the House. Not only am I acting but I have a whole team of technical officers taking note of the contributions you have made. Consequently, I am not playing games. This is a very serious matter and we take your work very seriously.

On the issues that you have raised in the contributions, take the issue of the image of Uganda abroad, who is not concerned about the image of Uganda? If you look at the contribution of Ministry of Foreign Affairs to regional integration and to peace and security, including our own membership and contribution in the United Nations, who would want the image of Uganda to be in doubt?

When you mention infrastructure, yes, the policy is changing regarding rent or having our own accommodation domestically, and it is also going to change abroad. Where it is possible or as soon as the budget makes it possible, these properties of Uganda will be renovated. 

However, of immediate interest to us is promotion of Ugandans abroad. I want to inform the House that Government has got US$ 25 million, which has been given to the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife. When the Minister of Tourism and Wildlife comes to account to you, this point will be put across–about a concerted effort being made to ensure that the image of Uganda in attracting tourism, which is a very big foreign exchange earner and a primary growth sector in our economy, is promoted. So, your concerns are being addressed.

Similarly, regarding our citizens in South Sudan, again I want to confirm to the House that as I speak, there is a joint permanent commission working on strengthening co-operation between our two countries. I can say that I have been to South Sudan personally and gone to the embassy; this issue is being addressed from our embassy in South Sudan.

They also raised the issue of our own citizens not registering sometimes –(Interjections)– Yes, this is true. Well, I am telling you I have been there. You can dispute it but this is the truth. The point is that the co-operation framework within South Sudan is a matter of importance to the Uganda Government – (Members rose_) - No; I am not accepting the information.

On the status of reports, which was the first point the honourable raised, yes we can submit reports on obligations to international treaties to this House because these reports are available -

THE SPEAKER: The reports are available?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes. Let me repeat this. Regarding the status of reporting on obligations on our international treaties and conventions, the ministry can provide an update on these reports. All you need, Madam Speaker, is to give a timeframe on when these reports are required and they will be made available to you. On planned activities –(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been patiently listening to the minister holding the fort for the docket of foreign affairs. This is a very important exercise we are undertaking - discussing policy of Government and what it is going to do. The committee has been seated for about a month receiving information, analysing it and also coming up with recommendations.

Madam Speaker, from the submissions of the minister holding the fort for foreign affairs, it is clear he is not prepared because he is giving generalities. Maybe it will suffice to say that he has heard, and he does not waste the time of Parliament because he is not giving any clear information on the issues that have been raised by the committee.

I do not know whether hon. Kamuntu himself is convinced that he is giving any information to this House to address. I definitely respect the honourable Prof. Kamuntu but his answers are not very convincing. Maybe he would rather ask for time to come with responses because the House is not being helped with generalities by Prof. Kamuntu, whom I respect very much. Thank you. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate your ruling that anybody can be handpicked from the front bench to hold fort and respond to the issues on the Floor. I have addressed my mind to rule 35 of our Rules of Procedure, which require ministers to attend House and attend to issues. I am only wondering whether it is not procedurally right, since we normally approve three to five ministers in one ministry, that if the senior minister is not here there should be some other minister within the ministry, instead of handpicking someone and saying that they are holding the fort. I wonder whether it is right for us to proceed in that style because this is an embarrassment to the House.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, we on this side are unhappy that policy papers and reports are being presented in the House and the line ministers are not here. We had objected to the policy statement of foreign affairs being presented and you persuaded us, but we can see the disaster we have gone into. 

We would like to beg you, Madam Speaker, that beginning tomorrow or the next presentation, if the minister is not there, no report should be presented because we should take this House seriously. Those of us who sit here also have other things we can do outside here and so we should be respected. We should take this House seriously so that Ugandans get value for the money they pay us.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank my colleagues for the concern. However, I want you to know that these ministers seated in offices are not personal projects -they are not directors - and there is what we call collective responsibility. The Leader of Government Business stood here and told you there is an acting minister in charge of the portfolio. Let us not personalise these ministries because that will be setting a very bad trend. 

The issue is, if you as a House are not satisfied with the responses that the minister is giving, that is different from the individual. We should separate the two. The Leader of Government Business told you there is a minister holding the portfolio; the issue of the response by the minister is different. (Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you for giving way. Colleagues, the House is not specifically complaining about the person or an individual. We are complaining about the content in his response. If he consulted his colleague or if they got time to sit down to read the report and he gave him a line-up of issues to present here, there would be no problem at all. So, you also have to separate the issues. 

We are talking about responsible ministers sitting together to prepare for the House. Very many people have got a lot of things to do outside there, but they reserve themselves to come and sit in this House and the Speaker too sits here yet she also has a constituency. What do you mean when you say they are busy and not doing personal projects? There is nothing personal here.

Madam Speaker, I just want to inform my colleague, who is also my daughter, to align her ministers very well so that they can consult each other before they come to the House. Thank you.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, when I stood up I was responding to what hon. Wafula-Oguttu had said. He said we should not allow committee reports on sectoral policy statements to be presented here if the sector ministers are not here. That is what I was responding to. I think my uncle did not get me rightly. I was not talking about the substance of what the minister was giving to the House as a response.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I sat here very attentively and listened to the honourable Prof. Kamuntu responding to queries raised by the honourable members. I can say that the minister answered all the queries to the best of his ability. (Laughter)

Now the honourable members are only generalising when they say that the responses are not satisfactory; they are not pointing out any specific issues that the minister has not responded to properly. If there are any issues that have not been answered to the satisfaction of the Members, why don’t they specifically bring up those issues so that they see whether the minister has no ability to answer them? (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please take your seats. I want to propose that we ask the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come and respond to these recommendations specifically. (Applause) So, before we pass his budget, he must come here and answer. 

Honourable members, I now put the question that save for the recurrent and development expenditures under vote 006 and the recurrent and development expenditure under votes 201 to 234, the rest of the report is approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Before we approve the money, you must come here and give a report.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I just want to say I am most obliged to your ruling. Thank you very much.

6.39
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have sat here very attentively and followed the discussions, which for me have been a relay of the debate that this House has had in respect of that sector for probably the last 13 years, almost word for word, problem by problem and mission by mission. I think it is only getting worse by the day.

Over those years, we have always operated on a promissory note. The sector comes here and says they will deal with the issues, for example the Uganda House in London, but nothing is done at the end of the day. Now we are hearing about some things from whistle-blowers, actually allegations that even one time there was an attempt to sell the house that accommodates the Uganda Mission in New York. We just keep hearing about those things but with no remedy being provided here.

I would like to propose to this House that you set up a committee to carry out a special investigation into the management of these missions, the acquisition, resourcing –(Interjections)– Yes, that is my proposal. I know that the hon. Margret Baba Diri can improve it after but let me first make my proposal -(Interjection) -Yes, and the hon. Hanifa Kawooya. My proposal is that you set up a special investigation into the acquisition, management, resourcing and issues of staffing and rent in regard to missions abroad.

Secondly, that committee proposes to Parliament a roadmap in which we will subsequently approve and prioritize resource allocation to the sector, and that they will report to us in three months’ time.Madam Speaker, I beg to move that motion to this House. 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, thank you. We have just composed sessional committees. So, to set up another separate committee to go and do the work of the responsible committee when they have just started their work for this session is a vote of no confidence in our colleagues who we have not given enough time.

In the circumstances, I want to suggest, by way of a request to my colleague, hon. Alaso and those who have seconded her motion, that let us give time to our colleagues. Yes, they have presented a report in which they have proposed questions and changes in policy; kindly, let us give them time to do their work. Also, I suggest that we give them a timeframe within which to report back to the House on issues that my colleagues are raising. Thank you.

MS BABA DIRI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Hon. Alaso has just said that we have been duplicating these issues year in, year out for 13 years. I think the issue is not about the lack of information or facts; it is an issue regarding implementation. Why should we waste resources putting another committee in place when we already have all the information in our hands? That is why I really opposed the moving of that motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I want to agree with the Chief Whip that our new committee, which is hardly two months old, would lose confidence if we said, “let us look for other people to do your work.” Maybe we should collect all the information, which we have anyway from our report, and then bring a motion to discuss the performance specifically. We have the information; it would be at that point that we can maybe propose an action plan here in the House. I think that will be better. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also aware that the Public Accounts Committee has been touring missions abroad. So, if we have to do something, I would believe that the two committees, that of public accounts and the one on foreign affairs, can sit together, compile a comprehensive report and give us a way forward on how we should deal with this matter. 

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs.I want to say that we do understand one thing, that in every other committee we have a backlog of work that is being done. Likewise, we in the Committee on Foreign Affairs had various issues.

We also visited various missions abroad and we also sought answers from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. We would like not to task the ministry so much because they did give answers to the committee on some specific issues. However, what is pending is presentation of the reports on the Floor of the House. I would like to inform you, Madam Speaker, that we have reports that are going to be presented here and answers were given by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  

THE SPEAKER: So, are you saying hon. Alaso’s motion is premature?

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate the spirit under which my sister, hon. Alaso, has moved the motion. I also do appreciate the contribution of the Members who have said, and rightly so, under your guidance, that it is not necessary to create or set up a new committee. Equally, the Committee on Equal Opportunities has been visiting most of the missions abroad. The issues that the Committee on Foreign Affairs has raised –(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I really must raise this point of order, but what I am trying to do is to restate what I said. I said that I propose, Madam Speaker, that you put in place a special investigation. If you go back to the Hansard, you will not find me saying, “put up a select committee or an ad hoc committee.” I only said the premise is a special investigation to compile or to address these issues. So, I am disturbed that the content, the spirit, the intention is being diverted to a thing I did not say- a committee. 

Whatever the House decides is okay with me but I did not say that you put up a select committee. I said, “conduct a special investigation.” That was my prayer to the House. If only Members listened to me and addressed the content for a special investigation and packaged it very well, I will be happy. So, do not say I said, “select committee”; I did not say that, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are all speaking about the same thing. We shall sit with the Clerk and formulate the language because you are suggesting investigations, but the information is already here. I think what we want is an action plan. So, we shall formulate the language and thus organise which committees will handle that issue because it is really important. We cannot go on like this. We cannot go on doing business like this anymore. Thank you,Members.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014 FOR THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

6.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Margaret Komuhangi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I present the report, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy development and budget estimates for the financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings of the committee. 

This is the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2013/2014 - vote 108, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and vote 124, Equal Opportunities Commission.

Introduction 

Madam Speaker, Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution and the provisions of rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandate the committee to, among other things, examine and comment on policy matters affecting the ministries covered by them; and discuss and review the government’s recurrent capital budget estimates and make recommendations thereof.

The Scope

The report covers vote 108, the Ministry Of Gender, Labour and Social Development; and vote 124, the Equal Opportunities Commission. It highlights the following aspects:

The sector performance for the financial year-

THE SPEAKER: The Members can read the scope, the methodology. 

MS KOMUHANGI: I go to page 11. I thought we would look at the challenges and constraints of the sector. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. 

MS KOMUHANGI: We go to 7.01.The ministry reported the following challenges and constraints:
1. 	Inadequate staff to implement activities especially in key departments like labour, productivity and employment. 
2. 	Perennial underfunding-

THE SPEAKER: It seems hon. Mudiimi has a problem. What is it, hon. Mudiimi?

MR MUDIIMI: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural issue. We are looking at a ministerial statement report but on the attachment where members appended their signatures, I have seen “Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development who have endorsed the report, the petition of Uganda’s women who were taken to Iraq.” So, I am inquiring which report we are dealing with.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have moved ahead of us. Please, present the report.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me hope it is not a mistake. If it is, we shall rectify it –(Interjections)– the Speaker has already guided. We will put it right when we get there.

2. 	Perennial underfunding has limited the ministry’s effort to effectively perform its mandate.

3. 	Inadequate funding to facilitate monitoring and evaluation of programmes under the mandate of the sector. 

4. 	The absence of a constituted industrial court makes it difficult to resolve a backlog of industrial disputes.

Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues will look at the following planned outputs per department. I will now move to observations and recommendations:

Office Premises of the Ministry

The committee observed that the ministry continues to pay exorbitant amounts of money for the rent of office premises in Simbamanyo House yet it has vast land under remand homes, youth centres, rehabilitation centres, among others. This land is currently being misappropriated and misused. The ministry could put up office buildings on one of the pieces of land. This would save Government billions of shillings. 

The committee reiterates its previous recommendation that the ministry should find a permanent home and stop renting office premises. 

The committee further notes and recommends that the ministry should keep a proper record of its properties scattered all over the country and put them to proper use.

Structure of the Labour Department

The committee noted that the inclusion of labour as a department in the ministry is a disservice to the labour industry in this country. They noted that labour issues are distinct and, therefore, require a fully-fledged ministry so that the mandate can be fully met. This was a major recommendation in the restructuring report of the public service ministry. 

The committee further noted that the appointment of labour officers was decentralised but there are no labour officers in most districts yet employees in different organisations in the districts are exposed to very hazardous conditions of work. Even in the districts where there are labour inspectors, they do not seem to give reports back to the centre. 

The committee further observes that there is understaffing in the department of labour. Out of the 48 approved posts in the department of occupational health and safety, only 21 are filled leaving 27 posts vacant. The committee was concerned that there are some well qualified officers at lower levels yet the middle administrative positions remain vacant, with the ministry reporting a high labour turnover in the department arising from externally recruited staff. 

The committee noted that promoting the already existing staff, some of whom have served for over seven years and have the adequate academic qualifications, is a better option for filling the vacant positions with staff that are more likely to stay. 

The committee recommends that Government should create a standalone ministry of labour, so as to have a one-stop centre for issues of labour and employment. 

The committee further recommends that employment of labour officers should be re-centralised. It also recommends that the ministry, in liaison with Public Service Commission, should make deliberate efforts to promote already existing staff.

Occupational Health and Safety

The committee was informed that the ministry developed two project proposals namely: 
i) 	Promotion of health workforce employment and productivity project.
ii) 	Strengthening safeguards, safety and health in the work places. 

The proposals for the projects on strengthening safeguards, safety and health at work places was approved by Government and subsequently, the Ministry of Finance allocated only Shs 2 billion yet the said project has the potential to generate non-tax revenue of about Shs 20 billion per financial year. The department is currently understaffed but collects approximately Shs 500,000,000. 

The committee also observed that scientists under occupational health and safety are underpaid yet other scientists under the Ministry of Public Service have had their salaries increased. As a result, the commissioner and assistant commissioner for safety were recruited but they left within a month of recruitment. 

The committee recommends that Government should consider adequate financing for the above projects so as to benefit from its full potential. 

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that occupational safety and health should be made a fully-fledged autonomous agency to enable it execute the mandate stipulated in the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2006. 

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should improve the salaries of all scientists in the country across the board to prevent preference for some institutions over the others.

Externalisation of Labour 

The committee observed that externalisation of labour is a good idea but it notes that in Uganda, some of the companies that export our labour are dubious. They take Ugandans abroad and expose them to all kinds of danger and exploitation. 

The committee was informed that Government is working towards making the contracts for Ugandans officially going to work abroad tripartite, that is, signatories to the agreement will be between the company exporting the labour, the employee and the employer. Government is also trying to get into bilateral agreements with the countries where our labour is deployed. 

The committee recommends that the companies that subjected Ugandans to torturous and inhumane jobs without their consent should be punished. These companies must also rescue the Ugandans who are still suffering abroad on their account. 

The committee also recommends that Government should streamline the exportation of Ugandan labour. The licensing of these companies should be halted until a policy is in place.

The Industrial Court

The committee noted that although the Industrial Court has been in operation for some time now, no activities are currently taking place and yet there is a big backlog of cases. The committee was informed that the recruitment for positions in the Industrial Court had commenced. The committee recommends that the appointment of a substantive judge for the Industrial Court should be expedited.

Expanding Social Protection Programme

The committee was informed that Uganda signed a memorandum of understanding with development partners, that is, Irish Aid, DFID and UNICEF, to implement the social protection programme. The committee is glad to note that Government provided for the counterpart funding of this project this financial year, 2013/2014, as per the committee recommendation. 

The committee was, however, informed that the pilot stage that was agreed on has since ended. In April 2012, a phased roll-out plan for SAGE was proposed to cover the whole country. In financial year 2012/2013, Shs 36,000,000,000 was planned to cover 25 more districts under Government of Uganda funding. This money was not provided for in the budget. The ministry reported it in the ministerial policy statement as an unfunded priority. 

Recommendation: Government should find money to rollout these programmes to districts in a phased manner. The criteria for choosing the districts should be very clear to the country and each district should be fully covered before moving to another district. This will help curb tension and dissatisfaction among groups that have not yet benefited from the programme. 

The committee further recommends that the ministry gives a report on the progress of this project to Parliament and Minister of Finance gives a statement on the financing of the rollout and future implementation plan of the project.

Street Children

The committee was concerned about the continuous presence of street children in Uganda. The committee was informed that the phenomena of street children has both push and pull factors. The push factors are those that force the children out of their homes and the pull factors are those that entice them to stay on the streets. The push factors include poverty, lack of education facilities and famine, while the pull factors include some NGOs and members of the public that give inducements to the children to stay on the streets in form of both material and financial hand-outs. 

A special committee was put in place in the Office of Prime Minister to find a way of dealing with the problem. Most of the children are from Bokora County. Government is in the process of setting up Koblin Training Centre in Lorengechora sub-county. However, the process is temporarily halted because the contractor abandoned the site; so, it cannot materialise until next year. 

Kampala City Council Authority is supposed to take away the children, counsel them and keep them off the streets but they do not have the money. However, there are plans to temporarily keep the children in Kampiringisa when funds allow. They will be kept in an area separate from the juvenile offenders. The places where they currently sleep are known and will be destroyed because they have no sanitary facilities and are a health risk.

The problem of street children is multi-sectoral and includes sectors like the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that should ensure food security, and the Uganda Police that should ensure that the children do not leave their home areas without valid reasons, among others.  

The committee noted that interventions to take these children off the streets have in the past backfired with the children returning to the streets shortly after they have been taken away. The committee observes that the implication of this trend is that the streets offer better opportunities for them than their homes. 

The committee recommends that Government:

1. 	Sensitises the public to desist from giving the street children hand-outs hence making the streets hostile to them;

2. 	Ensures that the push factors causing the children to prefer the streets to homes are dealt with using interventions like NUSAF;

3. 	Provides these children with opportunities to guarantee them a productive future;

4. 	Finds ways of eliminating the problem of street children in the entire country.

Cultural Institutions

Buganda’s Position on the Shs 5million for Cultural Leaders
The committee was informed that the Kingdom of Buganda declined to take the monthly Shs5million that Government allocated to all cultural leaders.However, there is no documentary evidence to the effect.The committee recommends that the ministry should get evidence of the Kingdom of Buganda declining to receive this money so that the said funds can be put to other use.

Inequalities Cited in the Treatment of Cultural Institutions
The committee noted that Government treats different cultural institutions differently. Some institutions are facilitated with vehicles while others are not; some have palaces constructed for them while others do not.

The committee observes that this kind of differential treatment causes conflicts among different tribal groupings with some feeling superior to their colleagues. The committee notes that this does not promote national unity. 

The committee was informed that the law governing cultural institutions is very clear on what the entitlements of the institutions are. However, it commits Government in areas it cannot afford and it is unrealistic. 

The committee,therefore, recommends that the law on cultural institutions should be amended in a more realistic manner, with a view of having all cultural institutions treated equally.

Uganda National Cultural Centre (UNCC)

The UNCC receives Shs 27 million from the Ministry of Gender as wage subvention. It collects approximately Shs1 billion annually from various activities, which take place at the facility. The committee noted glaring inconsistencies in the amount of money collected by the centre and the way it is utilised. 

The committee was concerned that UNCC has not had its accounts audited since 2001. They do not have a corporate plan and have had sensitive positions unfilled for some time. These include auditor, accountant and head of finance and Administration. Currently, even the Executive Director is in acting capacity. 

The UNCC has been run down and conditions have greatly deteriorated. The committee also observed that different tenants of UNCC are treated differently. 

The committee recommends that the current board should not take part in the on-going recruitment process because they have been superintending over the current mess at the institution. Their motives are, therefore, not clear. 

The committee further recommends that the current board of the UNCC should be disbanded and a forensic audit be conducted on the institution. The committee also recommends that the tenancy of the properties of the UNCC should be streamlined and regularised.

Establishment of the Kiswahili Council
The committee notes that the establishment of the Kiswahili Council remains a slow process in spite of it being a requirement by all the East African states to establish a Kiswahili council for better delivery of services. Out of the five member states, it is only Uganda which does not have the council. 

The committee has made several recommendations for the establishment of this council. The committee reiterates its previous recommendation that Government should expedite the establishment of the Kiswahili Council.

Vote 124 - Equal Opportunities Commission

The Equal Opportunities Commission is a body corporate established by the Equal Opportunities Act, 2007 in accordance with Article 32(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The commission was set up to give effect to the state’s constitutional mandate to eliminate discrimination and inequalities against any individual or group of persons on the ground of sex, age, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, health status, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability. 

The commission’s function, in brief, is to enforce compliance with legislation, affirmative action and inclusion into programmesand plans by all on the basis of equal opportunities.Madam Speaker, I invite the colleagues to read on and allow me move to the challenges faced by the commission on page 27.

The commission is faced with following challenges:   
        ◦ Understaffing due lack of funds to have a full structure;
        ◦ The commission does not have field vehicles; 
        ◦ Lack of specialised equipment for PWDs such as audio-visual,braille and software for the blind; and
        ◦ Limited accessibility to the office and, therefore, a need for an outlet in the heart of Kampala for accessibility and visibility to their constituents.

Observations and Recommendations	

The committee was happy to note that the previous recommendations by Parliament requesting that the commission be granted a self-accounting status was granted. However, the committee notes that the commission was allocated only Shs 1.73 billion, which was hardly enough for the commission to carry out its activities, despite the fact that the certificate of financial implication issued in 2007 stated that the operation requirement was Shs 3.8 billion.

The committee recommends that Government should adequately facilitate the commission to carry out its mandate, to avoid a situation where salaries are paid to employees but they do not have the facilities to carry out the job for which they are employed.

Constitution of the Commission

The committee was concerned that the commission is not fully constituted because it currently has only four commissioners out of five. The committee recommends that Government expedites the appointment of the fifth commissioner.

Human Resource Gap

The committee was informed that the current budget does not address the human resource gap. While the commission had budgeted for Shs 817,803,000to cater for salaries for the approved macrostructure of 46 personnel, the Ministry of Finance scaled down this salary component to Shs 453,018,000 to pay for only the staff in posts. 

The commission has had to source for funding to pay salaries of staff from development partners. The Democratic Governance Facility (DGF) has undertaken to finance the salary for the 13 staff to be recruited for two years from 2013 to 2015. It is hoped that Government of Uganda will be able to pay their salaries thereafter. 

The committee was not comfortable with the fact that the commission was in the process of recruiting key staff even up to the level of Under Secretary with the help of Democratic Governance Facility,and that the salaries of the staff in question would be paid by the development partner for a period of two years.

The committee noted that there was no guarantee that Government would be able to take over from DGF after the expiry of this project.The committee recommends that Government should provide the commission with sufficient funding to cater for the salaries of all the staff.

Work Methods of the Commission 

The committee expressed concern about the fact that the commission is by law supposed to produce annual reports but no report has been produced ever since the commission was established. The committee noted that the annual reports would have formed a basis for the allies of the commission, like the committee, to advocate for them.

The committee was also concerned about the work methods of the commission. They observed that the commission seemed to have adopted methods of negotiating with implementing agencies on matters of imbalances and inequities in the society. The committee is of the view that the commission should be more assertive and demand that issues of imbalances and inequalities are addressed by these agencies and put in place mechanisms to ensure that the issues in question are not overlooked. They note that the issues of inequality are mandatory and not negotiable.

The committee also noted that if the commission was more assertive, they would have been able to get more donor support for their activities. The commission informed the committee that they are trying to make it mandatory that government bodies comply with the issues of gender and equity in their budgets by being issued with a gender equity certificate before the budgets can be approved by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development through the inclusion of a section to that effect in the Public Finance Act. 

The committee recommends that the commission should produce annual reports in accordance with the Equal Opportunities Commission Act, 2007. The committee further recommends that the commission should become more assertive so as to make its work visible. 

Method of Disseminating Information by the Commission

The committee was concerned that many of the people targeted by the commission are illiterate. They noted that it is important for this commission to translate the different messages to local languages and disseminate them in different ways like print, visual and audio. 

The commission assured the committee that one of the ways they will disseminate information is through jingles with simplified information, conduct barazas in all areas of the country, and generally use different approaches to reach different people. The commission also informed the committee that this year’s budget requested for vehicles to enable them go to affected people because the people in question do not have resources to come to them. 

The committee recommends that Government should facilitate the commission to perform its mandate and implement the activities according to plan.

Conclusion 

Madam Speaker, I think these figures will await the corrigenda report. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and your committee. (Applause) You did not address the question of the signatures. 

MS KYOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, I must apologise to the House. I think because we were preparing these reports concurrently, by mistake this was attached to this one, but we can put this right. My apologies to honourable colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. You have three minutes each. Honourable members, if you contributed on the other one, let other Members speak, please.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking procedural guidance from you. I remember very well a week or two ago, the Deputy Speaker allowed us to lay on the Table our alternative responses to the ministerial policy statements. I have also seen colleagues present alternative policy statements to committees. 

The report that has just been presented here is from my department as shadow minister for youth. I remember very well laying the alternative response for this very sector. I have waited for the committee to invite me to present this alternative policy statement and my colleague, the Shadow Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, is here and has also presented her alternative policy statement. 

The procedural guidance I am seeking from you is whether taxpayers’ money has been spent or wasted to facilitate the shadow Cabinet to prepare these alternative responses because I do not see it benefiting this process of ministerial policy statements.

THE SPEAKER: You are asking me to rule on issues that happened in your committee where I do not sit. I do not know whether the report was given. I do not know what happened to it.

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, to be honest to this House, that report was never tabled to the committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Was it sent to the committee?

MS KOMUHANGI: It was never sent to the committee, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe there was an omission.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, I think this could be resolved more neatly. A policy has been changed; we were told to lay our papers here by 15th July every year and we did not comply with that because some ministerial statements delayed. Several statements were laid on the Table here and the Clerk was supposed to disseminate them to the committees. 

Some members of the shadow Cabinet have been to the committees to defend their statements and all those clerks had a letter from the Speaker’s office sending those statements to them. What happened to this particular committee? We need it neatly resolved. Somebody must be held responsible, Madam Speaker. 

MS THEOPISTA NABULYA: In as far as the shadow minister is concerned -I think it is hon. Winifred Kiiza - she fully participated with us and she has never brought any documents or anything to do with that report that you claim to have tabled. Thank you. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, maybe to put the record straight, I was here when the Deputy Speaker was requesting for alternative policies and he said that the policies which are laid on the Table should be submitted to the relevant committees. When those committees are discussing the policy statements, they must be put together and brought to the House so that we debate in tandem and pass those policy statements. 

I think every Member, whether in the Opposition or Government, belongs to those committees. It is the responsibility of the members within those committees to bring those policy statements, even shadow ministers. So, I do not see why we should demand for it from the Clerk. It is our responsibility as Members of Parliament to see to it that alternative policies are put forward when debating these statements. These policies are for everybody in the country. I do not see why we should blame the clerks. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe we may have to capture this proposal in our Rules of Procedure because I think it is hanging.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, rule 136 says, “Alternative policy statements. Shadow ministers shall submit their alternative policy statements to Parliament by the 15thday of July every year.”

THE SPEAKER: Now after submitting to Parliament, what happens? Is the committee to pick them up and go?  

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Government Chief Whip has cited rule 136, which is okay. On the 7thAugust, the Deputy Speaker said, when he was chairing, that when we have presented and laid our alternative statements on the Table, the next step would be for the respective shadow ministers to be invited to the committees to defend their statements. 

Madam Speaker, I want to report to you that in the committee where I am shadow minister, that is, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, hon. Wafula-Oguttu, hon. Olanya and myself have already defended our statements. So, I expected that in the methodology on page 3, we would have a reflection of the alternative response of the shadow minister. 

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, I respect my colleague, the shadow minister, but I believe if you are a member of the committee, there is no need for the chairperson to invite you. You would rather present your statement to the committee and then it is discussed. 

I believe in the wisdom of the Deputy Speaker, when he made that reference, he meant that when the alternative policy statements are presented on the Floor of the House, they would be discussed concurrently with the ministerial policy statements so that the committee can come up with one report, which would be debated here. I do not agree with my colleague that they should have been invited because they are members of the committee and they should have discussed the ministerial policy statements in the committees. (Interruption)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, we have just explained how the process was. Some of us were invited by the clerk to the committee to go and defend our papers. So, is the honourable member in order to disagree yet the whole process was done formally following our Rules of Procedure? When we lay a document on the Table here, where should it go? 

Madam Speaker, some of us are not members of the committees where we are shadow ministers so we have to be invited there. 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the best way to solve this is by having the Rules of Procedure reviewed. When you look at the rule, it stops at laying it on the Table. So, if the alternative policy statement was laid on the Table, it was the responsibility of the clerk attached to that committee to take copies to the committee so that they discuss the ministerial policy statements in relation to the alternative policy statements. If the committee finds it fit, then they would invite the shadow minister to come and defend it. 

So, I would like to move that we review our Rules of Procedure so that it is equally stated. This was guidance given by the Deputy Speaker that the committee should consider the ministerial policy statements alongside the alternative statements. So, if a committee does not do it, it is not written anywhere in our Rules of Procedure so, how do we proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are learning, and that involves walking and falling. I think this is something we have learnt. We needed to have completed the process in our Rules of Procedure so that the clerks are clear, the shadow ministers and the chairpersons are clear on what to do. We regret that omission. However, let us proceed. We urge the rules committee to formalise the process explicitly so that it is wellknown to everybody.

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, what do we do for this year, because it is painful? We take a lot of time and effort to prepare reasonable responses. Instead of quarrelling with Government every time, I would pray that you allow the shadow ministers to make a response, however short, at least in summary, so that we do not lose a whole year without responding. 

THE SPEAKER:  I was going to allow them to say something. I am not closing their door. 

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, hon. Kiiza is not the shadow minister; she is a member of my committee and the shadow minister is hon. Florence Ibi. Like I said, this anomaly is crosscutting. It is not only in my committee but also in other committees. It was not intended. Otherwise, we would be very glad to consider the alternative position. 

7.31
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a former national female youth MP and I know that we were a sector in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I am also a Member of Parliament representing women and I know that women fall under the Ministry of Gender. However, when I peruse through this report, I do not see anything on the youth. We have talked about the youth fund, we have talked about the youth education scheme, we are looking forward to holding women council elections, but I do not see it here. 

In my constituency, women are asking me when they will relinquish their positions to other leaders because they are tired of holding the same positions. Is the Ministry of Gender only in charge of labour, PWDs and cultural institutions? If not, is this report comprehensive or should we expect another report on those sectors, which are not mentioned here? I am not comfortable debating this when the youth of this country, who deserve maximum attention from this Government and the women –(Interruption)

MR BAKKA: As if that is not enough, the committee has now come up with a proposal for a fully-fledged ministry of labour and yet we have been talking about its weaknesses all this time. You can see that the issues of the youth are disappearing from the forefront. 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, this report is a reflection of what transpired when the ministry interfaced with the committee to discuss the social development sector policy statement. In this statement, all the issues you are talking about are there - the women, the youth. Now, this report –(Interruption)– Wait, please. I am saying that in the policy statement, this report captures what transpired as issues to be dealt with. If anything was not captured, then that means there was consensus between the ministry and the committee and there was no need to capture it in this report.  

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I respect hon. Rukutana but is it in order for him to say that the young people and women of this country are not a priority to the ministry, to the extent that a parliamentary report can be submitted here without capturing issues of those groups?

THE SPEAKER: Committee chairperson, what happened to the youth, the elderly, PWDs and other workers?

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, it is because I was asked to summarise; you actually asked me to move on and this made me skip a lot of things midway. Look at all the sectors, for instance on page 4 under the performance in the financial year 2012/13, and see what happened under community mobilisation and empowerment – (Ms Mariam Nalubega rose_) – hold on, honourable member  – mainstreaming gender and rights.  Everything is under there. Even when you look at social protection of vulnerable groups, on page 5 it is talking about the youth. 

The Youth Education Scheme is under Ministry of Education not under Ministry of Gender, and the Youth Fund is under Ministry of Finance and not in our ministerial policy statement. The muchtalked about youth livelihood project is not officially with us; it is still in proposal form and that is why the committee could not have considered this comprehensively. (Interjections) The Youth Venture Capital Fund is with the Ministry of Finance. 

MS SAFIA NALULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would agree with the committee chairperson when she talks about missing out on some things because she had to summarise. However, there is no way she could have omitted something on the disability grants because it must be appearing in the ministerial policy statement. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, you recall that in the Eighth Parliament when we were considering the Income Tax Act, we even put a provision to cater for incentives for those employers who employ persons with disability. You know, there was a very big debate here and we zeroed in on reviewing that provision in the Income Tax Act where we are providing for any employer who employs five percent disabled people to get a tax waiver of two percent. We also provided for a disability grant of Shs 30 million to each district but as we stand now, you go to the districts but the money is not reaching there. 

When I was consulting the technical people, they told me that ever since the districts were split, they would share the Shs 30 million. If the district was split into three, then Shs 30 million would be divided by three. This money does not make sense at all and there is nothing in this report, even the committee chairperson admitted.

I would like to recommend that as the budget committee is reconsidering the figures, this issue should also be considered. The ministry should also consider this grant to have a framework like that one of the Youth Livelihood.

Lastly, on this issue of promotion of labour, productivity and employment on page 5, the training ground for the disabled people was the rehabilitation centres. If you – (Ms Komuhangi rose_) – No, I am finishing, committee chairperson. Rehabilitation centres were training grounds but one rehabilitation centre, like Ocoko, which was serving West Nile, when they asked the ministry where they lay, there was confusion; they do not know whether they have to get support from the Ministry of Gender or Ministry of Finance. These issues must be clarified in this report.

MS BABA DIRI: Madam Speaker, I am going to defend our report. (Laughter) Yes, I belong to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. There are very many issues in this policy statement and definitely, the committee has tried its best to identify as many issues as possible and definitely, the human error –(interjections)– Yes, listen. 

Secondly – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MS BABA DIRI: May I continue? Next week –(Interjections)– What is the point of order about? May I finish my input? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, may I know whether the issues raised by hon. Safia Nalule are in the policy statement? Did the minister speak about them in the policy statement?

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, on the disability fund, the submission for the financial year was all remitted and the funds reached the districts. The only issue was how this fund is being utilised. The former committee did visit the districts and they told me they had a report, which I have asked for but not yet seen. However, the disability fund is being implemented and the only problem is the framework for implementation and utilisation – that is where the hiccup is and the abuse is taking place. Otherwise, it is considered in the policy statement.

Regarding the women, when you look at page 5, it says that the three councils – youth, women and PWDS - were supported with Shs 928 million for wage and nonwage submissions. This is where we have facilitation for women councils and for the elections of the women councils. It had been handled together with the LC I chairpersons the other day. (Interjections) It is on page 5.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the policy statement contains those issues then that is fine; you can address them. They do have to all be here; otherwise, that would mean that the committee would reproduce the whole report. So, if they are in the policy statement, it is okay.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, can I make this clarification? Not only does the policy statement contain those specific issues but when we interacted with the committee, we duly and exhaustively considered them. It is my submission that what the committee reports on are only those areas where there are inconsistencies and disagreements. Otherwise, all those issues raised, like the youth, women, disabled and elderly, are all covered in our ministerial policy statement and they were discussed and agreed upon.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am satisfied that the minister spoke about all those issues; let us now proceed.

7.43
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for providing a summary of the ministerial policy statement. However, I have issues with the committee report, especially on some of the issues.

I am looking at page 7 - key planned outputs 2012/13 - and under bullet two I see 2000 stakeholders were mobilised to commemorate International Literacy Day. On another page, I see 3000 to commemorate the International Women’s day. Madam Speaker, we have always faced challenges when we come to such days. So, I would like to know, how are these people mobilised? 

Two, sometime back, Government introduced an allowance for the elderly. I think it is about Shs 20,000. It has been going on in very few districts and I know that every year, at least one person qualifies to get that specific allowance. So, I would like to know when I should expect this to go to Buvuma, the district I represent, and how those people who qualify are catered for.

Lastly, on page 17, which is on cultural institutions, I see Buganda’s position on the Shs 5 million for cultural leaders. The committee recommends that the ministry should get evidence of the Kingdom of Buganda declining to receive this money so that the said funds can be put to other use. This reminds me of when I applied for a job somewhere and after the interviews, I received a letter saying, “if you are ready to take up the job, please confirm in writing.” So, my question is, was there a situation where Buganda or the King of Buganda- (Member timed out.)

7.46
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their report. My observation is from page 15, expanding social protection programmes. The committee recommends that the programme should be rolled out in a phased manner and also the criteria for choosing should be very clear, which is okay. However, when they say that districts that are benefitting should be fully covered before it is moved to another district, this becomes a problem.

Only 14 districts have benefitted so far. In the last financial year, there was a plan for 25 districts to benefit but they did not.In Uganda, we have a total of 112 districts;if we wait for a district that is benefitting to benefit fully and yet even the first 14 districts have not yet benefitted, when will the rest of the districts be covered?

This is bringing a political issue. In my district, I found somebody who would like to unseat me moving with the photographs of beneficiaries from districts that are benefitting. They were saying, “your honourable MP does not know how to lobby and now other people are benefiting; you can see them eating and dancing.” We have to revisit this policy.I would prefer at least all the districts - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Members of Parliament from Busoga are in trouble as no district in Busoga is under that programme.

7.49
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee. However, I have some concerns about this report. 

On page 12, the committee did recommend that the appointment of labour officers be recentralised but they have not given the reasons why. What disturbs me is that the system is decentralised and we have the district service commissions mandated with that obligation. My humble question is: why doesn’t the committee make recommendations in terms of empowering the district service commissions regarding their mandate?

Secondly, I worry about the issue of halting all companies exporting labour abroad. It is the ministry that does register most of the companies exporting the labour.What I find very disturbing is: how could they accept that obligation without a policy in place? We have had so many pieces of information where many Ugandans are taken abroad to conduct markets –actually, we are getting disturbing information that some Ugandans are acting as prostitutes. I would like to ask how these Ugandans can be protected in terms of their rights- (Member timed out.)

7.51
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting their report. 

I have a few comments from the report and to begin with, on the issue of street children on page 17. Street life exposes our children to drugs. It further exposes our children to rape, defilement and HIV, among others. In this era of UPE and USE, it is very sad to see that while other children are in class, some children are busy on the streets begging.

It is also wellknown that there are specific people who bring these people to the streets, especially to Kampala, from Karamoja. I really do not know why these people cannot be dealt with so that they stop this kind of behaviour.

I also want to comment on externalisation of labour. This is a very serious issue, and these days it is more serious especially to Ugandans. There is a case where a young boy was taken to India and given drugs to make him sleep. When he woke up, he had been operated and one of his kidneys was removed. That is a very serious issue. 

Like my colleague said, most of our girls who are taken abroad are promised luxurious and well-paying jobs and they end up being used sexually. Most of them have contracted diseases.Because they are in foreign countries, they do not know anyone and do not have the resources – (Member timed out.)

7.53
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): I thank you very much. I want to comment on the delay to establish the Kiswahili Council in Uganda. As a partner state in the East African Community, we had been given the opportunity to house the Kiswahili Commission as a country. However, because we had not established a Kiswahili Council, we lost out on this opportunity. The Kiswahili Commission was later relocated to Zanzibar. As a country that subscribes to and even chairs the EAC, we have ended up losing that opportunity. Otherwise, I still believe that if we had established that commission, it would have created jobs for our children in Uganda.

Secondly, I want to comment on the establishment of the cultural institutions. The criteria in which cultural institutions are being established to some extent is going to breed divisionin some areas. As I speak, in Bugisu the Bamasaba have got a cultural leader called Umukukha, which is a rotational position. Each person serves for only five years before another clan within the Bamasaba takes over– (Interjections) – Yes, only five years and you hand over. 

Surprisingly, however, one of the districts has broken away from the Bamasaba. As I talk, on 31stof this month, they will be inaugurating their own king. That is the county of Manjiya –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for you to conclude your speech about the Umukukha.

MS KAYAGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Umukhungu who is going to be inaugurated on 31stis going to lead a group called the Babukusu. This group falls in Manafwa District, which is not part of Bududa District. So, I would like to seek clarification from the minister on what criteria we are using to accord such institutions the status of a cultural institution. We are also hearing that you are in agreement with this establishment and that you will be attending the inauguration. (Laughter) Those are our fears. So, can you help us?

7.57
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the committee for the good work done. On the issue of street children, the committee has made some observations and that is fine, but to me it looks like they only concentrated in Kampala; they do not seem to have gone to the other parts of Uganda. A case in point is Lira District where we have a number of street children.I know that the district has been struggling very much with this problem of street kids but to no avail. 

One thing that the committee has not realised – we know there are push and pull factors, which is fine, but we realise that there are people who entice those children to get onto the streets where they have made it a business. I do not know whether they identified such people.

Another issue is about these scraps and bottles that the street kids take to sell to earn a living. They are sustained on the streets with no problem. What has the committee suggested to do away with those children who keep selling empty bottles and scraps to the dealers? It is important that we do away with such because those are the things that make them earn a living on the streets.

Madam Speaker, when we talk about externalisation of labour, sincerely, I appreciate the fact that the committee has realised that there are some companies that deal in exporting labour but that they are dubious. These are the people who employ our Ugandans abroad and while there, they expose them to hazardous conditions. This is the reason why Ugandans are being used as prostitutes in Malaysia and other countries. 

In their recommendations, the committee says that such companies should be punished. To me, I think they should be identified – what are these companies? How many people have they so far taken out? How many have died from there? How many have safely returned to Uganda? They should be blacklisted –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just conclude that sentence.

MS ONGOM: It is my opinion that if they employ, then the lists of the people that they have so far recorded from Uganda should also be taken to the respective embassies in those respective countries. This is because embassies usually only come to know about the existence of these people after they have encountered problems. So, let us have our embassies have knowledge of the presence of these people in their respective areas.

7.59
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue I would like to talk about also relates to what the honourable member has just been talking about. That is about street children. 

My concerns are about the men and women who are on the streets of Kampala. We can wake up one morning and send those children to places like Kampiringisa or wherever we can take them, but I think the committee underrated the issue of men and women who are always on the streets. We can take away the kids, but these men and women will still stand a threat to some of us who move along those streets either during the day or at night.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the issue of street children is bigger than what the committee has talked about. Yes, there are both push and pull factors, but I think that as an economist, I say that the serious issue is about the economic push and pull.There is some information that the committee received, that a special committee was established at the Office of the Prime Minister to find ways of dealing with the problem. The information indicated that most of the children are from Bokora. So, as I was seated down here, I asked myself why most of these kids are not from places like Mbarara or Jinja or Kamuli? I am just citing examples.

Now that I have cited the serious factor being financial, the only solution I suggest to the committee to consider is to put up a serious affirmative action programme in the areas where these children come from. This will help their parents and all the people in these areas to have something serious to do to cater for their children. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.02
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to address myself to page 12 of the report where the committee recommends that we should get a standalone ministry of labour. This recommendation cannot work because on the Floor of this Parliament, many committees have been asking for independent ministries. We have asked for a standalone ministry in charge of Kampala. We have also asked for a standalone ministry for the youth and ICT.Now we are asking for one for labour affairs. At this rate, I do not know how many ministers we will end up with.

Madam Speaker, I think we have some serious problem somewhere. Why is work not going on? Last year, when other members and I visited Kenya, we went to the Ministry of Labour and I can tell you it is the same ministry that deals with youth, disability and women affairs and everything going on at least at an average level. So, where is our problem? Maybe the committee has to go a little bit deeper and look for where the problem is and advise the ministry accordingly. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BAKKA: I concur with you absolutely, that the issue of creating a ministry is not necessary. The problem actually is funds. If you look at the total budget for the ministry, it is only Shs 24 billion. This is already an underfunded ministry; and now, the committee thinks that creating another ministry will increase funds. The problem is that we do not have funds in the country. So, the idea of creating a ministry cannot be a solution. Proceed. (Laughter)

MS ALUM: Thank you for that information. I would like to inform my colleague that now the issue of money is going to be even worse –(Member timed out).

8.04
MR ISAIAH JOHNY SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County, East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to react to two issues, one from page 29 and the other from page 30. The committee recommends that Government should provide the Equal Opportunities Commission with sufficient funding. The next one is that the Equal Opportunities Commission should be very assertive in doing their work. 

The Equal Opportunities Commission is very important to us. I was once a member of the equal opportunities committee and when we travelled all over the country with the commission, they were identifying issues of inequalities in regions. If you were to move and you look at Uganda right now, Uganda is full of imbalances; Uganda is full of inequalities in all its settings. Look at the job sector. Look at the employment patterns. You can move around offices and ministries and see the officers there. You will definitely discover that you have got a very big inequality problem. 

Look at the constitution of our districts. You will get a district with one constituency and you will get another district with maybe five constituencies like Kibaale. There is a very big issue of inequality. Move to our constituencies; you get a constituency like Ntenjeru with two sub-counties and you get a constituency with about 21 sub-counties. It is the Equal Opportunities Commission, which can help us and bring out all these issues of inequality.

It will be very important for us as a nation that we move together as one country. We may want to brush it off, but look at the whole of eastern Uganda, Madam Speaker, we have only three Cabinet ministers and when you go to the great Bushenyi you will see six ministers. (Member timed out.)

8.04
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH (MrBernard Atiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I want to assume my docket as shadow minister for youth. I would like also to raise, once again, the issues raised by hon. Bakka and hon. Mariam Nalubega, the former national youth representative in this august House. 

While the committee did not find space to accommodate issues of the youth, as shadow minister I have 21 pages of issues that concern the youth that arise from my reading of the ministerial policy statement. Madam Speaker, I will be laying this on the Table so that this august House can capture it and probably, it will form part of the final report. 

The gist of the matter in this Opposition alternative policy statement concerning the youth is that the National Youth Policy is obsolete and, therefore, we propose a comprehensive review of the National Youth Policy to deal with the challenges that face the youth, which have been highlighted in this document - 17 of them. Also, my ministry has highlighted 18 possible priority areas that can address these challenges, which I would like to read. 

Madam Speaker, we propose education and skills training, which is also in the Government policy, that should be supported; science research and technology; information and communication technology –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to make your proposals.

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, we propose youth and employment; entrepreneurial development; youth in modern agriculture; gender mainstreaming; environment; fighting HIV/AIDS; networking and partnership; mentoring; arts and culture; governance, democracy and leadership; sports and recreation; youth in conflict prevention and peace building; youth and vulnerability; youth patriotism and volunteerism; lastly, nationalism and conscientization of the youth.

I beg to lay on the Table the Opposition alternative policy statement on the social development sector, particularly for the youth, for the year 2013/2014. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: I direct the Clerk to reflect it on the Hansard.

(Full text of the Opposition Alternative Policy Statement on the Youth to appear in the Hansard Sessional Committee Reports)

8.10
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to improve on the recommendation of the committee on page 14 that Government, through the ministry, presents a comprehensive report to this Parliament. This report should actually tell us the companies that are involved in the exportation of labour and their profiles. They should tell us which companies or individuals are importing labour. They should tell us the terms and conditions under which Ugandans are being imported and exported. The report should tell us the role of our foreign missions and whether they are actually aware of Ugandans who have been exported to work abroad.

Madam Speaker, the rumour going around is that these are companies, which used to export those who were recruited to protect American missions and interests. When you look around, the rumours going around are that the companies are actually dubious. If we are not careful, we are entering into the era of slave trade. (Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, hon. Yaguma, for giving way. The concern of hon. Yaguma about companies exporting Ugandans as slaves - I can call them slaves - has been on this Floor of Parliament more than three times. They were asking the ministry to provide information about the genuine companies-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of trafficking, we have two reports which are coming; we might have a deeper debate. There are two reports coming on Iraq. They are two reports, which touch on those issues. 

MR YAGUMA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, Government should not shy away from its responsibility of protecting the interests of its citizens, whether they are here or they are abroad.

8.13
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much, chairperson of the committee for this report. 

I want to start from a very important point of the economy; this country is getting more money through remittances of export of labour than even exports. So, as we talk about the dangers there, largely it is because as Government we have not invested in this Friesian cow where we get milk without a single investment.Dubai and other emirate counties have bilateral agreements where Government negotiates how many people can go there, and this is done between Government and Government, instead of having these third parties exploiting our people.We can get more money from that.

I do not think the Equal Opportunities Commission is doing its work. I come from one part of Uganda, which is endowed. It contributes a lot but it gets nothing from the centre. We need to seriously audit which parts benefit most and they should stop getting Government resources and we send them to areas which get nothing like Buliisa and I am sure very many others.
If we do not do that, we are going to have a problem. 

We are always saying that gender has no money. Government has no standard of dealing with these cultural institutions. How do you give billions to one region which is very developed and the regions, which have suffered most, are getting nothing? So, we need a standard. If this money was going through Ministry of Gender, they would be empowered. Even the street children we are talking about would not be there if every cultural institution was empowered to look after their poor, but we not have a standard; we give money because of political expedience and it is a very big problem. We need to work with the religious and cultural institutions and this matter of street kids could be history.(Member timed out)

8.15
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, District Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise. One is from page 16 on street children. I happen to sit on the committee for the presidency and I know that this issue of street kids is crosscutting.It is under the Ministry for Karamoja Affairs, which is under the Committee on Presidential Affairs.It is also under KCCA and also the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social and Development.All these people are asking for a budget to remove children from the streets; which ministry should we really fund for this activity? We should get clarification on this.

The other one is on cultural institutions - the issue that the honourable member talked about, that all the cultures tend to start cultural institutions because of many issues.Cultures differ. You remember there was confusion in Bundibugyo District, where I come from - the institution of the Rwenzururu versus the Bamba-Babwisi of Bundibugyo District. These are two different cultures. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda allows people to start cultural institutions; even though you are two and you agree that one person becomes your leader, the cultural institution allows you - (Interruption).

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I think it is pertinent that we give clarity on issues and statements that we make. The hon. Ntabazi is saying that there was the issue of Rwenzururu versus the Bamba. To me, her statement is misplaced.

There has not been any time where the Rwenzururu Kingdom is confronting the Bamba people. Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable member to bring a misplaced statement, insinuating that actually the Rwenzururu kingdom is against the Bamba? Is it in order for her to misinform the House?

THE SPEAKER: I think let her substantiate.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I represent the people of Bundibugyo where the Bamba and the Bakonjo live. I am a Mwamba by tribe married to Bakonjo; I understand these issues better than him because I live in both communities. So, I know what I am talking about. It is because I do not have time but I would have given you some history when he came here and mentioned something but I was not in the House. I wonder when he starts disrupting.

The point I was trying to bring out is that almost every tribe is trying to bring up a cultural institution and the Constitution allows this.We used to have a minister for culture. Whenever these issues arise, we do not have a real minister in charge of that docket like we used to have. (Member timed out.)

8.19
MR MICHAEL KAFABUSA WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its very good report. The issue of street children is not only in Kampala. We are experiencing this problem in Jinja, Mbale and Iganga. So, it is important that we focus ourselves beyond Kampala so as to address this problem. 

It is not only children; they do not come on their own accord to the streets. There are adults who have actually turned these children into a source of income. When you drive around, you see some of the adults hidden somewhere seated but they are sending these children to the streets to beg so that they take the money to them. So, we must also look at this problem from the point of view of adults who are pushing these children to streets so that we can solve this problem.

On the issue of cultural institutions, I agree with the committee in reviewing the law concerning cultural institutions. As we talk now, there are inequalities and I think as hon. Netalisire said, for us as Bamasaba we have a big challenge now. At one time, the Bukukha, which unites all the Bamasaba including those in Kenya, all these local councils met and they signed the constitution. If you are breaking away, that means you have to go back and the entire group of local councils must sit and either accept or not, but now we are already having a problem whereone district is creating another king. (Member timed out.)

8.21
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the committee’s recommendation and I want to make observations on some few sections.

On externalisation of labour, I would like to know from the honourable minister whether we have a databank of all the Ugandans who are working out. If we have this databank, how many of these Ugandans have been exported to go and work in some of these countries? 

I agree entirely with the committee’s report on inequalities cited in the treatment of cultural institutions. Recently, Government signed an agreement with one of the kingdoms namely, Buganda, and they pledged to compensate them for what they have been using.You all know that Bunyoro Kingdom is one of the oldest kingdoms in this country but the Government has up to today failed to pay back the reparations.I want to find out from the minister what plans you have; when are you going to compensate the Ugandans from Bunyoro? I will be happy if we can get that. I also want to request the Government to join the Banyoro in our case against Queen of England.

The third issue, which I want to find out from the minister and possibly the committee, is about the law we passed on female genital mutilation. We would like to know how far Government has gone in implementing this law.Every year, we see in the papers and read media releases about girls who are hiding or taking refuge in Kampala, some are running to other countries and the “surgeons”are preparing to go and operate, which is contrary to this law. Can the minister – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have seen those who still want to contribute but you will speak on the other three reports, which are coming tomorrow. I now want to invite the minister to respond to the policy issues.  

8.24
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Mary Karooro Okurut): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, andI thank the honourable members for those erudite questions. I will now beg your indulgence and answer some of them but the ones pertaining to labour, I will request hon. Rukutana to answer because he is the one in charge of that sector. I beg your indulgence.

Most of the questions were actually crosscutting.The first one is on what we call the SAGE money, which is being rolled out in 14 districts.Of course, everybody would want that money in their own districts, including yours truly, because there are very many testimonies that the money is doing a lot, but this is a pilot project.The ministry has now made a proposal that we roll it out to 24 more districts this financial year. The ministry is now producing a comprehensive rollout plan, which will be discussed with the Ministry of Finance and we are going to indicate when each of the districts in the country will be covered by what we call the SAGE programme –(Interjection)– can I take clarification or should I first finish? 

THE SPEAKER: No.

MS KAROORO OKURUT: There has been a question about the money to the Kingdom of Buganda. The kingdom returned the cheque and did not sign for the money. This is actually evidence of their refusal because the cheque was returned.However, we also intend to have dialogue with the kingdom because it is spelled out that this is their entitlement but –(Mr Okupa rose_)–  No, you can ask later on. 

The issue of the street children, as Members have pointed out, needs a multi-sectoral approach and this is what we have been doing. We have held meetings with the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs and KCCA and we want to get to the bottom or the root cause; unless we address the rootcause, we are really skirting on top.  

However, we have taken a lot of steps and we have agreed with KCCA - KCCA is bringing a bylaw - that in order to stop this, we should actually close the cash taps. We should be cruel in order to be kind to these street children, because it has been found out that there is a mafia group not just in Kampala but throughout the various towns of Uganda. These street children are not the ones getting that money; there are mafia who bring them.If you have a keen eye, for instance in Kampala at around lunch time, the mafia take away these children to take the money they have made during that time and then they bring them back.  

We are, therefore, not seated. We have visited Kampiringisa as a stopgap and Masulita, but at the end of the day we want these children re-united with their families.

On the Kiswahili Council, we agree totally, absolutely, that it should have started. 

The Equal Opportunities Commission and more funding - You know that all the recommendations that the committee has made, we entirely agree with them. So, even when you talk about the Equal Opportunities Commission getting more funding, we agree.Actually, we have already started putting on paper how much more money this Equal Opportunities Commission should get.  

Hon. Yaguma - this one will go to hon. Rukutana – about the companies that take children – (Interjections)–  Nobody asked about that, honourable. 

On the cultural institutions, if you come to our office, we have so many files now of people from different parts of Uganda asking for their cultural heads. What we are saying is, and we agree with the committee here, a law must be put in place, which can guide the formation of the cultural leaders. Otherwise, it will be more than one million and then – so, we are going to formulate a law that will regulate the formation of these cultural institutions –(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MRS KAROORO OKURUT: I will take it later on. Otherwise, I am going to – honourable – okay, fine.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification on that before she moves to the next point.They brought up a pertinent issue especially on the new cultural leader in Bugisu, the Umukhungu. We have been having the Umukukha but now there is the self-imposed one called the Umukhungu. 

We are aware arrangements are already in place and some two weeks from now, His Excellency the President is going to be the chief guest at the installation of the Umukhungu. As a ministry, I believe that you are very aware about it and for us, as leaders of Bugisu across the political divide we are not in agreement with that. The assurance you could give us, honourable minister, is: are you aware of these arrangements or you are not aware? As people of Bugisu, we have been taken by surprise about the arrangements and Office of the President is directly in charge. 

THE SPEAKER: Information from Manjiya via Bududa.

MS KHAINZA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. I am aware that there is a function taking place in Bududa on Saturday to install our cultural leader, the Umukhungu of Bududa.According to the literature that I have been given, Article 37 of the Constitution guarantees people to form their institutions according to their beliefs and their traditions. Article 247 also allows people, according to their beliefs – you will read the whole of it. It guides on the formation of cultural institutions.

The information I am giving you is that the people of Bududa – By the way, there is a process and the district council gave them the minute and approved. So, the information that I know is that the function is taking place and as a leader, I have been given the procedures of the function. On this note, I would like to invite honourable colleagues to come and witness the swearing in and installation of our cultural leader in Bududa. I thank you.   

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable minister, please, complete your submission.

MS KARORO OKURUT: I thank you. Actually, my honourable sister did come to our office – (Interjections)– Yes, I am very much aware. As I said, they are very many. The Omudingisa is also on the way. (Laughter)

Lastly, on this issue of kingdoms, hon. Jalia Bintu asked when Bunyoro Kingdom will get their ebyaffe.We know that even for the ebyaffe here in Buganda, there was dialogue. So, nobody is standing in the way of dialogue. Our decided path is to request the people of Bunyoro to come and make a presentation and we take the path of dialogue because dialogue has been the hallmark of the NRM Government. (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Madam Minister, for accepting my clarification. I am very concerned about national integration. You talk about those who negotiate most. In the Constitution, when the Banyala and the Baruli were forming their institutions, it was through dialogue with Government; it is now the same Government that says they have been returned to Buganda. 

Honourable minister, for Bunyoro’s demands, the country could not afford to look at a strong region, possibly because of centrality, and forget even the mother kingdom. Would Government handle if Bunyoro resurrected the demands of the lost counties including Kyankwanzi, Kiboga, Mubende, Nakasongola and Kayunga? (Laughter)Is that where you want to take us?

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Kyankwanzi District and Kiboga District, according to the Constitution of Uganda, are districts of Buganda; they were never districts of Bunyoro. Therefore, is hon. Mukitale in order to say that Kyankwanzi is part of Bunyoro?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are alive to the historical factors that they were part of what are called “the lost counties”. That is a fact. Please, conclude. 

MS KARORO OKURUT: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. Lastly, on FGM, yes, we are all concerned but there is a programme in our ministry on FGM and it is actually funded by donors, to see that everything possible is being done. Of course, we have some of these “surgeons” sneaking in and they have their caves where they operate. These are difficult to get, but there is a very comprehensive programme under the Ministry of Gender to try and get this FGM out. We want to implement it; we want it to become history. We are all concerned. In fact, on that note, I have just finished writing a book and the title is “The Switch is Off.” That “switch” is what they take off from the women. So, we are all concerned. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

8.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I think I am left with only two issues touching externalisation of labour and recentralisation of labour officers. 

I will begin with the latter. The honourable member asked why we are recentralising labour officers. Labour officers are basically enforcement officers and are meant to enforce labour standards. Experience has shown that districts have found it in their favour not to recruit labour officers. Whenever they think they do not have enough money for the wage bill, they recruit all other officers and leave out labour officers. As we speak, out of the 112 districts of Uganda, only 27 have labour officers. 

The second reason is that being enforcement officers, when we know that the districts themselves are employers, we see that there is likely to be conflict of interest. Even in areas where the districts have recruited labour officers, the labour officers find it difficult to bring their employers to book when they contravene labour standards. The labour officers are supposed to oversee, have inspections, both routine and statutory, and some of the culprits are the employers. So, it becomes very difficult for them to enforce labour standards against their own bosses or employers. So, we thought it is important to recentralise the institution and bring them back here like we did with the chief administrative officers.  (Interruption) 

MS TEOPISTA NABULYA: On top of what the minister has just contributed, you find that districts do not give any vote for the industrial relations officers in terms of facilitation. You may find one labour officer representing about six districts but they have no means of mobility, not even a bicycle.This is because they are not using immediate revenue like other departments. 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you very much, honourable member. It is true that even districts where we recruit labour officers, they are not facilitated and they cannot do their work. 

On externalisation of labour, I would like to say that the phenomenon of migration of labour is as old as humankind. Humanbeings will move in search of employment from areas where there is no employment to where they think they can find employment, whether you like it or not. In Uganda, when we realised that phenomenon, we put in place a statutory instrument to regulate externalisation of labour. This statutory instrument, which was enacted in 2005, is supposed to regulate, guard and protect workers who migrate to other countries to seek employment. 

However, not every Ugandan who goes abroad to work goes under the ambit of this law. So many go on their own and many are taken by companies, which are not known by our ministry.There is no way the Ministry of Labour alone can track those people. However, under this law, we put in place all the safeguards that we could imagine to protect the Ugandan workers when they go abroad. 

However, over time, we have discovered loopholes in this law. As I talk now, we are in the process of amending it to make it watertight to ensure that Ugandans who go under the ambit of this law are protected. I must put a –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not want the minister to leave that question un-clarified. It is said that the people who are suffering out there have been taken by companies that are not known to them. Everybody who has been reading the papers knows the company called Uganda Veterans Development Agency, which is duly registered. It is one of the companies that took ladies to Iraq and gave them to this man called Abdul Sharif, who humiliated them. The few who came back have been in court. 

I am happy to know that a few days ago, you were able to deregister that company. So, it is not true to state that they are taken by only those who are not registered. Even those which you have registered are doing it and you must stand firm and deregister such companies when they come to your attention. 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: If only the honourable member had been a little bit more patient, that is what I was going to say. I was going to say that even with these statutory instruments, even with the regulations, the protection provided under this law, we have realised that some companies externalise people but they do not comply with the provisions fed in this law.It is true that two or three companies have exported people abroad and have deployed them contrary to the agreements they signed with us. 

The important thing is for you to know, honourable members, that before we licence any company, we find out where the company is going to externalise people, the nature of jobs they are going to do, the terms and conditions of work the employees are going to undertake – actually, under this statutory instrument, we get copies of the contracts of employment. However, once they reach abroad, they abrogate the terms of the contracts; they employ Ugandans in areas which were not allowed. It is only legal, healthy and safe areas of work, which are licensed to employ Ugandans. We have noticed that – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, windup. We are going to have a debate on this; there are two reports coming, which we should debate in full - on trafficking, slavery and so on. 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: In conclusion, while we have safeguards in this law, because we are not there to routinely oversee what is happening, people find it possible to flout the law and employ Ugandans in exploitative ventures. However, when we discover that, we bring the companies to book. We have some cases in point. We have de-licensed Uganda Veterans; we have refused to renew its licence. About three or four companies have had their licences withdrawn, on top of other remedial measures we have put in place to ensure that our people are protected. 

Honourable members, as I have said, we know there are a number of loopholes but we are trying to work with other stakeholders - the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Security - to ensure that we safeguard Ugandans who are working abroad. However, having said that, we should not condemn the phenomena as a whole because we all know that remittances from Ugandans working abroad constitute a big component of our national resource envelope. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Now, of course, as you wait for your law and the amendments, I think it is important to sensitise the population because people are so desperate; any job anywhere like Canada, they go. I have been told that the immigration people have devised all ways of identifying the possible targets. When they stop them here in Entebbe, they board a bus, go to Nairobi and take a flight. So, please, sensitise the population on that.

In the meantime, honourable members, other than the recurrent and development expenditure under vote 108, other than the development and recurrent expenditure under vote 124, I put the question that the rest of the report be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for the work done today. There are three more reports for tomorrow. So, I want to adjourn the House to 2 O’clock, tomorrow afternoon. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 8.50 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 29 August 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

