Monday, 27 August 2012

Parliament met 10.51 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good morning, honourable members, and welcome to this sitting. I welcome you back from your committee work on this very important matter, the budget. I have been receiving reports about your deliberations in the committees and wish to thank you for the good work that you have so far done, and there is still a lot to be done.

Honourable members, like it has been in the past, this period is a very busy time in the programme of Parliament. We have a lot of commitment to do with the budget, which has a timeframe prescribed by the law - 31st of August - and that comes this Friday. For this reason, we need to be conscious of the time constraint we already have. Accordingly, I am proposing that we handle as many sectoral committee reports each day as possible. I am proposing that we should complete this by Thursday so that we dedicate Friday to deal with the Bills and other related matters. The appropriation also has to be handled in the same vein before that date. 

From my forecast, and with your usual commitment, we can say that by 31st we shall be home and dry with all the things that we need to do with the budget. This will still leave us with several other things to be done, and if we are able to finish this by that day we would have finalised a lot of things. 

The reports will, therefore, be presented in the following order: Committee on Information and Communication Technology, which is ready to proceed today. I thank the chairperson and his committee. Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development is ready. I thank you. Committee on Foreign Affairs is also ready. We will be starting with those ones today and we will see how we move. 

Tomorrow we should be handling the committee reports on defence and internal affairs; education and sports; public service and local government; natural resources; and health. Hopefully all of them will be ready so that we can handle all these tomorrow. That will be followed by the East African Community affairs; presidential affairs; physical infrastructure; tourism, trade and industry; agriculture, animal industry and fisheries; and finance, planning and economic development. We should be able to deal with this quickly. We will then have legal and parliamentary affairs to wind up. 

As you are aware, the Finance Bills are also still pending. I am therefore asking the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in the hope that these Bills are already with us, that we proceed with them quickly so that the report on them also comes and we are able to pass the Bills in time. 

I finally wish to draw your attention to the need to keep time and maintain quorum as this is a requirement when decisions have to be taken. We are going to be taking decisions almost every minute; therefore, we require your full attendance so that we can move with business in a steady manner. I thank you very much and welcome to this sitting.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE FREE ZONES BILL, 2012

10.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I am speaking here as the brand new Minister of State for Finance in charge of General Duties.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations!

MR OMACH: I thank you, Sir. I also congratulate all those other brand new members who have just come into Cabinet - (Laughter) – and also the shadow ministers. 

I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Free Zones Bill, 2012” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is seconding this? The Minister for Lands – things have changed quickly - the Minister for Works and the Minister of State for Defence. 

MR OMACH: In accordance with the Budget Act, Section 10, I would like to lay the certificate of financial implications accordingly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, the Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee to handle within the timeframe provided in the rules – 45 days. It is accordingly referred to the committee.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

10.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker, In accordance with Rule 44 (1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I take this opportunity to inform the House of the sad news of the accident involving three helicopters of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces Air Force.

Let me take this opportunity right from the very beginning to make an appeal. This statement is providing preliminary information; quite a lot is yet to be unearthed by a committee of inquiry that has been put in place. However, because of the seriousness of this matter, I thought it prudent that the House should not continue to just read about this from the press but should have a Government statement on this matter. Therefore, the appeal is that maybe debate at this stage is a bit premature. We could wait until we receive the board of inquiry report that will provide us further information, which will enable us to have a rich and full debate.

I make this statement to provide preliminary information. In the morning of Sunday 12 August, four helicopters, one a utility helicopter known as Mi-17 and three combat helicopters known as Mi-24, left for Somalia for African Union Mission for Somalia (AMISOM) duty. In each of the four helicopters, there were seven UPDF personnel. 

Mr Speaker, let me state that these helicopters, which were involved in this accident, have been in service with UPDF since 2003. They have been involved in almost all the engagements that UPDF has taken place in.

Our Air Force personnel, working with their Kenyan counterparts and the United Nations Office for Assistance to Somalia (UNSOA), planned both the logistics and routing from Uganda through Kenya to Somalia. Putting various options into consideration, the most optimum route approved was from Soroti in Uganda to Eldoret, Nanyuki, Garissa and Wajir in Kenya, and then to Baidoa in Somalia. Overflight procedures were specifically adhered to. Clearance for overflight over Kenya was sought from the Government of Kenya, and the Government of Kenya did grant this clearance on the 6th of August to all the four helicopters. 

Whereas one helicopter, the Mi-17, made it safely to Garissa, the other three did not. As we now know, the three crashed. With a heavy heart, Mr Speaker, I regret to report that as a result of this crash, we lost seven officers and men of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces Air Force. The other 21 are safe and alive. 

The UN resolution 2036 expanded the mission of AMISOM. It also authorised the deployment of air assets. That is how we came into the situation where our helicopters were deployed. Following this resolution the UN, and later the AU, asked Uganda to deploy air assets to support the mission in combat and causality evacuation in sector A of the mission area. 

Mr Speaker, permit me to explain a little. The UN Security Council resolution 2036 divided Somalia into four sectors: A, B, C and D. Sector A is Mogadishu and the surrounding areas. Sector B is central Somalia including Baidoa area. Sector C is Southern Somalia and Sector D is Northern Somalia. Sector A is the responsibility of Uganda. Sector B is the responsibility of Burundi, although Uganda and Burundi are working together in Sector B. Sector C is the responsibility of Kenya and Sector D is the responsibility of Djibouti. Sierra Leone is expected to soon deploy in Sector C. 

Given the tremendous achievement that AMISOM registered, it was only logical that the Government of Uganda accepted, as requested, to deploy these air assets. It is important, Mr Speaker, to note that a lot of work and preparation was undertaken prior to the deployment of the helicopters. These preparations lasted more than three months from the time of request to the time of deployment. They included, but were not limited to: planning conferences, crew pre-deployment training and testing, as well as helicopter inspection by the UNSOA aviation component. The crew passed all the competence tests and attained the requisite mission standards. The helicopters were found air-worthy and fit for the purpose they were intended for.

At this juncture, Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Government and people of Kenya for the support they offered us in planning the routes, and for the logistics and the support they offered us since we received the sad news of the accident. In particular, I would like to thank the Kenya Defence Forces, the Kenya Police and the Kenya Wildlife Services who put their personnel and assets at our disposal in searching for and rescuing our colleagues. When all information in connection with this accident has been collected, we shall find time to specifically thank those individuals who performed heroic acts. 

His Excellency the President has already put in place a seven-man board of inquiry chaired by Gen. Caleb Akandwanaho to investigate this unfortunate accident. The board of inquiry has been given four weeks to do its work. It started its work yesterday when it was officially put in place by the Chief of Defence Forces. 

As I conclude, I would like to appeal to all of us to remain calm and sensitive to the feelings of the bereaved. Further, we should also bear in mind that this accident did occur in a sister country. In particular, I would like to appeal to the press not to theorise or sensationalise this accident. After all, our hope is that the board of inquiry will answer most, if not all, of our questions. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you for allowing me this opportunity to make this statement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this accident has not only taken assets of this country, it has taken lives of the combatants who signed up for service to defend the territorial integrity of this country and the mission of Uganda anywhere it is required. Seven of them have died in action. It is a moment of sadness. I ask that we stand for a moment of silence in memory of them. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you have heard from the minister, the statement is not detailed. The statement is meant to give some preliminary cover on what happened; it is a short report on the incident. The bulk of the work you are still carrying out is a security matter. We therefore ask ourselves to be sensitive to the matters that we are going to say. As Parliament, the statement that we will make should be responsible enough and try and contain this situation within the sensitivity of this House. We will therefore have limited response on this matter, and each member will be given three minutes. 

I now ask the honourable member for Toroma County, member for Pallisa County, the vice-chairperson for the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, the MP for Lwemiyaga, hon. Ekanya and the Shadow Minister for Defence. You have three minutes each. Honourable members, please respect what the Speaker has said. If you exceed it, I stop you. 

11.09
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will strictly go by your ruling. I have a few things I want to put across. One, when you look at page 2, the minister stated very clearly, in his last statement, that a lot of work was undertaken to prepare these planes for the mission in Mogadishu. My question is, if time had been allocated to prepare these planes, which means repairs and the rest, how come these planes crashed? 

I am one of the few UPDF officers who worked in the Operation Lightening Thunder in the DRC Congo in 2009 before I retired from the Army. This unseriousness of training and preparing of troops and planes led some planes to crash including the MIGs. We lost competent Ugandans who used a lot of money to train outside Uganda in Israel and Russia. I remember there was one flight engineer by the name Opio, a very distinguished Ugandan, who acquired first class training in Israel. He crashed and this investigation has not come out. The same is happening today; you may find that the investigation that will come out of this may not be really satisfactory to us. 

Secondly, who will pay for the assets we lost, these planes and the lives? There is a lot of money that the government normally incurs when Ugandans go to train outside to fly these planes. I think Government must always be serious to get the training properly done and to prepare the planes for these missions. Otherwise, there is a lot that has not been done. 

Lastly, most of these planes - the Mi-17s and Mi-24s - are not serviced and that is why they crash. I think the report that will come in four weeks time will be very concrete and will be convincing to Ugandans because we lose a lot of money in buying these planes. We lose a lot of money to train Ugandans to fly these planes. (Member timed out)

11.13
MR RICHARDS OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Ministry of Defence for formally giving an explanation and statement to this House. It is painful to speak when you have lost very valuable lives both to the nation and to the individual families and relatives. Therefore, when we talk here, I believe the Ministry of Defence will come out with very clear and concrete positions on what hon. Cyrus Amodoi has said. I would be glad to know exactly what kind of compensation Uganda will get. What kind of compensation will the families of the fallen get and who will provide that compensation, if any, so that we are sure that something is going to be done? 

Mr Speaker, sometime back I read in the press that Government was considering asking for compensation from the UN for our helicopters. It would also be prudent to mention what exactly the position of the UN is. This is in light of the fact that Uganda has made a commendable contribution to AMISON to the point where we are now. I think it should be appreciated that we have done a lot and, therefore, wherever we have encountered hindrances and setbacks, we should be compensated. 

The minister could be correctly faulting the press, but it is also possible that the press was fixing gaps that were left by lack of information. Possibly, it is also because other members of the public could have also given information that could have misled the press in whatever they have written. I therefore appeal that as much as possible, the same way we have been given information here, and I expect we shall be given more since we are asking for it, should be the same way the press will be given information. 

We, other members of the public, should also be mindful about what we say. Some of us may say something that excites the press and the rest of the public and therefore, we find misleading statements. So, I want to thank the Ministry of Defence once more –(Member timed out)

11.16
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise the question about the legal regime and framework under which this board of inquiry is being constituted. As you know, these planes crashed in a foreign territory where our municipal law is not applicable. Under what legal auspices is this board of inquiry going to be conducted? 

Secondly, a crash of this magnitude is a national disaster. A national disaster would inquire into both the technical and other matters which, as we may have been guided by your Chair, we may not delve into. In that respect, Mr Speaker, it needed competent persons and the composition should be international in nature. 

Why are we treating this matter of such magnitude in a casual way? Three choppers crashing and you come to say, “Honourable members bear with us”! It should have taken an international dimension; we should have got experts with technical competence like what happened in Kenya where they got expertise from South Africa. Here when I read the names - though the board has not yet been brought to this House - it is made up of serving military officers in the Air Force. Mr Speaker, you know the principal of nemo judex; how are they going to investigate themselves? It would have required competent and independent personnel to do it. Where fingers are being pointed at the UPDF and then you have members of the same force to carry out the investigations is an indication of not taking this matter seriously. 

In Ukraine when a plane crashed - What are we seeing here; you have three and all of you are busy seated - (Member timed out)

11.19
MR KOSIS CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement but I would like to inquire from him about the weight of ammunition that each chopper was carrying. He has informed us that there were seven personnel in each chopper. My suspicion is that the crash could have been as a result of the weight of ammunition that was being carried in these choppers.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you want the minister to start revealing the fire capacity of the plane? Would you want that debated in this House? I think that is exceeding our limit.
 
MR CHEMASWET: No, it is the load that was carried. Of course, there was ammunition that was carried by these choppers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will be talking to the enemy.
 
MR CHEMASWET: Okay, thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the minister the level of training of the pilots, the investment put in training each pilot and the motivation that is given to them.  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

11.21
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join those who have expressed sorrow over the loss of both lives and equipment involving our officers en route to Somalia. I also thank the minister for his statement but of course as Parliament and taking into account your own guidelines, there are questions which are extremely vital that we consider that the ministry and those undertaking the inquiry should provide answers to.
 
The first issue is the very composition of the board of inquiry. I join those who have proposed that it be expanded to include expertise that is more independent than the very service against which the inquiry is being conducted. This is because the composition comprises of - though I have very much respect for Gen. Saleh- members of the very service on which the investigation is supposed to dwell. So, it is very important that for us to get independent and expertise information, this team be expanded to include people outside the Uganda Air Force. 

There are issues that we shall be interested in; for example, when the minister talks about the three months preparations, we have to go into the details of those preparations in terms of personnel, in terms of the programmes that were impacted onto them and also in terms of the issue of the movements. We would want to know how the route charted out and if there were any variations whatsoever. 

Mr Speaker, it is also very important that we know the role of the UN in this and to what extent they can be taken responsible. We know that from 2007, the UN has provided guidelines as to what extent the troops and police contributing countries should take into account when they are contributing their resources for the special equipment or ordering equipment to such peace missions. So, we need to know whether the UN confirmed that route, or if they were involved, to what extent they were. 

I am also concerned that we may lose this equipment without any refund whatsoever from the UN. We would like to cross-examine the memorandum of understanding between Uganda and the AU/UN. The contingent equipment protocols under the UN specify categorically the responsibilities of the contributing countries and the mission. (Member timed out_)

11.24
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Godfrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing in for the Leader of the Opposition. As the Opposition, we would like to most sincerely express our heartfelt condolences to Government on the demise of our staff of the UPDF Air Force and the loss of equipment. 

Mr Speaker, on Sunday, the 12 August 2012, I was in my compound in the village in Tororo when I saw four helicopters flying at a very low altitude. If my house was at the level of Crested Towers, they would have crushed into it. The people asked me whether the helicopters were looking for something unique in the village to which I could not answer. As it was stated, these helicopters left Soroti flying at a very low altitude. It was a disturbing question to me but being of security concern, I kept quiet. It was saddening to note that they later on crashed just across the border.
 
Our laws as regards commissions of inquiry are very clear; we expected the minister to have either published or gazetted under the Commission of Inquiry Act or Board of Inquiry Act. Short of that, the report will be trashed in the courts of law in case it implicates anybody. Therefore, may I ask the minister to do the needful and redeem his actions?

On the issue of the team to investigate this matter, I wish to appreciate that Government recognises that we have teams of experts who have the requisite knowledge in aviation security. Nonetheless, we have had other inquiries where conflict of interest has caused reports not to come out qualitatively. Since this mission is connected to the UN, we would wish to urge Government to have the team of experts involved in this investigation approved by the UN so that responsibility will be shared equally. 

We need to know when these helicopters were procured and their airworthiness. We need a team of people who have the capacity to read the recorders communication with the control towers, to note the helicopter worthiness, to find out whether the meteorological department had given advice and why the advice was ignored. These are fundamental questions that require answers even before the report comes out. 

As it has been stated, it would have required the Minister of Defence to be here personally to present this statement and after presenting such a statement resulting from that magnitude of the accident, the minister should have stepped aside or resigned because Uganda cannot just lose four helicopters at a go. These helicopters were flying at a very close range, about 200 meters apart, and no wonder the three crashed. I really believe it is the one that was ahead that survived the accident. They were so close - (Member timed out­) 

11.27
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the honourable Minister of State for Defence for bringing this information to us. My condolences go to the families of the bereaved for the loss of our brothers in the accident. I have three questions to ask. 

One, honourable minister and honourable Members of Parliament, do you see yourselves as people with a role to play in the inquiry to be carried out on the helicopter crash? If yes, where are you going to fit in? Now that a committee of inquiry has already been set up by the President, where does Parliament come in? What are the terms and conditions, the questions and issues to be asked? 

As shadow minister of defence and security, I believe we need to look at the helicopters, the manufacturers and the suppliers. We are aware that there was an inquiry that was carried out in this country involving the procurement of helicopters. With due respect to Gen. Saleh, he was one of the persons who was questioned in that process; how do you put such a person to investigate? He is actually supposed to be one of those to be investigated! Are these not the helicopters where he participated in the procurement and his involvement was questionable? We need to examine this and begin by removing Gen. Saleh from that group because he is supposed to be investigated first on the role he played in the procurement.

I thank my comrades for the information they gave us regarding the role they played in Congo. Investigations about such sensitive issues sometimes if they implicate people in the military will not come out. We have been waiting for the Congo report and now you are giving another assignment to the same people! Mr Speaker, I advise the people who love this country to reject the commission of inquiry and establish a new one with clear terms and conditions. (Applause) It also should have a clear timeframe. Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I love Uganda.

11.30
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for his brief, timely and on-the-point statement. 

The only reason I stand to speak is to add my voice to the appeal that when a country loses patriots who have put their lives on the line for the peace of Uganda, the peace of East Africa and for the world peace, this is the time for solidarity. This is the time for us to come together and strengthen the family of UPDF and the families of those who have lost their loved ones in defence of our country and continent. This is not the time to start insinuating, politicising and sensationalising the whole operation. 

As we speak, the achievements so far registered have led to Somalia being able to elect its Parliament last week. (Applause) As we speak, we have lost some of our soldiers and now some of our assets. In history, it is at such a time as this that nations show solidarity and come together and then trust the institutions in place. 

In this case, I appeal to you to trust the UPDF in the investigations and the board of inquiry. I want to assure you that the board of inquiry has the freedom to invite, incorporate and bring on board all the people with the necessary technical expertise and knowledge. If you have any, please take it there. It does not ask us to start arguing about the details involved. Please take it to that board of inquiry and we shall get a result that I am sure will take us forward and not backward. Thank you.

11.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me begin from where Gen. Tumwine has just stopped. He has appealed to all of us to remain calm. If we have questions, let us raise them with the board of inquiry so that the board will take all of them into consideration. Later, the report it produces will include our concerns. Indeed, members have raised questions but I am reluctant to respond to them directly because, again as I mentioned in the beginning, there is a board of inquiry and most of these questions touch on what that board will be looking into.

Hon. Ssekikubo raised a question as to whether there is a legal locus for us to set up a board of inquiry when the accident did not occur in Uganda. The lawyers will be able to answer this but I hazard to say that when you lose somebody in the lake, you do not let the lake tell you what happened; you try to find out what happened in the lake. (Laughter)

Finally, I thank members for their concerns. Like I said at the beginning, our hope and prayer is that all our questions, concerns, worries shall be addressed by the board of inquiry. If you do have anything, please reach out to the board and give your input. Thank you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
I: THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012
II: THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2012/2013

11.36
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the Opposition’s response to the 2012/13 Budget statement. In accordance with the practice and Rule 140(5) of our Rules of Procedure, which requires the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give a response to the Budget, allow me proceed as such. The Opposition’s response will, among others, have:
(i)	A critical review of the performance of the economy.
(ii)	A review of the proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2012/2013.
(iii) 	Alternative proposals for the budget speech policies or reviews and expenditure for the financial year 2012/2013.

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented the budget for the financial year 2012/13 under the theme, “Priorities for Renewed Economic Growth and Development”. That theme was misdirected. Given the current economic conditions, it should have been “Reallocating Resources for Inclusive Economic Growth”. The rationale is, economic growth should be more visible in the productive sectors of the economy like agriculture, which employs 56 percent of Ugandans and contributes 80 percent of total exports. Economic growth should be able to reallocate resources in the population and to reduce income inequality. In other words, economic growth should be shared by all Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, in our last response to the budget, we cautioned the Minister of Finance that there were tough times ahead which demanded foresight and professionalism. She never heeded. The result was unnecessary supplementary expenditures on the budgets. Indeed, the times have been rough with contracting economic growth, unstable prices and widening trade deficits and conditions. This may remain the same, if not worsen, if you do not listen to our advice again.  

To many Ugandans, most foodstuffs like maize, cassava, beans and groundnuts have become a luxury and unaffordable due to high prices, to the extent that some families only take porridge or boil leaves for a day’s meal. Isn’t this a shame to the NRM Government?

Mr Speaker, the challenges in the health sector are evident and they continue almost unabated as evidenced by the negative growth in the sector. Like the Opposition said last year, well constructed buildings with big signposts reading “health centres” without medicine still exist. This situation is so bad that parents witness their babies die in their arms due to lack of cotton wool to stop bleeding.  A similar situation has been experienced in the education sector where because of very poor quality, 80 percent of the pupils cannot read and write.  

Mr Speaker, the financial year 2011/2012 will be remembered in our history as the year of unstable prices. We experienced the highest double-digit inflation levels, last experienced in the early 1990s. The shilling depreciated to unprecedented levels and the lending interest rate in the commercial banks rose to 30 percent. It should be noted that this was not a one-off incident but the health and education sector have been growing negatively in the recent years.

Colleagues, I would like to invite you to see figure 1. If you look at that graph - Mr Speaker, we did not have a colour printer - the light print is health and the dark one is education. You can see the health sector growing at negative 20 percent. 

The Performance of the Economy and Future Outlook

Economic Growth

Mr Speaker, let us agree that the growth rate for the financial year 2011/2012 was below Government’s expectation. Whereas Uganda’s economy grew by 10.8 percent in the financial year 2005/2006, the growth rate for 2011/2012 was 2.3 percent. The GDP per capita growth rate was negative 0.4 percent in financial year 2011/2012 from 7.2 percent in 2005/2006. It is important to note that the economic growth and the GDP per capita growth have been declining over time. See figure 2 below. 

The claim by this regime that external factors were the cause for the low economic growth is a total lie because other East African Community countries facing similar conditions of drought and high international fuel prices posted better growth rates than Uganda. The economies of Rwanda, Tanzania, Burundi and Kenya grew at a rate of 8.6 percent, 7.3 percent, 5.2 percent and 4.5 percent respectively. 

Mr Speaker, the growth rate in the industrial sector declined from 7.9 percent in financial year 2010/2011 to 1.1 percent in financial year 2011/2012. The manufacturing sector shrunk by negative 1.8. Formal manufacturing was the hardest hit with a great hit of negative 4.4 percent. The services sector, which had remained vibrant for the last five years, grew at 3.1 percent. The health sector shrunk by negative 20 percent while the financial services, which had experienced high growth rate in the past, shrunk by 11.8 percent. 

We wish to warn Ugandans that the NRM-O boat is sinking. If you have not realised it, wait until when you are at the bottom of the lake. (Laughter) The leadership of this regime should resign and call for snappy elections. (Interjections)

External Sector

Mr Speaker, Uganda’s trade balance has widened by 3.6 percent to US$ 2,707 million or Shs 6.8 trillion from Shs 6.3 trillion in March 2011. The trade balance is worsening every year due to increased importation of items like safety pins, hoes and textiles which used to be locally produced in the 1960s and 1970s. Ugandans are wondering whether this is part of the fundamental change promised 26 years ago. Uganda’s poor performance of exports is expected to continue in the financial year 2012/2013 because they are still dominated by a few unprocessed agricultural exports such as coffee, tea, fish and cotton.

The budget proposals for the financial year 2012/2013 do not have any specific measure targeting improving the external sector. The Opposition proposes that more funds be channelled to value addition by establishing processing plants fully owned by Government. 

Uganda’s foreign exchange reserves are steadily declining. As at March 2012, they stood at 3.8 months - just three months and few weeks - of imports of goods and services compared to 5.5 months for Sub-Saharan Africa in 2012. 

The exchange rate market has experienced volatility in the last 12 months. The shilling depreciated to Shs 2,814 per US$ 1 in September 2011. It is feared that in case the offshore investors withdraw their funds, the shilling will plummet more. The economic fundamentals of the NRMO are weak, wrong and the private sector confidence in the economy is low. 

Inflation and Interest 

Mr Speaker, Government’s target of single-digit level of inflation was not achieved in 2011/2012. It instead rose from five percent in January 2011 to 30.5 percent in October 2011. The annual food price inflation too has been volatile. Government should therefore put more effort in addressing the supply constraints in the agriculture sector. 

The raising of the Central Bank Rate (CBR) by 10 percent points led to the increase of the average lending rate on shilling denominated loans from 19.6 percent in February 2012 to 36 percent the same year. The limited level of credit especially to the private sector affected employment as businesses closed and those who defaulted on their commitments lost their property.

Financial Sector Developments 

Mr Speaker, it is disappointing that the interventions to increase agriculture lending are still lacking. Agriculture credit was Shs 353 billion out of Shs 4,933 billion, representing only 7.2 percent of total private sector credit in the financial year 2011/2012. 

As the Opposition, we propose that a land and agriculture bank be established. I will be seeking leave of Parliament to move a private member’s Bill to that effect. The Bill is ready, Mr Speaker, and I wish to lay it on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is no procedure for laying that particular document on the Table. You will have to bring the motion for leave for you to lay it on the Table.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much for your advice, but I just want to show that the Opposition is competent and we have the Bill ready. (Laughter)

The turbulence experienced in the financial sector has called into question the regulator’s capacity to govern the sector. The integrity and sovereignty of Bank of Uganda has greatly been eroded. Examples from the Auditor-General’s report June 2011 show that: 
    • Bank of Uganda issued letters of comfort to various commercial banks in favour of borrowings by HABA Group amounting to Shs 153 billion. 
    • Bank of Uganda capital reserves, after excluding accumulated unrealised foreign exchange gains, was a net deficit of Shs 168 billion. 
    • Bank of Uganda was involved in clearance of payment of 40 percent, representing US$ 1,719,454, for the supply of 70,000 bicycles for the chairpersons of parish and village councils, which was fraudulent. 

These were on the heels of an unprecedented central bank reserves withdrawal for the procurement of jet fighters and injecting excessive money in circulation at the beginning of 2011. These actions imposed a huge cost on Ugandans in terms of runaway inflation and a highly depreciated exchange rate. It is sad that Mr Museveni condoned this unconstitutional behaviour. As the saying goes, if you hide a thief, then you are a thief.  We call for an immediate amendment of the BOU Act to tame this looting.

Fiscal Developments

Mr Speaker, fiscal performance in 2011/2012 was below expectations on the revenue and expenditure sides. The projected overall expenditure was Shs 9,869 billion representing 19.4 percent of GDP. Even by Uganda’s standards, expenditure levels below 20 percent are low. Uganda’s domestic revenue performance is poor with tax revenue to GDP ratio at 12.26 percent in 2011/2012, way below the 25 percent and 17 percent ratios for Kenya and Tanzania respectively and 18 percent for Sub-Saharan Africa. Uganda’s revenue collection has stagnated at about 12 percent of tax revenue to GDP ratio for more than a decade and yet the economy is said to be growing.

We propose that on top of identifying taxpayers, Government should end leakages, corruption and inefficiency in order to widen the tax base. Providing too many tax incentives to businesses to attract foreign direct investment is a wrong policy. Quality infrastructure, predictable macro-economic policy and low administrative costs of starting businesses will attract investments.

The NRMO regime is mortgaging this country. By March 2012, Uganda’s debt exposure was Shs 13.7 trillion up from Shs 11.3 trillion in the financial year 2006/2007.  The cost of servicing debt, Shs 1.1 trillion, is twice the budget allocation to the agricultural sector. 

As of June 2010, commitment fees on borrowed money increased by 72 percent from Shs 3.3 billion in 2008/2009 to Shs 5.6 billion. Two of these loans - loan IDs 21553000 and 21555000 - signed in 2009 did not have any loan disbursements by the end of the financial year. Delays in disbursement resulted into payment of Shs 559.8 million in commitment fees. 

We urge the NRMO to utilise procured loans so that Ugandans do not sink in debt. The Opposition and the people of Uganda cannot tolerate the laziness of the NRMO Government anymore; it must end! 

Budget Strategy for Financial Year 2012/2013

Resource Framework for Financial Year 2012/2013
Mr Speaker, the total amount of resources available in the financial year 2012/2013, Shs 11,157 billion, is largely underestimated. This is because the NRM Government - 
    • continues incurring losses through tax incentives; 
    • will not attain overall efficiency gains from implementation of projects;
    • will never have savings from the fight against corruption; and
    • will not stop wastage in loan acquisition, disbursement and usage. 

The URA has underperformed. We propose that the NRMO Government revises the tax revenue proposals to 17 percent revenue to GDP ratio. This will bring Uganda nearer and within range with some countries in East Africa. These will come from:
    • Savings from project implementation and utilisation of loans;  
    • removal or total elimination of the various tax incentives; 
    • removing the numerous revenue leakages; 
    • introducing taxes on windfall gains; 
    • increased tax audits; and 
    • gains in fighting corruption and increased efficiency. 

These measures and actions if undertaken would generate additional revenue in excess of Shs 3,000 billion on top of the available Shs 11,157 billion, bringing the total resources available to Shs 14,157 billion. The additional resources would be used to improve the welfare of civil servants including the UPDF, Police, teachers, nurses and local councillors. 
 
Key Sector Priorities for Financial Year 2012/2013

Agriculture

Mr Speaker, the budget priorities in financial year 2012/2013 are not in line with the long term vision for the socio-economic transformation of Uganda. To quote from a diplomat, “Uganda’s oil is green and it is in agriculture”. The Opposition asserts that transformation of Uganda’s economy is impossible without transforming agriculture and the rural sector.

The financial year 2012/2013 budget proposals list the priorities in the agricultural sector as food security, providing raw materials and enhancing export revenue. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development mentions food security in the speech but without any implementable actions. We expected the budget to inform us on how they intend to increase productivity and agro-processing. 

The total direct and indirect allocation to the agricultural sector for the financial year will amount to Shs 585.3 billion. This expenditure is grossly insufficient for sustaining any major substantial investments. Agricultural development faces major challenges like drought, weak demand for exports, declining soil fertility and weak prices. To revamp the agricultural sector, we propose that Government does the following:

    • Establish silos, storage warehouses and marketing services.
    • Provide fertilisers to farmers free of charge.
    • Improve accessibility to agricultural credit.
    • Set up a special fund for input subsidies earmarked to benefit all farmers.
    • Fix prices of crops above production costs and at a level which guarantees an improved standard of living.
    • As a matter of urgency, develop more irrigation schemes countrywide and new irrigation gadgets be provided to farmers. Water harvesting facilities, including runoff water tanks and reservoirs, should be constructed and encouraged at the community and household level.
    • Increase Government spending on agriculture research and development. 
    • Revive former Government ranches and farms to act as breeding and demonstration centres. 
    • Re-establish Government district demonstration centres. 

Extension services are dead in the whole country. We urge Government to swallow its pride and transfer resources to the long-tested old extension system and integrate all NAADS workers into the district production departments. The NRMO should show us the funds they have allocated for development of the zoned areas and the 10 selected crops. Time is over for empty promises.

Transport Sector 

Most roads in the country are still in a very poor state characterised by potholes, poor drainage systems and an increasing number of accidents. The quality of roadwork and bridges is highly questionable given that they do not last as the railway bridges built in the 1920s. It is important that Government clearly indicates the sources of funding for the 19 listed priority road projects. The Opposition would have used Shs 1.65 trillion annually in the medium-term to make the above problem history. 

The World Bank has estimated the delay time in completion of roadworks at 8.8 months. On top of collecting the least amount of domestic revenue, the cost of roadworks in Uganda is the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa, and I repeat, it is the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa. For nearly every major Government project, the price at the time of signing the contract changes along the way. By the time of completion, it is 40 or 70 per cent higher. That is theft which is now part and parcel of this NRMO Government.

The state of the railway network in East Africa is abysmal. The Opposition notes that the only relevant and functional railway system in the region is chronically under maintained, underfunded and inefficient. This is due to the sub-sector lacking a master plan. 

It is sad to note that with a huge water body, the water sector is neglected. The situation is even dire in the air transport sub-sector with no single national carrier. What a shame! We call for value for money in the sub-sector and for a master plan to revamp the water, air and railway transport. Efficient functioning of even this existing railway can lead to substantial cost saving for traders in Uganda, Rwanda and even DRC. Is the NRMO listening? 

Energy

Government should go beyond prioritising increased generation capacity, expanding the transmission and distribution network, to finding ways of reducing the electricity tariffs. The current tariffs have increased by an average of 47 per cent. The Opposition would be the lead investor in the sector, which has remained unattractive to the private sector, and would lower tariffs by 50 per cent. This would be besides expansion of rural electrification from the current less than 10 per cent to 35 per cent in the medium term.

Oil and Gas   

The FDC applauds this Parliament for pushing the Executive to table the oil and gas sector legislation, but a number of issues remain outstanding. We propose that Parliament plays a greater role in overseeing the oil sector and ensures there is greater transparency in the sector. We urge the Executive to adopt the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative Policy. 

On top of the lack of transparency in the sector, there are many unanswered questions pertaining to oil revenue and collection. The capital gains tax from firming out activities between Tullow Oil, Total and CNOOC is yet to be paid. It is important that the petroleum revenue management procedures and taxation of oil and gas are separated from other domestic revenues. 

Tourism and Trade

Although Uganda is rich in flora and fauna, the potential in the tourism sector has not been fully exploited because of underfunding of the sector and the traditional approach to the sector.  We recommend that Government goes beyond the use of national parks as if they are the only tourist attractions in Uganda and includes Uganda’s education, history, culture, food, architecture et cetera as other tourist attractions. 

The tourism sector contributes 9.2 per cent to the GDP and gets only 0.13 per cent of the total budget. The resources allocated to tourism are meagre and inadequate. The allocation in the 2011/2012 budget to the industrial sector (trade and tourism) was only 0.5 per cent of the total national budget. This was too low to promote Uganda as a top tourist destination. We recommend that the budget allocated to the tourism sector be increased to at least two per cent of the GDP in the financial year 2012/2013.

Trade is one of the ailing sectors, which have been neglected. The Opposition recommends that the sector is supported through proper record keeping, hiring professionals, computerisation, access to low-cost financing and adequate funding to revamp the SMEs. 

Education Sector

The Opposition reminds the NRMO that the standard and quality of education, especially under UPE and USE, are still wanting. We are questioning the NRMO policy on effectiveness and efficiency in the sector given that underfunding, absenteeism and lack of scholastic materials, low completion rate, poor literacy and inadequate school inspection is high. The government’s contribution of Shs 5,000 per pupil and Shs 47,000 per student per term is grossly inadequate given that studies established that the minimum required per student per term was Shs 100,000 in 2008. We are in 2012.

The budget did not address the critical challenges affecting Uganda’s education sector like low teachers’ pay and limited infrastructure. The proposed salary increment to the teachers is short of what they deserve. We propose to increase primary school teachers’ pay to a minimum level of Shs 500,000, revised annually to keep pace with the cost of living or indexed for inflation. 

The UPE policy has resulted in an uneducated generation. This is a lost generation that is not trainable, cannot adapt modern disease control methods and engage in productive activities. We propose as follows:

    • The role and contribution of parents and guardians to their children’s education be recognised. 

    • Emphasis be put on skills development and capacity building to create a more innovative and practical job creating population. 

    • Emphasis from nursery to university be put on practical knowledge rather than theoretical.

    • The higher education loans scheme be operationalised starting with students from poor backgrounds.

Creating Employment Opportunities

Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that after 26 years of NRMO, the majority of Ugandans cannot get employment. Instead of addressing the problem, the government is using the Youth Entrepreneurship Venture Capital as a scapegoat. The Opposition proposes investment in the productive sectors with multiplier effects to absorb a growing number of young graduates as it were in China and Malaysia. 

Health Sector

Mr Speaker, the health sector still faces major challenges including insufficient funding, dilapidated health facilities and a demotivated workforce. The regular outbreak of diseases like cholera, dysentery, diarrhoeal diseases and typhoid mainly in urban slums in Uganda is unacceptable in this 21st century. This would be history under the FDC government. (Laughter) 

The proposed Shs 849.5 billion for the health sector is inadequate. We propose to increase health sector funding to at least 15 percent, increase workers’ salaries by 50 percent, increase supply of essential medicines, rehabilitate and equip health centres, and strengthen the regulatory capacities of the line institutions. 

Water and Environment Sector

Mr Speaker, we would like to emphasize to the NRMO Government that climatic change has not been given the deserved attention, even as the entire country is experiencing its effects in form of floods, landslides, crop failure, all associated with famine. In many local governments, the environmental departments and district forestry services are either non-existent or dysfunctional due to lack of funding. 

We move that climate change be integrated in all relevant sector policies including agriculture. Developing climate-smart agriculture is crucial to achieving food security. 

Mr Speaker, as earlier noted, the funds allocated and activities undertaken under water for production are inadequate. Transferring the component for bulk water supply to the water sector does not amount to an increase in the funds allocated. We propose the establishment of water harvesting systems in flooded and water logged areas in parts of the country.  

Defence and National Security

Mr Speaker, there is an increased threat of instability in the neighbouring countries of Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and South Sudan, the presence of LRA in the Central African Republic and the increasing crime rate on the domestic front. It was surprising that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had nothing to say on security. In addition, the Opposition notes that there is limited communication from Government on UPDF Somalia mission and difficulties in the management of the wage bill for defence. There is also accumulation of food and other domestic arrears.

We recommend:  
    • Transparency in payment of soldiers in Somalia and at home.
    • Clearance of arrears.
    • The Police should be the only ones to maintain internal peace and security.


Justice, Law and Order Sector 
The Opposition observes that the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) is one of those neglected sectors, with challenges of understaffing and underfunding. This does not augur well with the stated objective of improving Uganda’s private sector competitiveness. 

Inadequate provision for court awards, human rights tribunal awards and compensations keep domestic arrears accumulating. Moreover, the NRMO Government has been undertaking selective compensation payments. There has also been a failure to honour the resolution of Parliament to increase the number of Justices and Judges in order to improve on the delivery of justice.
 
President Museveni’s inaction on the above is tantamount to constitutional abuse. Mr Speaker, we call for increased funding to Justice, Law and Order Sector so that we can promote the rule of law and also complete a backlog of cases. 

Improving Government Effectiveness

Mr Speaker, whereas the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development promises that starting next financial year public sector efficiency and effectiveness will be of paramount importance, no major action is proposed. We expected measures on how to fight the rampant corruption tendencies which eat away an estimated US$ 400 to 600 million, which is over Shs 1,000 billion, and excessive supplementary expenditures which render the budgeting exercise an academic one. 

We were shocked that the minister proposed that Ugandans should pay for national identity cards on a cost sharing basis! The Opposition demands that they be issued free of charge because Ugandans pay taxes. (Applause) 

In order to achieve efficiency and effectiveness in Government, the Opposition is recommending downsizing of the entire structure of governance including ministers not exceeding 42, Members of Parliament, RDCs, presidential advisors, and create a ministry in charge of planning. 

Presidency

Mr Speaker, the management of financial resources in the Office of the Presidency and State House has continued to boggle the minds of rightful thinking people. The supplementary expenditures for State House and Office of the Presidency were Shs 100.2 billion and Shs 6.8 billion respectively, equivalent to 14 percent of the total central government supplementary expenditure. 

The total amount of money spent by the two offices last year was Shs 239.6 billion. It was more than half of the Shs 433.9 billion of the total approved budget for agriculture, and the Ministry of Health could not even be allocated Shs 7 billion to help nodding disease victims. What a shame! How do we justify the lavish expenditure of State House and the presidency to parents who lose 148 children every day in Uganda? 

Expenditure on public administration accounts for 42 per cent of the total recurrent expenditure. The total recurrent expenditure is Shs 5,575.5 billion representing 49.9 percent of the budget. Public management and administration combined take 11.3 per cent of the total budget, far greater than that of the health sector at 7.6 percent. 

On that note, we recommend that Government institutions stop renting offices and instead use the same resources to construct offices in the medium term. The current policy of assigning vehicles to officials and departments has been abused and is unsustainable in the long run. We urge Government to facilitate officers to purchase private cars at concessionary rates and pay them mileage. The current vehicles should be auctioned to the highest bidders. Savings from these initiatives will be used to enhance workers’ pay and improve health services, improve school infrastructure, and even afford free lunch for pupils.

Taxation and Revenue Measures

Mr Speaker, despite Uganda being ranked among the best performing economies in the region in the past, the growth in domestic tax revenue has hardly kept pace with growth in the economy. The tax revenue to GDP ratio of 13.2 per cent for 2012/13 is low compared to about 25 per cent and 17 per cent for Kenya and Tanzania respectively. It is important to note that countries have had tax to GDP ratios of more than 50 per cent. In 2006, for example, Sweden had the world’s ninth highest GDP per capita and tax to GDP ratio at US$ 43,948.6 and 49.1 per cent respectively. 

Mr Speaker, every financial year, Government provides incentives and waivers to private investors with no clear criteria on who gets what and how much. International experience shows that incentives promote abusive tax avoidance schemes, made possible by tax preferences, which further erode the revenue base. As a development tool, tax incentives score poorly in terms of transparency and accountability.

Mr Speaker, even the World Bank agrees with us that over 92 per cent of investors in Uganda currently enjoying tax incentives would have invested their capital even without these incentives. In 2009/2010, Uganda lost approximately two percent of its GDP in tax revenue amounting to US$ 272 million. 

The Opposition is urging the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and this honourable House to accept that the current tax system is sick and needs urgent attention. It is imperative that:  

    • A comprehensive review of tax and taxation policies is conducted with the sole purpose of undertaking new reforms. The reviews should extend to capital equipment taxes, carryover of losses, capitalization ratios, double taxation treaties, issues of ring-fencing, and exemption from the income tax and withholding tax liabilities on foreign employees. 

    • Government provides on an annual basis, during the budget process, a publicly available tax expenditure analysis showing annual figures on the cost of tax incentives, and showing who the beneficiaries of such tax expenditure are.

    • Introduce technology and training allowances/levy on companies in the natural resources sector. The training offered by companies in the extractive industry should not be limited to engineering and geology but should also cover other expertise in law, accounting, economics, taxation, environment among others.
 
    • The URA should publicly report the investigation of any tax gaps and law enforcement measures taken to discourage tax evaders and bring fairness to the taxpayers. 

    • Strengthening of real estate taxes.

Mr Speaker, the proposal to increase withholding tax on income derived from Treasury Bills and Bonds from 15 per cent to 20 per cent is welcome. We urge the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to review the possibility of imposing a charge on foreign exchange transactions to benefit both local authorities and the central government. 

Conclusion
Mr Speaker, like we did last year, we again present alternative budget policies that we strongly believe will restore inclusive economic growth and transformation of Uganda’s economy. I wish to restate that there is no way Uganda can develop without transforming the agricultural sector. The current unemployment and underemployment especially of the youth would be history if we invest and develop the agricultural sector. 

We believe the Pearl of Africa is well endowed and can be transformed into one of the most successful economies in the world, but we have to be committed servants and leaders for this to happen. A country with 75 per cent of the population living on less than two dollars a day and holding one of the world’s highest population growth rates of over 3.5 per cent per year cannot afford to lose approximately two percent of its GDP in tax revenue. 

It is in our interest that we overhaul the strategies of domestic resources mobilization by introducing tax and non-tax instruments that are fair, equitable and create minimal disincentives for economic efficiency, and initiate tax reforms to simplify and rationalize tax structures. The current tax system is not comparably revenue productive, economic efficient and equitable, optimal, simple and effective in administration and transparency. 

I beg to respond. Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much. I think this has been a good example for time management; 45 minutes meant 45 minutes and two seconds, which was very good. I thank the Shadow Minister for Finance for delivering his reply within the time allotted to him by the Speaker. We will take that as a good example of how we are going to proceed with the rest of business in this budget process.

Honourable members, rule 140, sub-rule (5), would have required that at this moment we would have a statement from the chairperson of the Budget Committee. I have consulted the chairpersons of the committees and I am informed that there has been no common interaction between the committees and the Budget Committee. So there will be no statement from the chairperson of the Budget Committee in this particular budget. We will therefore proceed to the specifics of the policies raised by different sectors in Government and looked at by sectoral committees of this Parliament, to see what problems have been identified and how much money has been thrown at them and whether the monies are adequate. I can see the Minister for Finance smiling and this means that she has not thrown enough money to the problems. 

So, we will now proceed to deal with the specific reports from our committees. Time being of the essence, we will restrict ourselves to 15 minutes for chairpersons. What we want is a short background to the sector, observations, recommendations and the general outline of the figures that the committee has dealt with. After that, you can then move for the adoption of the report and approval of what you are recommending this House to do, so that we do not spend a lot of time on the same thing again. Thereafter, we will open debate for members on that particular sector. Contributions will be limited to three minutes for each member, and the total time allocated for that debate will be 45 minutes. So, those are the governing rules. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chairperson of the Committee on Information and Communication Technology. I can see that he is actually going to use information technology in his presentation. 

12.27
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Vincent Bagiire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As per rule 177 of our Rules of Procedure, the committee on ICT has considered the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of ICT and would like to report as follows:

The first slide indicates the resources that were allocated to the Ministry of ICT in the financial year 2011/12. You can see from the columns that we have the approved budget, the released resources, resources that were spent and the release performance and actual performance. 

The highlight on that slide is in the release performance where under non-wage, the ministry used 159 per cent of the budget. That is as a result of a supplementary that the ministry received due to recruitment in one of the departments, that is, the National Information Technology Authority of Uganda (NITA-U).

In terms of the highlights or the achievements of the sector, they had policies and strategies developed, Bills and regulations and implementation of approved policies. Under the policies and strategies, the ministry had an IT policy approved. The ministry also developed the Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) Transitional Strategy. They developed the National Information Security Strategy. They have a concept note on the IT park, which was approved by the board of NITA-U. They have a draft e-waste policy, a country top level domain name policy and a telecom policy. 

Under Bills and regulations, the ministry is operationalising the Electronic Signatures Act, the Electronic Transactions Act and the NITA-U Act. As you very well know, we had the first reading of the Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority Bill that was undertaken in March this year. 

The other aspects that are being implemented are the Postal Policy; the roadmap of analogue to digital migration, which has commenced with a rollout in Kampala and SIM card registration. The national postcode and addressing system has been piloted in Entebbe Municipality. 

That slide indicates the trend of resources that has been allocated to the Ministry of ICT from 2008/2009 to 2012/2013. As you see in the column of the wage, there has been a drastic increment from Shs 677 million to Shs 4.3 billion. As I said earlier, that is as a result of the recruitment in one of the agencies, NITA-U.

In terms of activities, one of the e-activities that the ministry is undertaking is the phase III of the National Backbone Infrastructure. As you very well know, Parliament of Uganda did get a loan from Chinese Bank to establish and develop a national backbone infrastructure to increase connectivity within the country. 

The slide that we show there has been revised because there were delays in implementing phase III but that has come as a blessing, in the sense that we can now have Internet access through Mutukula. As it is, the country has had Internet access only through Kenya and the border in Malaba. Now, during phase III, what NITA-U is planning to do is to have an alternative route for Internet connectivity for this country, which I think is a very good thing. As a result, they are going to increase the protection of the network. The key aspect here is that the fibre that was laid has had challenges. It was dug in the ground and as roadworks were being done, the cables were cut. So what NITA-U is doing is to change and use a mix of underground barriers as well as aerial cables, the way we see electric poles. During that phase, because of the delays, technology has changed and it has become cheaper. As a result, the Network Operating Centre (NOC) that was supposed to be implemented under phase I will come in under phase III but at a reduced cost. 

The next slide is about Business Process Outsourcing (BPO). Under that activity, the ministry will operationalise the BPO strategy and incentive scheme. Mr Speaker, Parliament approved a supplementary to develop these centres, and the picture that you see there are the actual centres that have now started employing the youth of Uganda. Indeed, NITA-U will be overseeing the BPOs as well as advising on how they should be managed. 

The other planned activities are establishment of district business information centres, whose purpose is to deepen e-government services. One of the major services here is provision of tax advice or assisting people who work in rural areas to fill their returns online. The other aspect is harmonisation, rationalisation and coordinating IT planning across ministries, departments and agencies, enforcing regulations on cyber laws.

In terms of e-government, the ministry is finalising the e-government master plan and the ministry will be rolling out unified messaging collaboration systems and voice over Internet Protocol across 10 ministries, departments and agencies. 

The ministry has unfunded priorities in terms of the BPOs. They need Shs 5.2 billion to continue with the incentives that they have given to the three companies that are running the BPO call centres in the country. The ministry will also need Shs 7.5 billion for the implementation of the National Security Information System specifically the component of the national databank under the National Security Information System.  

The ministry has a shortfall of Shs 9.5 billion for implementation of the e-government policy framework and Shs 2.8 for operationalisation of cyber laws, which include the Computer Misuse Act, the Electronic Transactions Act and the Electronic Signatures Act. 

In terms of challenges, as mentioned from the shortfalls that they have, they have: 
    • inadequate funding to key priority areas; 
    • low ICT staffing in ministries, departments and agencies and lack of IT staff in districts; 
    • ICT security threats and attacks; 
    • inadequate local digital content in local languages; 
    • uncoordinated delivery and rollout of infrastructure countrywide, and that includes roads and telecom infrastructure. Like I mentioned earlier, there have been cuts in the fibre that had been laid for Internet connectivity. 
    • Rampant damage on installed ICT infrastructure; and 
    • limited penetration of ICT in terms of access and usage. 

The committee had its own observations and made recommendations. One of our major observations is that ICT procurement across ministries, departments and agencies is uncoordinated yet streamlining it would save costs. The committee therefore recommends that NITA-U rationalises and harmonises procurement especially the bulk purchase of a bandwidth where Government can make quick savings. 

The committee also noted that infrastructure development is uncoordinated. Telecom companies should be encouraged to share masts and also the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) should be encouraged to develop ducts, which can be used for passing through fibre to avoid the cuts that we are experiencing. The UCC therefore should urgently put in place a framework for sharing infrastructure while UNRA should construct ducts for fibre as they build the roads. 

In terms of analogue to digital migration, Uganda and other East African countries had agreed to a deadline to migrate from analogue to digital, a deadline of December 2012. There has been a failure in recognising this because the ministry, I think of Information and National Guidance, received a quotation of Shs 74 million. As if that is not enough, there have been issues related to the framework.  

The committee on ICT recommended in the last financial year that the Ministry of Information and National Guidance unbundles UBC to have a section for content and a section for infrastructure. That has not been done yet. The committee therefore recommends that the ministry should urgently unbundle Uganda Broadcasting Corporation to provide for content and infrastructure separately. Also, during the interactions with the sector departments, we learnt that Uganda Communications Commission can indeed deploy analogue to digital at a cost of US$ 11 million as opposed to the US$ 74 million that had earlier been proposed to the Ministry of Information and National Guidance. 

In terms of e-government, the committee commends the Uganda Revenue Authority for its efforts to computerise its operations. However, it is concerned about the recurrent software expenses that ministries, departments and agencies are incurring. The committee recommends that where possible, these agencies should purchase the source code of the software to enable manipulation to address future challenges without requesting the supplier to innovate on their behalf. 

In terms of technology and localisation, if you go on the interface of Google, you will see that you have an option to interact with the Internet using your local language i.e. Luganda, Kiswahili or Runyakitara. However, Government continues to use foreign applications without transaction, which has hindered the government-to-consumer component of e-government that would enable users to interact with government services online. The committee recommends that the Government of Uganda should prioritise innovation in terms of localisation of software as well as translating applications in local languages to address the digital divide. 

In terms of ICT research and development, most ICT initiatives are championed by the private sector yet the country’s research needs cannot be addressed by the private sector alone. The committee notes that what NARO is to agriculture, the Uganda Information and Communications Technology Institute (UICTI) should be to ICT. Government should therefore upgrade UICTI to an ICT research and development centre with a mandate similar to the Meraka Institute in South Africa. The committee further recommends that the institute should be managed by UCC to compel the commission to invest in it. 

Mr Speaker, while interacting with the ministry, they did mention that they are reviewing the ban on used computers. The committee is concerned and aware of the dangers associated with these used equipment and the dangers they cause to the environment. The committee therefore recommends that the ministry upholds the ban to safeguard the country from being a dumping ground for used products under the guise of “not all used products are harmful”. In addition, the ministry should not contradict the e-waste management policy they are developing. 

In terms of the Country Top Level Domain (CTLD) name management, with your permission, Mr Speaker, let me explain that the CTLD is the dot Uganda where you see all email addresses or websites that have .ug - that is the top level domain name. As it is today, the top level domain name is a national resource but it is managed by a private organisation. By so doing, it exposes the country to risks in the sense that if that private operator had a problem, we would all be basically disabled, in that, we would not be able to access the Internet largely because our access is through the domain of the dot ug (.ug). 

The committee recommends that Government should urgently, but cautiously, take the ownership and management of the top level domain name in accordance with Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICAN) principles and guidelines; ICAN is an institute based in the US that governs Internet across the countries. 

The other key observation is that ICT is a tool for managing waste. However, in this particular financial year 2012/13, printing, stationary, photocopying and binding will have a whopping budget of Shs 34 billion as opposed to the Shs 20 billion that the ministry of ICT is seeking. In actual sense, the reason we champion ICT is to avoid printing, stationary, photocopying and binding. The committee therefore recommends that in financial year 2013/2014, ministries, departments and agencies should submit their ministerial policy statements in soft form as opposed to printed copies. Each sectoral committee can have access to 30 bound copies as opposed to all members receiving all policy statements, many of which are not read. 

The other observation is related to the national ICT policy. The committee is saying that the government should expedite the process of having a national ICT policy in place because the country is losing opportunities due to absence of the same. Now that the country or NITA-U is operationalising the cyber laws, there is need for a data protection Bill to ensure that personal data is protected from unreasonable security safeguards, against risks such as loss of or unauthorised access, destruction, use, modification or disclosure of data. The reason we proposed this is because when cyber laws are operationalised, we shall start transacting online but the people who are transacting online must be sure that the data that they are leaving on those computers where they have transacted are not manipulated or misused. Therefore, we need a law to protect us against that. 

In terms of infrastructure, the committee recommends that in order to safeguard critical infrastructure and not just ICT, there is need to have a stringent law that penalises offenders such as the case is in other countries. 

In terms of BPOs, honourable colleagues, the committee actually did visit the BPOs as you have seen from the pictures shown in one of the slides. We observed that the BPOs have been set up on the basis of getting businesses from out of the country. However, the committee recognises and recommends that Government should also use BPOs, most especially in maternal health. 

The diagram that you see there shows how data can be accessed by expecting mothers using integrated voice response systems. An expectant mother can call a toll free line and get assistance about any given scenario in their pregnancy stages, and get quick response as opposed to walking distances going to hospitals. In addition to that, the system can allow the expectant mothers to get a message that reminds them that their date for antenatal, or whatever it is, is due. So, we are saying that Government should actually use the BPOs to provide services to the citizens. 

Again, the same is associated to agriculture, that they should use the BPOs to create a farmers’ helpline which can provide farming tips on crop production, weather patterns, fertilisers, loans, crop protection, horticulture; everything related to agriculture can be actually delivered using BPOs. The diagram on the right basically shows the stages that would be undertaken to ensure that this information has seamless flow in the system. 

In terms of sectors and their performance, the highlight from Posta Uganda is that they are owed money by the Office of the Prime Minister arising from rent of the postal buildings. The committee recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister should pay Posta Uganda by next month. 

We also noted that there are agencies participating in the implementation of the National Addressing System and Post Code Project. However, the ministry needs to streamline implementation of the post code system by clearly defining and separating the distinct roles of implementing agencies from supervision and coordination.  

Uganda Institute of Information and Communications 
Technology (UICT)

The Uganda Institute of Information and Communications 
Technology derives its mandate from section 5(z) of the Uganda Communications Act 1997 and its role basically is to impact technical skills to Ugandans. However, the institute is drifting from the core role by adopting business courses in their curriculum. The committee notes that given the dynamism of the ICT sector, the institute should introduce courses such as cyber optics maintenance, IT security, and forensic audits as opposed to business courses. The committee also noted that the institute does not get much funding from Government and therefore recommended that UCC should manage and fund the institute in order to make it competitive. 

National Information Technology Authority, Uganda (NITA-U)

The National Information Technology Authority, Uganda derives its mandate from NITA-U Act of 2009 and the agency has commercialised the national backbone infrastructure. In essence, the national backbone infrastructure that was developed by NITA-U can now start generating resources so that the country can pay back the loans that it got to establish that infrastructure. Parliament of Uganda asked it to carry out a forensic technical audit, which was done and presented to the committee, and NITA-U has recruited 55 more staff in their docket and is introducing three district business information centres.
 
However, the committee notes that NITA-U has a large mandate that could be compromised by concentrating on what we call District Business Information Centres (DBICs) yet UCC and Posta Uganda are doing projects along the same line. The committee recommends that NITA-U should consider handing over these DBICs to Posta Uganda. 

Colleagues, the picture that we have there is of the national backbone infrastructure network, and basically the key highlights as I said earlier. Now the country will be in position to have an alternative gateway for the Internet through Mutukula and that is the key highlight of what NITA-U has done in terms of redesigning the network. You will see that in some sections, the ring does not exist or it appears as though Internet is not there, but those will be addressed with advanced wireless connectivity that will provide the last mile; after the third phase is finished, and then the last mile connectivity will be done. All the areas that are not covered by the fibre will be covered using wireless technology. 

Uganda Communications Commission

Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) derives its mandate from the Uganda Communications Commission Act, Cap 106 of the Laws of Uganda. The agency has reviewed interconnection rates, installed ICT laboratories in schools and equipped health centres. However, they have challenges arising from lack of a national competitions law and delays in pronouncements of the telecommunications policy and unresolved issues connected to analogue to digital. Like I said earlier, UBC needs to unbundle in order for them to move; they cannot move unless UBC has been unbundled.
 
The committee recommends as follows: 

There are issues related to quality of services. Over the years, the quality of services of telecom companies has dropped, in addition to abuse of privacy through unsolicited messages that are associated with legal costs to the consumer. The committee recommends that UCC should take stern action against companies that abuse users’ privacy by sending unsolicited messages in some cases at a cost, especially those managed by short code managers. The short code managers are these organisations that run the four digit number codes.
 
The committee further recommends that UCC should pursue number porting as a tool for consumer protection. With your permission, Mr Speaker, if I could explain what number portability is. It is basically where you have your number and move it to another network without changing a single digit. So, in essence, with the abuse that telecom companies are impacting on the users, the user can move their number as it is to another network without changing a single digit. That is what number portability is.

The other activity that UCC is doing is SIM card registration which, however, lacks uniformity. In some cases, the companies are taking photographs of users and in others they are asking the users to carry photographs. The committee recommends that UCC, first and foremost, steps up awareness and makes it clear that the exercise is free. In some areas, individuals have been charged for their phones to be registered.  So, we urge UCC to basically step up awareness to ensure that they emphasise that the exercise is free at the same time develop a uniform SIM card registration guideline that telecom operators should follow.
 
In conclusion, the committee recommends that Parliament do approve a total budget of Shs 20, 328,000,000 for the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology for the financial year 2012/2013 as follows: 
    • Recurrent expenditure (wage and non wage) - Shs 8, 378,000,000;
    • Development expenditure – Shs 7, 248,000,000; 
    • Taxes - Shs 4,703,000,000 

Altogether, this comes to a total of Shs 20, 328,000,000. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and your committee for this excellent work. I would request you to lay both the main report and the slides for our consumption. Let the Hansard capture them both.
  
MR BAGIIRE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Information and Communication Technology on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for vote 020, financial year 2012/2013. I beg to lay.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and also the slides.
 
MR BAGIIRE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the slides on the report of the sectoral committee on ICT on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of ICT, Vote 020, financial year 2012/2013. I beg to lay.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those documents as such. Honourable members, that is the report of our committee. This time would be appropriate, if the members have comments. As I said, those comments are limited to three minutes. The way it is structured is that time was given for the shadow ministers to present their alternative policy statements to the committees and then the committees would present both. So, there is nothing like an Opposition position on this. The Opposition will only respond at the time when the minister is also responding. We have already dealt with that issue and so there is nothing like the Opposition’s position on this matter. 

12.56
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On page 7, the chairman has highlighted areas of unfunded priorities in this department. I have had the opportunity to read the budget framework paper and some ministerial statements and found that actually everywhere, you find that we have a whole lot of unfunded priorities of different sectors of this economy.
 
I would like some clarification from the Minister of Finance because last financial year, in the month of June, Uganda Revenue Authority collected a surplus of Shs 106 billion. This was not all; the government still received more money which was returned from different departments as unspent funds. I would like to know where this money was reflected in the budget. We have a lot of unfunded priorities and we have cash which was brought forward from the past financial year; where is this money reflected in this budget? If anything, can’t we have these unfunded priorities catered for and financed from within the funds that accrued from last financial year? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.58
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking two clarifications. On the last page, under the conclusion, the chairman indicates that Shs 4.7 billion has been budgeted for for taxes. When you compare this amount with the development expenditure, you will find that the difference is not big. May we know where these taxes are going to be incurred? 

Secondly, on unfunded priorities on page 5, one of the items is Business Process Outsourcing (BPO). From the chairman’s submission, in last financial year this activity was funded through the supplementary budget. However, this year it appears as unfunded. Don’t you think that at the end of the day we will again have a supplementary budget relating to this activity? Thank you.

1.00
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the presenter for the good report. However, I have two questions. One is on the wage bill for NITA-U, which is raised from Shs 0.677 billion to Shs 4 billion. I wish to understand what mainly constitutes this increase because such a drastic increase from Shs 677 million to over Shs 4 billion is astronomical. 

The second one is about the BPOs. Whereas we are investing over Shs 5.2 billion in this area, it is not exactly clear how much revenue we are expecting to generate from this sector. I recognise the importance of BPOs in providing employment, especially to our youth, and we are injecting a lot of money into that area. However, what revenues are we expecting and when should we expect to start receiving these revenues? What are our main sources of business in this area? Thank you.

1.01
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report that focuses on ICT, which is about 20 percent understandable by Ugandans. It seems that 80 percent of Ugandans are not well versed with ICT. Given that, I note on page 7 that there is an effort to have Cabinet ministers taken through training in ICT. I also plead for state ministers – as much as I am not one of them – and the backbenchers. 

Looking at the projection of the ICT committee, it seems that they are basically targeting e-tax and business people. We should also look at the education section. You did not present it as a challenge and yet you find that most schools do not have computers yet this should be the beginning of appreciating the role of ICT.

Lastly, on page 10 they are talking about technological localisation as a challenge. I believe we are not talking about technology going to the village to my grandmother but it can first end with the institutions. Let us first make institutions well versed with ICT and then the others will follow. Thank you.

1.04
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Looking at page 4, I have been trying to relate the preamble to the table listed there but they seem not to be correlating. When you read the second sentence it says, “The performance is attributed to the recurrent budget that performed at 159 per cent due to the supplementary expenditure of Shs 3.6 billion that was provided to cater for the NITA-U wage shortfalls.” But when you look at the table, the supplementary is related to the non-wage. So which one is which? Is the supplementary related to the wage or non-wage?

The second question comes from the table; the performance of most of the items was below 100 percent. This would imply that some of the activities were not funded and therefore were not handled. However, as I was reading, I did not see these activities which were included in the budget but were not handled. I am not a member of this committee, so I would be interested in knowing these activities that were not handled and also finding out whether these activities have actually been rolled over in this budget. So, at what point can I get the information about these activities that were not actually handled? Wouldn’t it be prudent to indicate the amount that was actually released out of the approved amount? 

I am looking at the second line of the table, which reads “non-wage”. When you read it, you get the impression that the supplementary budget was got. However, when you add the supplementary budget to what was approved, the amount comes to Shs 8.292 billion, which is over and above what was released. So in this case, if I had the amount that was released out of the approved, then I would have a clear understanding. Thank you.

1.06
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is just a small observation. I first thank the committee and the chairperson for the work well done. I would only love to know the reasons the ministry gave for lack of operationalisation of the cyberspace laws, especially the Computer Misuse Act and the Electronic Transactions Act with a view to the current transactions which are going on online. I believe not many of us are spared the same. Just in case the reasons were given to the committee, may we know why it is just lack of funding and yet it is a priority? 

Given the fact that probably each one of us is transacting online every day, what would happen? Where would I get my remedies just in case I was defrauded online within Uganda and within cyberspace? I would be interested in knowing that, and whether there is hope of getting these laws working as the chairman is suggesting.

1.08
MS RITA NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 11 part 7, the committee mentions the review of the ban on used computers. I appreciate and definitely support the fact that the environment must be protected, but we have a challenge. 

Government has decided to make computer studies in secondary schools compulsory and the government policy is that only government schools are supported to have computers. However, we have some sub-counties in this country that do not have government schools already established. The private sector decided to bridge this gap by introducing secondary schools in these sub-counties. These schools are helping Ugandans, but when it comes to being assisted with these computers they face a challenge. Now that computer training is compulsory, and the money they collect is almost not there because most of them, especially the seminaries, are non-profit making, they find a challenge on how to proceed to ensure that computer studies are offered but without the computers. 

I therefore want to find out from the honourable minister what plans they have to bridge this gap. We have time and again overwhelmed him in his office, well knowing that the policy does not allow him, but I do not know if they have gone ahead to plan and see how to assist these schools. To me, it does not make sense for us not to support a school in Moroto, for instance, that is private and getting very little and we give such assistance to a school like Gayaza, which already has parents that can afford to procure those computers. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, maybe you should also guide me. Is there a ban on used computers? Is it on importation or just using used computers? You could take one then you deal with the rest of the responses. 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think it is importation of used computers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not very clear from the report. 

1.11
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice in thanking the chairperson for the wonderful presentation. I am looking forward to the day when all of us, Members of Parliament, will actually be reading from our iPads as chairpersons of these committees make their presentations or as members of the frontbench make presentations. 

Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the chairperson on the comments on page 8 of the paper where he is talking about the duplication of ICT activities. My ministry is handling the Energy for Rural Transformation Project and indeed we liaise with the respective ministries that have issues in energy for rural transformation, and ICT is one of the ministries. So I am seeking clarification from the chairperson on the issue of duplication. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will take the shadow minister then we will take the minister. Since it is dealing with the report of the chair, the chairman will be last. 

1.12
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, the department of ICT in the Opposition would like the chairperson to clarify on the following:

How much money has the Government of Uganda been paying to the Kenyan Government for the use of the fibre optic gateway? How much are we earning as revenue from the Government of Rwanda using the same gateway between the border of Malaba and Katuna? This gateway is like a vehicle; if you want to drive a vehicle to Kenya, you have to pay some insurance and that is for the use of their road facilities. That is not declared in your report.

We also need to know the capacity of the current bandwidth compared to the growth of the economy of Uganda and East Africa. Is it inadequate? What is the challenge the sector is facing? What plan does the government have? The Government of Ethiopia has decided to have its own fibre optic from the Middle East because the current fibre optic being shared between Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda is totally inadequate as to promote business outsourcing. So, it is a big challenge. The chairman needs to tell us what plans Government has and when we are going to have our own from the Middle East. 

When you are proposing that now we are going to access from Katuna and yet Tanzania is also getting from the other side, your proposal is just to worsen the situation. We have Mutukula which is via Tanzania. You are not adding anything because it is more expensive from the Middle East, Kenya, Uganda; Middle East, Tanzania and then via Uganda. We are using one system; so what are you adding?

The chairman also needs to clarify, or if you are not aware - Are you aware that there was a consultancy project on Posta Uganda and the consultant was given the first call in case of privatisation? Now you are recommending transferring certain substance from another government department to Posta Uganda and yet there is already a first call on privatisation to a private company, violating the PPDA Act. This agreement was signed by the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury, tying the hands of Government.

For us in the Opposition, we believe that for the Postcode Project there should be no resource for this, thus the US$ 25 million is wastage. In other countries, citizens pay to have address codes. The people of this country would be willing to pay, provided Government comes up with the guidelines, so that mail can be delivered to my residence without people looking for my home, driving and asking boda bodas. This will also enhance security of this country, and it does not require Government to put in a shilling. In other counties, owners of homes and residences and business premises pay for this service. Why is Government taking time to institute this, putting US$ 25 million to waste? We are short of money for other important sectors. 

In your total allocation of Shs 20 billion, please indicate to us the component of non-tax revenue. Mr Speaker, most of the government departments and sectors generate revenue. That needs to come out clearly, and how it is utilised. Is this from the Consolidated Fund? How much is the NTR as part of this Shs 20 billion we are going to approve? Thank you very much.

1.17
THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee of ICT for making, in my view, a very good report and also the colleagues who have contributed to the same report for the ideas, suggestions and views that they have expressed. I will just make comments on some of the issues that have been raised.

The BPOs; when should we get returns? I am happy to say that after some investment in it, at long last the BPO programme is in operation. In fact, only this morning, the ICT team with me spent some time meeting Techno Brain, one of the BPO companies that are now operating in Uganda. They did tell us this morning that they already have quite a number of seats, which they are going to increase to a few hundred within the next several months. So, the BPO operations are no longer theory; they are now a reality in Uganda. We are at the investment stage. As to the returns, the returns are expected at an appropriate time. 

The issue of Cabinet ministers being sensitised to acquire computer skills is a very legitimate point. It is a very good point. You may be interested to know that actually next month, there is going to be a retreat for ministers and they will be focussing on issues of policy and also polishing their skills in as far as computers are concerned. However, I hope that this is not going to be a privilege for ministers only, that honourable Members of Parliament will also be able to polish their skills. 

By the way, we are talking of computer skills for all Ugandans. We have, therefore, invested substantial amounts of money to ensure that secondary schools, as had already been said, acquire computer labs. As I speak now, 900 or so secondary schools in Uganda have already received computer labs and another 300 or 400 secondary schools are about to get these computer labs, and that will complete government secondary schools. However, it is true that there is a case –(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for giving way. I am happy that he said all Ugandans must become computer literate. I would like to know whether they have provisions for the blind students who are in secondary and primary schools. Do you have arrangements for speaking programmes for all the computers so that blind persons can benefit? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: The honourable colleague has raised a very legitimate point. I know arrangements are in place to ensure that the computer skills being imparted are non-discriminatory, and that people with some special needs will also be catered for. Off hand, I cannot give you the time scale but I know that that is part of the programme.

A point was raised whether private schools will be able to benefit. It is true that the intention of Government is to assist as many young people as possible to acquire skills. The first priority was given to government secondary schools but yes, at a later stage, after government secondary schools have been handled, it will be possible to support private institutions as well. As we said, our policy is to extend computer skills and knowledge to the people of Uganda as a whole.

A few other points were raised like money gained through the gateway. Yes, a lot of money exchanges hands because of services provided. I do not have that ready information but that is information that we can make available to the honourable member who raised this point.

Our own dedicated cables; this is an important point. At the moment, we have about four cables that are supposed to be coming to Uganda from Mombasa but it also true that Tanzanian cables or cables through Tanzania have been linked up to Mutukula. Under the third phase of the national backbone infrastructure, we are going to connect to Mutukula and that is important because Uganda as a landlocked country will be able to have its data, information going through either Kenya or through Tanzania. In fact, the national backbone cable is already at Nimule and the idea is to connect with Sudan and possibly also with Ethiopia and Djibouti so that we connect with Cairo. The more cables we have, the better –(Interruption)

DR OKUONZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister on this point. What I want to know is: what arrangements does the ministry have to connect West Nile to that line? I also think about Karamoja because those are the two main regions that have been left out and the minister is talking about connecting Sudan and Ethiopia. Can you clarify on this issue?

DR RUGUNDA: Actually, it is an important point but hon. Bagiire, in his report, did explain. In fact, he showed us a map of Uganda with various backbone routes but he also added that the areas of Uganda that do not appear close to the national backbone will be covered by the last mile management or programme under wireless technology. So, West Nile and the rest of the country are going to be covered either through the backbone or through the last mile technology, and this will be wireless technology. So, West Nile is covered under the programme.

Mr Speaker, the more cables that we have linking Uganda with the international community, the better and more stable and competitive our BPO services and programmes will be. The other day we were in Cairo and Egypt has 16 sea cables serving them. That is one of the reasons why they are so successful in the BPO operations because at any single time, they are assured of reliable and affordable Internet connections. 

On the question of the individuals being able to pay for their postal connections and the like, Government has a programme which is being piloted in Entebbe Municipality to ensure that postcode addresses are given to all our people, premises are numbered and the like. Government has a responsibility to do so. People will be paying for other services because when you send a parcel, you will be paying for it. So, let Government focus on ensuring that the infrastructure is in place and then wanianchi can be able to pay for additional detailed services. 

In conclusion, I want to commend the Committee on ICT for a good report that they have presented. The Ministry of ICT and Government are committed to ensuring that ICT becomes a reality in our country, expedites transaction of business and makes Uganda competitive. Although we are landlocked, the fact that somebody in New York and Uganda can go to the Internet and do business at the same time, we in Uganda as a landlocked country want to take maximum advantage of that. 

In this crusade of ensuring that the Internet becomes a reality, we ask for full support from Parliament and other institutions in the country which are involved in, or in one way or another promoting, the practice and use of ICT. The policy is, let us focus on getting reliable Internet connections which are affordable and accessible not only in urban areas but in all parts of the country, including West Nile. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

1.29
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Vincent Bagiire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank you, colleagues, for your comments and questions. 

One of the honourable colleagues has asked why the wage bill has gone up from Shs 670 million to Shs 4.3 billion. As I explained earlier, NITA-U recruited 55 staff. That is the explanation for that increment. 

With regard to the increment or the supplementary falling under non-wage as opposed to the wages; we raised that issue with the ministry about why the figure fell under non-wage. They explained that when they made supplementary requests, they included some other activities and that is why they lumped the entire figure. Although the reason is not convincing, they showed evidence that the figure went to wage. As a committee, we did not want to tamper with the manner in which they had presented it so we just left it as it was. 

On the issue of education, hon. Ninsiima was making a point on the ban of importation of used computers. The committee compelled Uganda Communications Commission to ensure that they allot computers to some of the key private schools in the various districts. We are confident that in due course, private schools will also be a beneficiary of the Rural Communications Development scheme.   

Hon. Oboth asked about the dangers of Internet fraud. Again as I mentioned earlier, the Shs 3.8 billion which we said was an unfunded priority is a figure which is supposed to operationalise the Computer Misuse Act, Electronic Transactions Act and Electronic Signatures Act. The idea is to protect the users from any sort of fraud.

Hon. Muloni wanted me to clarify on the issue of duplication of ICT services. The committee looked at the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and there was a component of creating communication information centres. However, she has just explained here and now that they implement these components with the aid of UCC. I would like it to go on record that there is no lack of coordination but rather, ERT is implemented with UCC and indeed, some of those resources are used for purchasing computers but end up in the schools. 

Hon. Ekanya raised an issue of the fibre which goes up to Rwanda. The national backbone infrastructure in Uganda was only commercialised this month. It was handed over to a commercial provider and it is only until then that Government will be able to get resources from that national backbone infrastructure. Now that it has been commercialised, it has a manager. The manager will take care of any cuts, defects and defaults and collect revenue on behalf of Government and pass it on to NITA-U and the ministry.

Again, hon. Ekanya gave an example of Ethiopia, which has connected itself from the Middle East. As you very well know, Uganda is a landlocked country but again it is in that very bid that the ministry is getting more redundancy on bandwidth by making sure that we are connected through Mutukula. 

In terms of postcodes, the honourable minister has given an explanation but let me add that we cannot ask individuals or citizens of Uganda to invest in the technology of postcodes. In essence, the initial cost of establishing the national postcode and addressing system has to be undertaken by the Government of Uganda.

On the issue of non-tax revenue, I think that will arise in the next financial year now that the fibre has been commercialised. 
I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issues have been raised and clarified. Time has come for us to take a decision on whether to adopt the report of the committee with its recommendations. I will put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank you, honourable minister. Thank you, shadow minister. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us receive the report and see if we can take a break for lunch. In the meantime, let any member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs get ready. Mr Chairman, you have 15 minutes. 

1.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nokrach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to present a report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2012/2013. 

Article 90 and 155 (4) of the Constitution of Uganda and provisions of rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandate the committee to, among other things, examine and comment on:

i) 	Policy matters affecting the ministries covered by them. 

ii) 	Discuss and review the government’s recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them.

Scope of the Report

The report covers Vote 018, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and highlights the following aspects:
    • Sector performance for the financial year 2011/2012.
    • Mandates of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 
    • Key sector achievements for the financial year 2011/2012. 
    • Financial performance for the financial year 2011/2012. 
    • Key constraints or challenges in financial year 2011/2012. 
    • Key planned activities for the financial year 2012/2013. 
    • Budget proposals for the financial year 2012/2013. 
    • Observations and recommendations.

Mr Speaker, we used the following methods in scrutinising the ministerial statements:
a) 	We held meetings with the following stakeholders: 
i) 	The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 
ii) 	The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic development. 
iii) 	The Forum for Women in Development. 
iv) 	The National Culture Centre. 
v) 	Equal Opportunities Commission. 
vi) 	Apex trade unions (NOTU and COFTU).
vii) 	Parliamentary Forum on Children. 
viii) 	Kampala Capital City Authority.
 
b) We examined the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2012/2013 and made references to the following documents: 
1) 	The ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for financial year 2011/2012.
2) 	The Budget Act, 2001.
3) 	The Background to the Budget, FY 2012/2013.
4) 	The Budget Speech for financial year 2012/2013.
5) 	The report of the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2011/2012.
6) 	The National Budget Framework Paper for the sector for the financial year 2011/2012 to 2015/2016.
7) 	The National Development Plan for financial year 2010/2011 to 2011/2015. 
8) 	The 2012 State of the Nation Address by the President.

Mr Speaker, because of time, I will not read through this report. This report is accommodated on 27 pages, therefore the time given to me is not enough. I will therefore make reference to key issues. I want to refer members to page 12 so that we look at the main issues facing the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

Challenges and Constraints 

    • Perennial underfunding has limited the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development’s effort to effectively perform its mandate.
    • Inadequate funding to facilitate monitoring and evaluation of programmes under the mandate of the sector.
    • The absence of a constituted industrial court makes it difficult to resolve a backlog of industrial disputes.
    • Inadequate staff to implement activities especially at the local government level.

Mr Speaker, these were the main challenges identified in the sector and we scrutinized the ministerial policy statement seriously. We made our observations and recommendations on page 20, where I refer you to. 

Labour and Productivity

Industrial Court

The committee observed that continued absence of a fully constituted industrial court is making it difficult to resolve industrial disputes. This has resulted in continued/increased industrial cases. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development informed the committee that he had met with the Attorney-General to discuss the appointment of the Chairperson of the Industrial Court and the proposed structure has been forwarded to the Ministry of Public Service for approval.  

The Committee further observed that:

    • The absence of a fully-fledged industrial court has led to the poor performance of labour and labour productivity in Uganda.

    • The underfunding of the department has led to its non-performance since no attention is paid to it.

    • The activities of labour are suffocated under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

The Committee recommends that:
    • A separate ministry of labour be formed to handle issues of labour and employment in this country.

    • The process of forming the Industrial Court should be expedited such that it can handle labour disputes. 

Minimum Wage Advisory Board
The committee observed that Minimum Wage Advisory Board, which was scheduled to start last financial year, did not start. 

The committee recommends that the ministry fast tracks the creation and operationalisation of this board in this financial year, 2012/2013.

Occupational Health and Safety
The committee was informed that the ministry developed two good project proposals - Promotion of a Healthy Workforce, Employment and Productivity Project; and Strengthening Safeguards and Safety and Health in the Workplaces - with sound and convincing objectives. If supported through Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, this would help the ministry to strengthen its mandate through improving service delivery.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government considers the two projects with a view of mobilizing funds for their implementation. 

Equal Opportunities Commission

The Equal Opportunities Commission (EOC) was set up by   an Act of Parliament in 2007. This Commission is to give effect to the constitutional mandate to eliminate discrimination and inequalities against individuals or groups of persons on grounds of sex, age, race, colour, ethnicity, origin, creed, disability and so on or any other reason created as result of history, tradition or custom. It is to redress imbalances which exist against such persons; that is in Article 32 of the Constitution. 

During the interface with the committee, the EOC informed the committee that it had submitted a separate budget to ministry of finance but it was never considered. 

The Committee observed:
    • The Commission was allocated only Shs 600 million in the financial year 2011/12, which was hardly enough for the Commission to carry out its activities.

    • The Commission has never been allocated its own budget hence crippling its activities. It accounts to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development yet it is an autonomous commission.

    • The EOC has already met the key requirements of attaining an independent vote.

    • The fifth position of the Commission is vacant.

The Committee recommends: 
    • The budget ceiling of the Commission should be enhanced.
    • The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should allocate the Equal Opportunities Commission a vote.
    • Government should ensure that the fifth member of the Commission is appointed.

Youth Venture Capital Fund

The Youth Venture Capital Fund is being implemented by three banks namely, Stanbic, Centenary and DFCU. A memorandum of understanding was signed with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development where, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is to provide training for the youth. To date, the ministry has developed guidelines and regulations for the operationalisation of the Youth Entrepreneurship Venture Capital Fund, and has prepared the Youth Training Manual. 

The committee observed that in the financial year 2011/2012, funds for training were not released and the ministry did not conduct any training. The number of youths who have benefited from the Youth Venture Capital Fund is small in the whole country.

The committee, therefore, recommends that funds for the Youth Venture Capital Fund should immediately be released to Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to enable the ministry operationalise the project.

The social protection for vulnerable groups

Expanding Social Protection Programme

Government signed a memorandum of understanding with the development partners who include Irish Aid, DFID and UNICEF. I would like to lay a copy of the memorandum of understanding on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. What is the date on the copy of the memorandum of understanding?

MR NOKRACH: It is dated 12 January 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good.

MR NOKRACH: The title of this memorandum of understanding with the Government of Uganda for non-budget support financial aid between the governments of United Kingdom of Great Britain, Netherlands, Ireland acting through the Department for International Development (DFID) and the Government of Uganda together call participants – United Kingdom and Expanding Social Protection Programme Grant 2010.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR NOKRACH: Under this programme, the Government of Uganda is supposed to co-fund this programme with the development partners. However, no funds have been indicated in the MTEF and/or in the ministerial policy statement. The committee observed that continued delay to show commitment on the side of Government is likely to hamper the implementation of the programme.

Besides, the ministry during the medium term expenditure frame work discussion with the committee in April proposed a phased roll out plan for SAGE to cover the whole country. In this financial year, Shs 36 billion was planned to cover 25 more districts under Government of Uganda funding. This money has not been provided in the budget and the ministry is reporting it in the ministerial policy statement as an unfunded priority.

The committee, therefore, recommends that funds for counterpart funding amounting to Shs 0.5 billion should be released to enable the implementation of the programme.

The committee further recommends that Government considers funding the extension of SAGE programme to cover the whole country and in line with the roll-out plan by releasing the required Shs 36 billion this financial year. This will help the elderly to be at the same level with the rest in the 14 districts where the programme is already being implemented.

Street children

The committee was informed that a multi-sectoral street children strategy for prevention, withdrawal and reintegration of street children in communities was developed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The minister informed the committee that although the ministry at times removes the children off the streets, the primary mandate is for Kampala City Council Authority. When the committee interacted with KCCA, they informed the committee that KCCA has integrated the surveillance of children on the streets into other surveillance activities of the city like law enforcement of trade order, surveillance of city green areas and city cleaning activities carried out by the Directorate of Public Health and Environment. Other measures KCCA is proposing is enacting a by-law –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three more minutes.

MR NOKRACH: I thank you. Other measures KCCA is proposing is enacting a by-law prohibiting the public from giving money to the street children. The committee observes that street children have continued to be a menace on the streets of Kampala and other towns of Uganda. Despite the above efforts, no serious action has been taken to remove the children from the streets. Currently, the main cause of increasing number of Karimojong families on the streets of Kampala is “commercialisation of begging”. Children are hired and placed by adults to beg on the streets as a source of economic activity and income. This has become a single factor that explains large numbers of children from Karamoja on the streets of urban areas in Uganda.

The committee also noted that the youth centres under the ministry like Mubuku Youth Training Centre in Kasese, Ntawo Youth Training Centre in Mukono, Koblin Youth Training Centre in Moroto, Kabalye Youth Training Centre and Apac Youth Training Centre are not fully functional with most of them having vacant posts.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development together with Kampala City Council Authority should work together to remove the children off the streets of Kampala and other towns.

The proposed by-law should be fast-tracked to stop the public from giving money to the street children.

The committee further recommends that Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development rehabilitates these youth training institutions and that their staff structures be fully provided for in order for them to function effectively. 

Government should ensure the Children’s Act is amended to include issues of child labour and change its aspects that have been overtaken by events.

Uganda National Cultural Centre 

The UNCC receives Shs 27 million from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as wage subversion. It collects approximately Shs 900 million annually from various activities which take place at the facility. The committee observed 80 percent of the staff structure is not filled with limited core or technical staff at the centre.
 
While interacting with the officials of the centre, the committee observed glaring inconsistencies in the money they collected and how they utilise it. The UNCC has been run down and the conditions have deteriorated and because of this, it is increasingly being out-competed by other theatres coming up.

The committee recommends that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development takes keen interest in matters pertaining to the centre and a forensic audit be carried out and a report be submitted to Parliament.

Local Governments 

The committee observed that, local governments are not adequately facilitated to mainstream gender into their plans. The Community Development Officers (CDOs) in local governments are not adequately facilitated to carry out community development functions yet they can become change agents for Government programmes. There is no policy on utilisation of Community Development Officers (CDOs).

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should have a streamlined strategy regarding utilisation of CDOs. The monthly allocation for operations of CDOs is just Shs 30,000 per month and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development requests that the amount be raised to Shs 300,000 per month per lower local government. The overall total will be Shs 3.44 billion for over 1,040 lower local governments per year for meaningful delivery of services to society. 

The committee recommends that Government should provide the funds for CDOs’ allowances and a policy on utilisation of CDOs should be put in place by the ministry.

Establishment of the Kiswahili Council

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development informed the committee that it is a requirement by all the East African States to establish a Kiswahili Council for better delivery of services. Out of five member states, it is only Uganda which does not have the Council. The estimated cost for the Council’s establishment is Shs 1.9 billion.

The committee recommends that Government should facilitate the establishment of the Kiswahili Council by providing the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development Shs 1.9 billion needed for its commencement as soon as possible. 

Conclusion 

Budget proposals for financial year 2012/2013

The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development recommends that Parliament approves funds for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the financial year 2012/2013 as follows:

Wage:  Shs 2,415,214,934.7 

Non-wage: Shs 15,020,438,225.53

Domestic – Members, I would like you to correct this. I apologise for that mistake. Domestic should be Shs 2,068,288,651.69

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the one that has been circulated right now?

MR NOKRACH: Yes, but there was a mistake on it. From our donors, we are expecting: Shs 31,389,126,144.42; Taxes: Shs 2,200,000,000. We don’t have any arrears. The total budget for the Ministry is Shs 53,093,067,956.34

Mr Speaker and Members, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for a very comprehensive report on the ministerial policy statement that your committee looked at. I thank your Members too for the work done. 

Honourable members, the issues raised in this particular sector are straight forward and clear; issues of shortage of funding and several other things. This time would be appropriate, if any debate is needed to be done, but if there is no debate, I would put the question to the motion for adoption of the report.

Can we then go for lunch for an hour and we come back at 3 o’clock. Is that okay? At 3 o’clock we start debate on this particular report. 

The House is suspended to 3 o’clock. Thank you. 

(The House was suspended at 2.01 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.17 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will have hon. Mawanda, the honourable member for Adjumani, the Member for Rukungiri, Ibanda North, honourable members for Sembabule and for Soroti District, and we will close thereafter. Proceed, you have three minutes each. 

3.18
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara Country East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report they have presented to us. However, I have some few remarks. On page 21, the committee observed that two very important projects have been submitted to the Ministry of Finance, but it appears the Minister of Finance has not considered them in this budget. These are the projects in respect to safety and health of workers in the ministry, and more importantly, the Occupational Safety and Health Department which is a very important department in the Ministry of Gender, but has not been catered for in this budget. 

This project should have support from the Ministry of Finance as they go a long way in solving some of the problems affecting our workforce in Uganda. These two projects – the Health Workforce Employment and Productivity Project which is estimated to cost about Shs 12 billion for five years, and another one to strengthen the safeguards and safety of health, which is estimated to cost Shs 34 billion also for five years, need support as earlier said because there are various advantages that will accrue from these projects. 

For example, we are undertaking a construction project in the neighbourhood of this Parliament. There are a lot of vibrations taking place. This department has no equipment to check where those vibrations are taking this building. In the near future, you will find this building affected because the ministry is hampered in monitoring and inspecting this building. The same applies to some of the buildings that are in town that have cracks. This department is not able to monitor them because it does not have equipment. So, it is against this that we really need to support this department and the ministry to ensure that the Ministry of Finance looks for money to support these departments.

Secondly, the project of strengthening safeguards and safety for health workers. It can also be a source of revenue for Government because there are certain laws that have been passed by this Parliament that can lead to non-tax revenue as a source of revenue for this government. For example, things that can be collected –(Member timed out.)

3.21
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker and Members. I want to thank the committee for this report. However, I have seek some clarifications. On page 22, under the Youth Venture Capital Fund, they have indicated that the funds for training weren’t released. So, I want to know why and I also want to know the state in which the fund was targeted to be utilised. They also indicated that a small number of the youth benefited under this fund. I want to know that specific number who benefited?

On page 23, under social protection for vulnerable groups, they have indicated that Government has not co-funded and there is even no commitment. So, I want to know why the government is reserving its commitment and I also want to know the sustainability of this programme because as we sit here, many people are asking when they will be receiving this support in the various districts of this country. 

Lastly, there is a challenge of poor funding. This does not only affect the serving level but the general activities of the ministries up to the local government level. The staff at district level under these ministries are miserable. You find only one staff manning the youths, persons with disabilities, children and women. It is, therefore, affecting so much service delivery at the grassroots level. Therefore, I will propose a review of the structure under this ministry so that the children and maybe the youths will be categorised in one aspect and the women be put with other groups. Otherwise it is enormous for this ministry to manage all the groups of people under one ministry. Thank you very much. 

3.24
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The point I want to speak to is on page 20, about the Industrial Court. I agree with the committee, but what I want to add is that these industrial courts are centralised and most of the disputes are at community level and not on the local government level. So, I think it is high time we thought of decentralising this Industrial Court so that the services are near to the people. 

The second point is on page 22 about the Youth Venture Capital Fund. The committee is telling us about the three banks which are implementing the youth fund, but I disagree with the committee because in most areas, especially rural areas, you do not find some of these banks there. So, I think we now need to work with our SACCOs because at least for any sub-county in a district, there is a registered SACCO which is insured. So, I think we should think of taking these monies to those respective village banks so that the youths can easily access this fund. Otherwise, up to now, they are still telling us that the money is in these banks but when you go there, you cannot get it.

Lastly, another point I want to comment on is on page 26, about underfunding. If you see what is happening in local governments, it is terrible. For a CDO to get Shs 30,000 per month, which is not even, worth 10 litres of fuel. We need to address this issue seriously; and remember that this is a ministry where many issues of women and children are implemented. So, we need to think about funding it if this ministry is to make some developments. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

3.27
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would equally like to thank the committee for this report. However, my comment is on the Youth Venture Capital Fund. The chairman has stated in the report that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development was supposed to undertake training of the youths before getting this capital. But in my understanding, this money has already been disbursed to the youths. I don’t know whether we are working backwards or may I ask what our vision or plan is so that we disburse the money to untrained youth? This is a guarantee that this money is not going to yield the desired results. How do we disburse money to somebody who is not trained on how to use this money and yet there is supposed to be a training carried out? I don’t know whether we are just throwing away money or we intend to make a difference in the lives of the youth of Uganda. I would like the minister to explain this because I don’t understand how you can set up training for the youths but still go ahead to disburse the money before they are trained. 

I would also like to comment on the issue of street children. Yesterday, when I was moving along one of the streets in Kampala, I saw children of about two to three years of age and what I was made to understand was that their parents hide somewhere and subject the children to begging all day. What came to mind was that while they express their need, their rights are being abused. Can the ministry explain to us what they are doing to protect these innocent children? They are there because their parents send them there. What other arrangement is there to make sure that we safeguard these children because if a child is going to grow up begging on the streets of Kampala from the age of two, what kind of youths are we bringing up? What kind of citizens are we bringing up? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.29
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and members of the committee. I would also like to strongly support the committee report and commend them for their strong views and support especially in the areas of the marginalised and vulnerable groups. I thank them for ensuring that their mandate has been used to see to it that these marginalised groups have some hope that things will soon be well for them and the government has something for them. 

I would like to turn to page 22 of the report which deals with the Equal Opportunities Commission. Due to lack of sufficient time, I will precisely look at the funding gap. But before doing that, I would like to add that the Equal Opportunities Commission is an independent body. The commission  does not only strongly advocate for equal opportunities to ensure that imbalances in the society are equally addressed, but also acts as a quasi judicial body, which has got the constitutional mandate to hear and settle disputes related to equal opportunities. 

In so doing, it has to further scrutinise all the policies and non governmental institutions to ensure that the government policies and benefits that relate to affirmative action are compliant with Article 32 of our Constitution. Therefore, when the report notes that the commission in the last financial year was allocated only Shs 600 million, and yet it is a body that  partners with every committee in this Parliament to ensure gender equity in all the sectors -  I strongly support that this –(Member timed out.)    

3.33
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report. My comment arises from page 22; the Youth Venture Capital Fund. As the honourable member for Adjumani District has already said, it is indicated that there wasn’t any training done, and it is also indicated that a small number of the youths have benefited. It would be important to know how many youths have benefited.

If you can recall, this has been a controversial programme. At first, we were told that it was about Shs 44.5 billion, but it reduced to Shs 26 billion and kept on reducing further. At this point, we would be interested in knowing - since you have said a small number of the youth have benefited - how much has been disbursed? And has the balance been returned to the Treasury or is it still available? How much have you budgeted for this financial year? Is it cumulative? In other words, is it added to the other balance and is the total amount available for the youths? 

This programme is sensitive because it is for the youths, and you know how demanding they can be. I am very sure, Mr Speaker, even in your constituency, the youths approach you to ask for this money. We support you on this programme as a committee, but we request you to own it and we would like to see results out of it. 

Another comment is arising from page 23; on social protection for the vulnerable groups. I strongly support the recommendation of the committee. However, a few issues need clarification. You have indicated in your preamble that you held a meeting with the ministry during the medium-term expenditure framework discussion and you agreed to roll over this programme throughout the entire country. 

This is very commendable, but again in the same preamble, you are saying that in this financial year, Shs 36 billion was planned to cover 25 more districts, but the pilot was covering only 14 districts. If added to 25, these will be only 39 districts and yet we have 112 or more districts. I would be interested in knowing –(Member timed out.)    

3.36
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the chairperson of the committee for the job well done. I indeed support and commend their report except that there are some few areas I need some clarification on. 

First of all, it is clearly indicated that in all regions, we have remand homes. Mbale for Eastern; Naguru and Kampirigisa National Rehabilitation Centre for Central; Fort Portal for Western; and Gulu for Northern. They sampled to do more counselling and other activities, but we noticed a very big problem after we visited these remand homes; facilitation is very poor. If possible, the minister in charge of this sector should at least increase funding to cater for these children.

On page 9, there is the issue of street children. I do not know why Government is failing to address it and yet we have the mandate. We thought the cause was the LRA war in Northern Uganda, but that war has ended. Why is Government failing to remove children from the streets? We need to be serious because whereas money is allocated, we keep seeing the number of street children increasing. Not only do we have children, but also people with disabilities, who are now increasing in number. 

On page 17, I was surprised to hear that the Children’s Act is now working. But I think that Act was tabled in 2004 and by then the minister was hon. Felix Okot Ogong. Later on, it was hon. Kinobe before hon. Jessica Alupo came in. Currently, we have hon. Kibuule, but its review was thrown away and has not yet been tabled here. However, in this report, I read that it was disseminated – which is wrong. I want clarification from the minister -(Member timed out.)

3.39
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the committee report and to thank the chairperson for presenting such a comprehensive report. I am only wondering where the meeting point between the activities of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the programmes such as PRDP and NUSAF II is. While we are talking about lack of resources and low funding, the activities that for me should lie under this ministry seem to be happening elsewhere. This is the time to bring these programmes home so that we are able to account appropriately because within the streamline of the establishment of ministries, activities must be carried out as expected. So, NUSAF needs to be brought home so that we are able to deliver the services as expected. I do not see the reason why we should cry over money when the money for this ministry is being spent elsewhere. 

And I think it also raises the question of how much the Office of the Prime Minister is holding. It seems to be creating another level of Government and ministries which is not agreeable. This Parliament needs to think of something to be done so that the right programmes are housed in the right ministries and let the Office of the Prime Minister carry out supervision and oversight. 

Secondly, on page 22, there is also this element of the Youth Fund. I wish to seek clarification that out of the funds that we have made available, were there indicative planning figures given per district for purposes of ensuring equity and accessibility. When you look at this report, where there is mention of training of youths and others, they seem to have concentrated in certain areas. What happens to the youths in Karamoja where there is no vocational training school? Where will they get skills if the basis of accessing money is that they must have skills to do implementation?

Looking at page 24; the issue of the street children; how many of the Karimojong children are living in Karamoja? What is unique about these children that have continued to be on the streets? Government needs to take a decision on this. The Minister of Gender should give us an explanation as to why they have failed to fix this matter. For the last seven years, these children have been on the streets and new ones keep coming each day. A colleague from Soroti has just said that even children who are two years old are now on the streets. Who is bringing these children here? We need to get the answer. Why should the thousands of Karamoja children be in Karamoja –(Member timed out.)

3.42
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Mr Speaker, I support the motion, but I need some clarification either from the chairperson or the minister. I want to know why, if Government is not ready, it goes on to introduce projects that it cannot implement. One of them is this project for the elderly where they have selected only two sub-counties in 14 districts. This basically shows that Government is not ready. How can a government work like an NGO which picks only one district and then exaggerates by placing it in the media to show that they are working? If you, as Government, were not ready, why introduce this project? I even pity the pilot districts where this project is being implemented. With only two sub-counties, I pity the MPs of those areas because the rest of the sub-counties can rise up against you in 2016 thinking that you segregated against them. 

Secondly, I want to know the criteria used in choosing the 14 districts because if you critically analyse them, it looks like the 14 districts have represented ministers. Could it mean that the ministers decided to choose their districts to benefit from this project? (Applause) 

I also want to know why Government has failed to buy their own buildings to house the activities of the ministries. I have realised that we are spending a lot of money – empowering individuals against all the citizens of this country – by paying a lot of money in rent. That money would have done something big for the citizens who are labouring to pay the taxes. Why should we cater more for the individuals other than the entire country’s population? What is the problem? Why are we failing to buy our own land?

Mr Speaker, I do not know why the Ministry of Gender has failed to increase the money for the councils that Government has put in place, specifically the women councils. It is now more than five years; these councils are receiving Shs 1 million quarterly. But we have known that quarterly –(Member timed out.)

3.46
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I commend the committee for the good work done. However, I have some issues to raise. First of all, regarding the Youth Venture Capital Fund, this Parliament demanded for a report from Government to explain to us fully how this fund can be operationalised and in this report, the criteria, the source of funding and whether this money belongs to the bank, have not been shown. They should also explain to us and we explain to these youths if it is not for Government, because we had raised the concern of a lot of demands from the bank. So, that one needs to be explained by either the committee chairperson or the minister concerned.

Secondly, in the ministerial statement of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I have seen only Enterprise Uganda for this money for training the youths and yet we had recommended that there should be more than one institution that should be involved in training these youths. Will there be fairness?

In addition to that, it seems the Ministry of Finance has become adamant about adherence to the resolution of Parliament that this money should shift from Ministry of Finance and be budgeted for under the rightful ministry. They are adamant to shift that money because if they never released the money for training to the Ministry of Gender and yet this Parliament pronounced itself on that, then they are adamant and maybe sabotaging our programmes. So, they should behave. 

On the social protection for vulnerable groups, I would like it clarified by the committee, and maybe the minister, when we passed the National Council for the Elderly, I saw the minimum age was 60 and yet when they are registering people to benefit from this fund -(Member timed out.)

3.49
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and members of the committee for this report. However, I would like to seek some clarification on a few issues regarding the Youth Venture Capital Fund. 

I seek clarification on the requirements for the youths to access this fund. I was expecting the committee to inform us of the terms and conditions for our youths to access these funds. Personally, I went to Stanbic Bank, Fort Portal, to inquire about these terms and conditions or the requirements that a youth who needs to access these funds needs to fulfil in order to get the funds. But officials in the bank gave me very hard conditions. They were telling me security and that the youths must be in groups which have been in existence before, and all that. These requirements for rural youths like the ones in my district, Ntoroko, are really hard to fulfil, and on top of that, I was just informed by bank officials. So, I was expecting maybe the committee or the ministry in charge to inform us so that even when we go to our constituencies, we have the right information to give the youths on what is required of them in order to access this fund. 

And when you look at the last paragraph, the committee observed that in the financial year 2011/2012, funds for training were not released and the ministry did not conduct any training. Now, if there is no training –(Interjections)- that is what I was talking about - how are these youths going to access these funds? Worse still, the number of the youths in the whole country who have benefitted from the youth fund is too small, like our colleague said. It means this fund is being accessed by just a few youths in this country and yet as far as I know, it is a venture for all the youths in the whole country. So, in my district, Ntoroko, I have no youth who has accessed this fund and when I am there I get so many questions to which I do not have answers. I would kindly request the committee or anybody in charge to at least -(Member timed out.)

3.52
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. First of all, I appeal to all Members of Parliament and ministers that we should not believe in imaginary airs of importance.

I would like to comment on the youth fund. I am bitter about it. You come here and tell us the youth fund is there when actually there is no single youth who has accessed this money. I remember in my constituency, the youths had a venture of keeping bee hives. When it got a problem, we went to Centenary Bank. Do you know what they told us, Mr Speaker? It was to our utter shock. They said we would rather apply for this normal loan than this so-called youth venture fund of ours. So, there is no way these youths can access this money. If the minister is up in the clouds or upstairs - I think someone should come down and be real as far as this youth fund is concerned. We should not lie to ourselves because it is not there at all. 

If you want to prove me wrong, tell us how many people have accessed this fund. If there is anyone, I think someone must be either the son of a minister or the son of who knows who. But there is no lay youth that has accessed this money, I bet.  

Then it has been put in banks. Again, even if you personally went to the bank, they will tell you that it is better for you to apply for the normal loans than accessing this money. So, what is this? Are we in a country where everyone is on their own and God for us all? We should follow our motto, “For God and my Country.” 

Coming to this social protection venture where some money has been given to some old people, we were in a workshop and it was working very well. Why doesn’t the government, if it is caring for its people, also engage in this? For example, there is this social assistance grant for empowerment. This thing is working well. Why doesn’t Government come in and at least we assist these elderly people? But you find in most cases they are in a few districts yet it is perfect. 

I appeal to the government to come and we assist this country if we love it. For example, this money for social protection is in the national development plan; it is in the NRM manifesto; FDC people have it; DP people have it. Every Ugandan is interested in this yet you neglect it in such a way. For instance, why did you refuse to consider it in this financial year? (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kooki, Maracha, Pallisa and I think we should close with the honourable member at the back. Forty five minutes are well beyond the time now. 

3.55
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I rise to support the recommendation of the committee that we need to facilitate the CDOs more from that Shs 30,000 to Shs 300,000 per month. By not facilitating these CDOs, I want to assure you that we shall be doing a disservice to our vulnerable individuals and groups.

As you are well aware, we have a number of domestic violence cases in our areas and it is these particular CDOs that arbitrate over issues of that nature. You know of cases in your areas where if a woman is battered and she goes to the CDO, the CDO demands for fuel to go and arbitrate over that issue which the vulnerable individual cannot raise at all. So, we need to facilitate these CDOs.

I relate the CDOs to the medical doctors. As medical doctors offer treatment, these CDOs offer psycho-social support which is related to attitudinal change - the issues of drug addicts and these cases of juveniles are supposed to be handled by these CDOs. So, I strongly support the issue of giving more money and support to CDOs. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.57
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this time and unfortunately, my colleague has just touched on the topic I was about to talk about. That is on page 26. We should take the issue of CDOs seriously. Our CDOs who operated on our youths; we knew them as being teachers, medical people, agriculturists etc., and these are people who helped women who were married before they attained adequate education. They taught them very many things. 

But today, our CDOs are recruited in office - the other time I asked my district officials in Maracha, “You are recruiting CDOs, what is their work?” I do not know what work these people are doing anymore. These are people who worked a lot for the community and that is why the first woman permanent secretary appointed in Uganda was a woman who was a CDO. We really need to look at these people critically. The ministry really needs to revive the activities of these people because many of these women who are suffering from poverty could be helped, for example, on how to stitch table clothes and handicrafts for sale. This is income-generating and they used to teach women the homestead health; how to look after their families, how to prepare food and so forth.

Today, these people are just recruited and they remain in office, and the money given to them is very little, and yet these are the people who are actually supposed to be our saviours in the rural areas. I do not know why their activities have been narrowed, but I think the ministry needs to be serious with these people and help us. I guess if I had my CDOs, I would have worked very well with them. Thank you very much.

4.00
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. However, I want to express my concern on the recommendation on page 20 under the Industrial Court. The issue of inadequate performance by the Industrial Court is well articulated.

However, when a recommendation of a fully-fledged ministry is made, I think this is a little misplaced and if not, then I will also say that I think at a time like this when we are advocating for fewer ministries, a better recommendation to enhance the performance of the existing structures could have been thought of and that would be advisable.

On page 21, there is mention of the problem of occupational health and safety. It is painful to realise that there is very little priority or effort put into ensuring health and safety for all our workers in their respective work places despite the rampant cases of accidents and other hazards that the workers face within the meagre pay. I would be interested in knowing at one point or hearing from the Ministry of Gender and the Ministry of Finance on what they intend to do to protect the workers and ensure that their work places are secure and healthy for them to be able to work productively and happily.

On page 23, the committee mentions that the Ministry of Gender entered a memorandum of understanding with the Ministry of Finance making it responsible for training on the Youth Venture Capital Fund. The ministry has developed guidelines and regulations for the operationalisation of the Youth Venture Capital Fund. Unfortunately, no funds have been released. My question then is, Who did the training and under what kind of arrangement if it was the Ministry of Gender supposed to do it? How does Enterprise Uganda come in? Is it regulated by the Ministry of Gender or it has been imposed on the youths by the Ministry of Finance? I would be glad at some point to have this answered. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on this issue of the Youth Venture Capital Fund; we have finally received a comprehensive statement from the minister which statement we have been waiting for, for a while. As soon as possible, we will have this debate. So, a comprehensive debate on this particular subject will show up one of these days and we shall have good time discussing it.

4.03
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the good work. I would like to add something on the issue of the street children on page 25. I was requesting that since this is a problem for children who are coming from Karamoja, you cannot work with KCCA alone. I was requesting the committee to include the ministry in charge of Karamoja Affairs so that they can work with them.

I would also want to comment on the issue of the youth training centres. If you go to the youth training centres, you will surely find that the infrastructure is there, but there are no teachers. So, I am wondering what the infrastructure is for. Some buildings are in place, but without teachers, and the place has collapsed. A case in point is Mobuku Training Centre in Kasese. The school is there and it is closed and there are no teachers. I was requesting Government to recruit teachers for these centres so that our youths can go there for training.

Then on the issue of CDOs; surely, if you see the work that the Community Development Officers do on behalf of Government, these are people who are supposed to be given a lot of money.  I think Government should think about this because whenever any programme of the government is going to a district, the first people they contact to sell the programme to the community are the CDOs. You want them to do a lot of work and yet they are the ones who are less funded. There is a time we went to visit Sheema District; it is a new district cut out of Bushenyi District. For the whole quarter they had released only Shs 500,000. How do you expect such a department to function? 

In addition to that, I was also requesting that we consider the labour officers. In every district, we have labour officers which are redundant. There is no work for them because they are not funded; they are not given anything and yet they can help on the issue of child labour and to help minimise school dropout cases.

I wanted to talk about the issue of the women councils. We have spent some time without having these elections. These are people who are being paid and I think they are being given this money illegally. I want to know the implication of them using these funds.

On the issue of rent; I am failing to understand how we are really functioning as Government if every ministry and department is renting and yet surely we have land. It is not that we do not have land. We have land. I request Government to think of making homes for these ministries and we use this money to do other developmental issues. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.06
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Mr speaker. I would like to thank the committee so much for the good work done. I was happy when I heard that the report about the youth fund is coming to this august House. I pray the report comes faster. 

Of late, I have been dodging meetings with youths in my constituency. The moment you go there, the first issue they raise is the youth fund. Members of Parliament have no explanation about the youth fund and yet the government has raised the expectations of our youths very high. For example, in my district Amuru, we have over 10,000 youths who have already opened accounts and are waiting for that money. Will the government give the money to all those 10,000 youths and more? If in Amuru alone we have 10,000 youths, how many districts are there in Uganda? The way the information was going to our youths raised their expectations very much and I feel that is very dangerous for the future.

As we talk, when the youths go to the banks, they are advised to get the normal loans. It looks as if even those working in the bank do not know what is happening with the youth fund. If you go with a youth to apply, they will advise him that, “Please, get the normal loan and begin paying monthly.” We are getting a lot of difficulties in explaining the youth fund. 

On the street children, I am very happy with the recommendations of the committee that the people who are giving money to the street children – we should come up with a by-law to restrain people from giving the money. This is very correct. I think when people give them money and in the evening a child goes with around Shs 10,000 or Shs 20,000, it encourages the child and the parent to bring in more children because the parent may be confident that every day, he or she is going to get almost Shs 30,000. Let those who give money be restrained. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.09
MR CARTER ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, thank you so much. I am a Member of this committee -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Padyere, you can resume your seat.

MR ANYWARACH: I was feeling -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can resume your seat. You have been very honest. You were supposed to be the last. Because you were supposed to be the last, I will allow the honourable member for Kigulu South to now be the last. You wait for the next report.

4.10
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report. Allow me to address myself to page 23 regarding the SAGE programme. We all support this programme of SAGE, but Government has not yet committed itself to seeing it go on or be implemented because the donors are playing their part by providing the necessary resources for this programme. The people of Kigulu South, specifically Iganga, have been on my case asking, “When shall we ever benefit from this programme called SAGE?” 

I appeal to the minister that when you are in Cabinet, please push forward. The entire country is waiting to see this programme succeed. People need to benefit. We have had pilot programmes in Kiboga and Katakwi, and we commend it, but people of other regions are anxiously waiting to see this programme working.

On the issue of the youth fund; last Friday, I was in one of the banks in Iganga and no single youth has accessed this money. They processed all the documents, whatever is required is in place, but when it comes to accessing it - it is like the will is also not there. Can I appeal to Government to come out clearly and tell the people of Uganda whether this money is there and whether this programme will work out instead of dilly-dallying and keeping youths in a certain corner of ignorance or darkness? Mr Speaker, I thank you so much for the opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shadow Opposition? Shadow minister from the Opposition, any views on this? But you have already spoken, so, if it is you, then now it is finished.

4.12
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): But, Mr Speaker, I wanted to inform the House that I am now acting as Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter)  

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR THE ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I want to begin by thanking you for showing concern for the vulnerable groups under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

I also want to thank the committee for a good report made. I cannot respond to all these issues and, therefore, I will respond to them in parts. A few parts regarding funding will be responded to by my colleague in the Ministry of Finance. But in terms of occupational health and safety, I agree that this is a very important department and we are working towards improving equipment for this department. But as you know, there are many competing demands and we have a limitation of funding.

In terms of Government commitment to this project, we are fully committed to this project, the SAGE project - Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment. It is this very government that saw it wise to put it in the National Development Plan in the NRM manifesto, but you also remember that within our Constitution under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy under (vii), we talk about providing welfare and full maintenance for the aged. This is provided for in the Constitution and under Article 32, we are talking about affirmative action based on different areas, including age. 

This government is fully convinced that this project for the elderly is very important. It does not only benefit the ageing population, but if you help the ageing population, you are helping the orphans and vulnerable children they live with. The elderly are supporting Government programmes like Universal Primary Education. We are quite ready and by piloting – somebody asked, “Why are you piloting?” Any new programme in this country starts with piloting. You remember, even the famous decentralisation which we have today, we started with three districts. Now we have started with 14 districts and I want to assure Members that in our five-year work plan, all the sub-counties in the 14 districts will be covered once the plan is implemented. So, do not worry about the sub-counties and rest assured that you have to go through a rigorous process. The processes of getting to every sub-county require us to build the manpower, get the statistics and the data, in order to expand to other sub-counties.

About the Industrial Court, my colleague here has mentioned decentralising the Industrial Court. I just want to refer you to what we call the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act. Under this Act, labour officers at the district are supposed to be the arbitrators at that level. Therefore, in that law, decentralisation is already there. What has been missing now has been the Industrial Court, which we are committed to seeing in place. We have already negotiated with the Judicial Service Commission and the Attorney-General to put in place this Industrial Court. But decentralisation is already provided for under labour officers in the districts, who are supposed to arbitrate. 

In terms of community development workers, we are equally concerned. As you know, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has a mandate – one of its functions is community mobilisation.   Community mobilisation targets the poor. You cannot target the poor without these community development workers, but as I stated before, much as we would like to fund these activities, we are limited by the envelop which we have.

Street Children; this is a big issue, but in addition to putting in place policies and a legal framework to address this matter, and as you know, our role in the decentralised system, the biggest function of the centre is policy and legal. I want to assure you that we are doing our best as a ministry, including amending the Children’s Act, to ensure that these issues that concern street children are addressed. 

As I speak, the ministry has already drafted a Cabinet memo to address the issue of the amendment and it is going to Cabinet and later coming to this House. But there are also push factors, including poverty. We need a comprehensive programme to address the push factors, including programmes that address poverty, to stop these children from coming from wherever to the streets. 

On issues of how many people have benefited from the Youth Venture Capital Fund, the Speaker has already noted that there is a report which is yet to come. But for now, I want to let you know that by the time we made this report, 2,620 beneficiaries had received this money. More details will come later –(Interjections)– somebody asked, “What was the criteria for choosing the pilot districts for the social empowerment grant?” 

I want to let you know that even I, the minister in charge, did not include Kayunga my own district. It was done scientifically. One, we wanted all regions to benefit: North, West, South and Central. After that, we knew that everybody would get there. Then we looked at the social economic indicators of poverty and one of them that we considered was the proportion of older persons in terms of the population of that district. 

But we also looked at the vulnerable children within those districts and the distance between the essential services like hospitals and health centres, compared these and made a score. The worst district then would score highest in that region and it would be selected. There was no political influence. It was scientifically determined. 

The National Council for Older Persons is quite different from the programme for SAGE. The National Council for Older Persons is talking about establishing a council. It is different from the programme called SAGE. Therefore, we do not relate what we pass to the programme called SAGE.

Someone asked, “Why 65 years?” This was addressed because of the limited resources. We looked at the population of 60 year olds in each district and we would be limited to only two districts. So, we decided to go for 65 years in order to reach more districts than serving fewer districts. 

But also, for areas like Karamoja, we have catered for 60 year olds. I want to end here and invite the Minister of Finance to respond to the other part. But I want to thank you once again for caring for Gender, and I want to assure you that once that ministry is understood and supported, we can have a lot of changes in terms of addressing equal opportunities and addressing income gaps because this ministry is supposed to put in place affirmative action. Thank you very much.

4.21
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a few clarifications. First of all, we, in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, very much welcome the initiatives under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We note the minister’s comments that such programmes must be rolled out to the rest of the country as soon as possible. This is also our concern and should be the concern of all of us to mobilise the necessary resources given that our development partners who have been supporting us in these endeavours are falling back on their contributions because of their own home circumstances. So, it is very important that the government, which is the Executive, Parliament and the Judiciary, makes sure that our production goes up sufficiently to take on the gap left by the development partners and to continue the roll-out. 

On page 21, under occupational health hazards, this programme was submitted and considered by our development committee and we made comments. But unfortunately, the Ministry of Gender responded to the issues raised when the budget had already been finalised. But we shall consider this programme next financial year. 

Under SAGE on page 23, this programme is very much welcome. However, given the budget constraints, we are in discussions even now, on the Frontbenchers continuing with the chairman and the minister to see how best we can make sure that this project goes on as soon as possible. They have agreed to look at their non-wage revenues and start with that while together, we search for the money for counterpart financing. 

Mr Speaker, there is also a discrepancy in the wage allocation for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The correct amount according to our ministry is Shs 2,360,015,000. So, we are going to reconcile this with the minister. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairman, most of your issues have actually been dealt with so you have very limited time now. 

4.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Wilson Nokrach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Members for their input to this report. We have taken note of your comments very seriously and my committee will always follow them up to see that your views are implemented. 

I have been informed by my minister that the amendment of the Children’s Act is in progress – it will be presented to Cabinet for approval and then they will table it for first reading in Parliament. 

The youth fund issue has been very common and very strong. I want to request that the Minister of Finance together with the Minister in charge of Youth prepare that paper. If one ministry prepares it, there will still be a gap in it. So, I request the Minister of Finance to get ready to make a comprehensive write-up on this issue so that people can understand it.

I want to thank members of my committee for turning up and scrutinising the policy. I thank the staff of Parliament, especially the clerk to my committee, and the budget officer, for the good guidance they have given to this committee in their work. We pledge our total support to work and support to the ministry because this is the people’s ministry.

THE DPEUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2012/13 be approved and adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT OF THE COMMITTE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very good demonstration of real committee work – both the chairperson and the vice chairperson are not in the House, but a member of the committee is presenting the report. That is a real sense of the committee membership owning the report. They deserve a round of applause. (Applause) Proceed, hon. Omwonya. 

4.30
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo) FOR THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITEE ON FOREIGHN AFFAIRS: I thank you very much. Mr Speaker, in accordance with the provisions of Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and in line with Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Foreign Affairs is mandated among others to:

(i)	Examine and comment on policy matters affecting ministries and departments under its jurisdiction; and

(ii)	Examine critically, Government recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House.

Scope

This report covers the following votes: Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is the headquarters; and Votes 201 to 233, which are Missions Abroad.

Methodology

The committee critically examined previous and current policy statements from both ministries, analysed previous committee reports, considered the National Development Plan and raised issues for response from the respective ministers.

We held meetings with the Minister for Foreign Affairs to discuss the respective ministerial policy statements and other matters incidental thereto.

Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I will not go through the entire report and will request Members to straight away go to page 18 on 4.4 about unfunded and underfunded priorities for the financial year 2012/2013.

Unfunded and underfunded priorities for financial year 2012/2013

The committee was informed that the following are some of the priorities the ministry would wish to undertake but with little or no budget provision under the financial year 2012/2013. We shall start with the foreign policy priorities.

Foreign Policy Priorities

Implementation of a Cabinet decision on obligatory payments to regional and international organisations amounting to Shs 28.5 billion.

Participation in Diaspora conventions and implementation of the Presidential directive on payment of Shs 184 million in annual contributions to associations of Ugandans in the Diaspora.

Construction and renovation of Uganda’s properties abroad especially in Brussels, Copenhagen, Dar-es-Salaam, New York, Kigali and Addis Ababa with capital of about Shs 6.4 billion. If I may elaborate here, most of our buildings, especially missions abroad, are really dilapidated. I am sure some of us who have been travelling abroad can be witness to that.

Opening of new missions and consulates in strategic locations like Mogadishu, Mombasa, Jeddah and Kuala Lumpur expected to cost Shs 7.5 billion remains unfunded.

Maintenance of the operations of Uganda’s missions in Abu Dhabi and Ankara requiring Shs 2 billion. These too, remain unfunded.

Participation in mandatory summits, conferences and meetings requiring extra funding of Shs 2 billion, which is not there.

Celebration of Uganda’s 50th Independence Anniversary at a cost of Shs 1 billion at the headquarters and Shs 3 billion at Missions Abroad also remains unfunded. Here, we thought that it was imperative that Uganda Missions Abroad celebrate our 50th year of Independence Anniversary. The funding was included in the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and that of Missions Abroad but the Ministry of Finance has not given us that money.

Development of a National Action Plan on Universal Human Rights expected to cost Shs 3 billion.

Finalisation of the foreign policy review with Government contribution of Shs 400 million is not there.

Accommodation, transport and other courtesies for visiting special envoys is not also funded.

Promotion of Uganda’s candidature in international organisations, including the offices of the Secretary-General of the OIC, which should be in 2014 to 2019, at the extra cost of Shs 379 million - it is not there, together with the Presidency of the 69th United Nations General Assembly for the year 2014, which still remain unfunded.

Conducting of preparatory consultations for Joint Permanent Commissions and border meetings with neighbouring countries, expected to cost Shs 1 billion remains unfunded.

Implementation of the East African Community Protocol on Foreign Coordination is unfunded; and

Promotion of commercial diplomacy activities at an estimated cost of Shs 200 million; that is promoting trade, tourism, investment and technology transfer at Missions Abroad is not funded.

Administrative priorities

Critical human resource functions which include induction – you know that when Foreign Service Officers are recruited, they need induction, training, attachments and restructuring the ministry, requiring Shs 500 million, and the money is not there.

Education and child allowances for Foreign Service Officers estimated at Shs 4 billion is not there. Education and child allowance for Foreign Service Officers is a very serious matter because when these children are not paid allowances, their education is in jeopardy. 
 
Review of statutory Foreign Service allowance and local staff salaries at our Missions, in line with the increasing cost of living in cities abroad. That also remains unfunded. I was recently in Abu Dhabi and we found a driver locally recruited there, but our mission could not afford that driver and so the Abu Dhabi Government is right now subsidising his salary and this is a shame.

Cost-sharing contribution of Shs 388 million to UNDP programmes also remains unfunded.

Mr Speaker, I will go straight to committee observations and recommendations.

Categorisation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs

The committee observed that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Missions Abroad are under the public administration sector despite its substantial contribution of Non-Tax Revenue of over Shs 9 billion annually to the Consolidated Fund, on top of negotiations for loans, grants and attraction of foreign direct investment from abroad. Because of this categorisation, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and foreign missions constantly suffer due to low budget ceilings and budget cuts, which should not be the case, given the importance of the Ministry and foreign missions in protection and marketing of the image of Uganda abroad for tourism and investment. 

When we were interacting with the ministry officials, the committee was informed that the ministry developed and presented a proposal to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the case for creation of a new sector called “Regional and International Relations” which is in line with the National Development Plan, and which placed the ministry under a separate sector, that is, International Relations.

The committee recommends that the development committee of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should expedite the approval of the new sector of “Regional and International Relations”.
Properties of Uganda abroad

The committee noted that the Government of Uganda continues to incur heavy costs every year in rent of Mission premises and official residences of our ambassadors and high commissioners despite efforts by the ministry to streamline the policy on acquisition, maintenance and management of Uganda’s properties abroad.

In line with the above, the committee was informed by the ministry that they had proposed to the Cabinet the need to draft a Bill on Financing, Acquisition and Management of Uganda’s Properties Abroad, which would include among others, an amendment to the Finance Act to allow our missions abroad to use Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) at source for property management, renovation and development.

The committee recommends that Government expedites the process of drafting a Bill on the Financing, Acquisition and Management of Uganda’s Properties Abroad, and amendment of the Finance Act to enable the ministry to use the NTR at source.

The committee noted that the issue of management of Uganda’s properties abroad has been going on for too long. The debate of whether the properties currently managed by Uganda Property Holdings Limited (UPHL) should revert to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or stay under UPHL management has been going on for a long time now.

The committee would like to re-echo last year’s recommendations that a study on the matter should be conducted to streamline and explore the legal implications of the transfer of these properties from UPHL to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs so that the matter can be concluded once and for all.

Imbalance in the Foreign Service

The committee would like to re-echo again last year’s concern that the majority of Heads of Missions are political appointees. It noted that only two out of the 31 Heads of Missions are career diplomats. In the same vein, 30 percent of all Foreign Service Officers in other ranks are political appointees.

The committee recommends that the appointing authority should address this imbalance and employ well trained senior career diplomats as Heads of Missions wherever there are political appointees, to enable the embassies and missions to operate efficiently and effectively.

Contracts of service

The committee observed that 17 Heads of Foreign Missions have been serving on expired contracts for quite a long time, until recently when the appointing authority renewed their contracts and appointed new ones to replace those whose contracts had been terminated.

The committee recommends that the contracts of Heads of Missions should be renewed timely to enable the missions abroad operate effectively and efficiently.

Foreign Service allowances

The committee would like to re-echo last year’s observation that Uganda’s Foreign Service officers continue to suffer in the missions due to the meagre Foreign Service allowances paid to them, which are the lowest in the whole region. The committee is aware that a review of the Foreign Service allowances is long overdue since it was last done in 2009, yet the cost of living index in cities abroad has increased since then.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government reviews  Foreign Service allowances urgently to rescue Uganda’s Foreign Service officers in particular and Uganda in general from further and future embarrassment.

The committee –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have another five minutes. 

MR OMWONYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee is concerned that although it had been informed that beginning from the financial year 2012/2013, Foreign Service officers would receive between $2,000 and $2,500 per year, per child as an education allowance for four children under the age of 18, this has never happened. The committee is also concerned that the amounts of funds proposed above are still very low compared to the standards of living in cities abroad.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides funds for the education allowance to enable the children of Foreign Service officers acquire quality education.

The committee further recommends that a review of the education allowance be conducted.

Independence and other national celebrations in missions abroad
The committee noted that the celebration of national days such as the celebration of Uganda’s 50th Independence Anniversary at Uganda’s missions abroad is one way the country can improve her image abroad. However, this item remains unfunded.

The committee recommends that budgets of Government institutions to cover the above function be harmonised to avoid duplication.

The committee further recommends that Government should avail funds for the celebration of Uganda’s 50th Anniversary and consider allocating funds for every mission abroad. We are recommending that at least every year, each mission should be given $10,000 for the celebrations.

Uganda’s obligations to regional and international organisations

We have noted that most of our obligations to regional and international organisations are unfunded. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide funds annually to clear these contributions to international organisations and all the outstanding arrears.

Border disputes

Mr Speaker, we have found that our borders are porous. Sometimes the demarcations are not there, especially if you talk of Moyo, Lamwo, Yumbe and Adjumani. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that funds should be availed to the ministry to resolve all these border disputes for peaceful co-existence, and that Members of Parliament should be integrated in the process since they represent the interests of the people.

	World Food Programme Eastern African Regional Centre

The committee observed that there is an eminent threat of losing Uganda’s hosting of the headquarters of World Food Programme Eastern Africa Regional Centre in Kampala due to Government’s irregularity in meeting its financial obligations towards contributions to the cost of renting the centre’s headquarters.

The committee recommends that Government should take this matter up and adopt corrective measures to address the irregularity in its financial obligations to the cost of renting the centre’s headquarters.
	
	Participation in Diaspora Conventions

The committee observed that is it important for the ministry to participate in Diaspora conventions. However, funds to cover this have not been provided. The committee recommends that Ugandans in other African countries be integrated in these conventions since they are quite many, and that funds be provided to cater for the above.

	Uganda’s candidature for the top posts of International Organisations 

	The committee observed that Uganda is interested in posts of the Secretary-General of OIC, 2014-2019, and the Presidency of the 69th United Nations General Assembly 2014, yet winning of these is important as it will greatly improve Uganda’s image. 

	The committee recommends that Uganda’s candidature be prioritised since this will help promote Uganda internationally.

Mr Speaker, the following are the proposed allocations for Vote 006 of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters for the financial year 2012/2013: 	

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs

The committee recommends recurrent expenditure of Shs 8,810,314,323; and development expenditure of Shs 191,990,599; totalling to Shs 9,002,304,922 be approved.

Votes 201 – 233: Missions Abroad

The committee recommends recurrent expenditure of Shs 60,331,181,252; and development expenditure of Shs 7,494,200,000; totalling to Shs 67,825,381,252 be approved. 										
In conclusion, I now move that Parliament approves the following estimates for the respective ministries and missions abroad for the financial year 2012/2013:

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Recurrent Expenditure of Shs 8,810,314,323; and Development Expenditure of Shs 191,990,599 totalling to Shs 9,002,304,922 be approved. 	

Votes 201 – 233: Missions Abroad 

Recurrent Expenditure of Shs 60,331,181,252; and Development Expenditure of Shs 7,494,200,000, totalling to Shs 67,825,381,252 be approved. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Omwonya, Member for Zombo, for standing in for your committee. It just looks like that sector has suffered some difficulties because we don’t even have the ministers and we don’t have the leadership of the committee. So, we will proceed because the report is now the property of Parliament. The ministerial policy statement was submitted to Parliament. We will proceed and debate, and the chairman or acting chairman will make responses and we will take a decision on this matter. We will not defer debate on this matter. 

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I wish to thank the chairperson of the committee for the good report. The guidance I am trying to seek is how we are going to debate this report. From the presentation and observation, the committee has largely re-echoed concerns and recommendations as raised in the last financial year, which means that most of the recommendations that the august House makes to this sector are re-echoed when nothing has taken place. The issue in mind is the recent one where this august House passed some resolutions based on the reports which were presented in this House by the Committee on Equal Opportunities and the Committee on Foreign Affairs. I don’t even see that part which was concerning operations of missions abroad and where we had passed many resolutions especially requesting actions by this sector, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, on repatriation of the girls who are sold outside Uganda. Now, how do we move – do I see the Minister of Foreign Affairs here or anybody? I am at a loss. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The government is here. 	

MS KAWOOYA: I have been going through this because there are so many observations. That is the guidance I am seeking.	

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those of you who are Christians, remember the story of the old woman whose answers were finally given because of persistence. She continued and continued until the very stubborn boss finally said, “Okay, you have really made me tired. I will now concede to your requests.” So, this is what the committee is doing. They will not get tired. They raised it last year, it has not been dealt with and they are raising it this year, and if it is not dealt with, they will raise it next year, but it is for this Parliament to now take remedial steps to deal with this situation. We will not mind that the minister is not here. The government is represented. This ministerial policy statement was presented to Parliament and it is Parliament handling it. We will take a decision as Parliament. So, can we have a limited debate on the subject? I will start with hon. Kakooza, then honourable Steven and the honourable Member for Bunya South. Let me start with those Members who have not debated previously.

4.56
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report they have given and my observation is simple; that the Minister of Finance should help us to give priority to some areas like Foreign Affairs. You know the world has changed and these missions are not cocktail missions; they are commercial missions in that we are competing for tourists all over the world. These missions are not doing a good job because the ministry is neglected, and yet we know that we are meant to get a lot of economic benefits through them. It is high time either Parliament or the Ministry of Finance allocated them money so that we can get help. 
When you go out there, the cost of living has gone up, the inflation is so high - you can imagine when I was reading in the newspapers recently, it was reported that the mission staff in UK are involved in bad activities like selling duty free goods, which was an embarrassment to Government, yet these missions are doing a good job. Other countries which take their missions seriously are benefitting so much; they are getting a lot of money and benefits through them. 

So, the Ministry of Finance should allocate more money and invest more in those missions where we feel we are benefitting other than neglecting them.  And, if we think that a certain mission is not doing well, we could close it and open one where we are likely to benefit through attracting more investors to improve sectors like tourism, which is growing in this country. 

I remember when we hosted CHOGM we spent a lot of money on hiring consultants abroad to market the country yet this is the job of the missions. So, it is high time that we changed and focused -(Member timed out.)     

4.59
MR IDD ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of this committee for presenting this report. The beauty of our country is seen by the people outside there through our embassies. Last time, this Parliament debated a report which was presented here about the status of most of our embassies abroad. Most of the buildings were reported to be leaking but when you look at the development expenditure, a meagre Shs 7.4 billion which has been allocated, may not help much to renovate most of our embassies so that they can look beautiful and motivate our staff sent there. 

As Members of Parliament, this is the right time to advise and allocate accordingly. You can see that throughout the report, the committee lamented about the appalling situation abroad. The provisions that have been made plus the total allocation of Shs 67 billion may not help much. It is not advisable to have very many embassies that we cannot ably fund. And recently, more ambassadors were appointed by His Excellency the President, which is quite challenging because appointing officers whom we cannot facilitate – you look at the structures, and how I wish the Minister of Foreign Affairs was here to help us explain how far he has gone because there were unanswered questions as per the observations of the team that was sent to inspect our embassies abroad. 

We love our country –(Member timed out.)    

5.03
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Foreign Affairs for making this report. Unfortunately, it is the sixth year of lamentations and I am getting very disappointed. If we as Parliament know our powers of appropriation, I hope when it comes to appropriation, we don’t end by just commenting on these problems and then pass figures which do not resonate with the concerns raised when we are discussing the budget. 

In a global village, the major contribution of a mission should be to position this country as the best destination for tourism, looking for market, direct foreign investment, and technology transfer, but our performance will remain very dismal if we don’t shape up to that task. Therefore, when I hear this underfunding year in and year out, and I have been a parliamentarian for six years, responsible for appropriation and not Government, I think we have relegated our responsibility as Parliament to the Executive. I think that is the first problem. 

We should not be lamenting; we should bite. We should be able to stop expenditures in public administration which don’t yield results and put these resources in areas which bring output for this country.

Even on the question of posting political appointees and non career diplomats; there are so many politicians who have some background at least in diplomacy. These would be the right people to be posted there. But alas! The ones you will find there are not in that line. So, it is a very big problem. 

The same applies to renting; we are talking of renting in Gender; we are talking of renting in every ministry; why don’t we stop this haemorrhage as Members of Parliament so that we give a deadline to stop renting for all ministries? And we have properties – we don’t have to make Amin - the man who bought these properties - useful. Every time we discuss their sorry state, we get reminded that Amin bought these properties. So, it is very unfortunate.

I am happy because we have the East African Community Committee, thanks to the Speaker and the Ninth Parliament for that –(Member timed out.)    

5.06
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chair and the committee members for the report that they have submitted. Before this report came in, I vividly remember watching the Minister for Foreign Affairs, my brother, hon. Oryem Okello, lamenting. I even once asked him, if the situation is that bad, my brother, why don’t you jump out of this ship? (Laughter)

However, there are three issues that I would like to address my mind to. In the Catholic Church there is a common saying that, “If you want to go to the altar, you must do it with clean hands.” Whereas the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is lamenting over poor funding, I want to address my mind to three issues:

Some time back, this same ministry received substantial amount of money from this Parliament, even after we Members of the Opposition walked out - and this was for construction of a market in Juba. And now you are coming here to lament and yet you have not told us what you have done with that money or where it is. I am asking this in my capacity as the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee. Money was given despite our pressure that it should not be given for the building of a market in a foreign country where you have no land title. Where is that money? In February, I was in Juba and met Ugandan businessmen. They are still under the same conditions of suffering. We want accountability for that money before you even ask for more.

Secondly, money was also given to this ministry, ostensibly for opening a mission in Guangzhou. Money for a whole financial year had no staff – not even a house or an office in Guangzhou. What happened to that money? Now you are here demanding more money, claiming that you are underfunded; first account for one financial year’s allocation to Guangzhou. 

In late October, members of the Public Accounts Committee are going to Asia; we want to put the minister and the permanent secretary on notice that we want accountability for that money which was spent on paper without anything on the ground. What moral authority do you have to demand for more when you cannot even account meaningfully for what you were given?

Thirdly, I have had an opportunity to visit a number of these missions and seen the cry there is about staff on contract who do not have valid contracts. Here in Uganda we can afford – if I have no money, I will go to uncle General and say, “Lopirigo, I have nothing for today; please give me anything.” –(Member timed out.)

5.09
MS ANGELLINE OSSEGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is indeed disheartening to hear that our face on the international scene is being misrepresented. If I understand well the purpose of foreign missions, which at this point I am wondering whether our Government really appreciates - the reason we have foreign missions - to the extent that we do not care about their appearance, presentability or how they represent Uganda abroad. Yet we expect foreigners to come to Uganda and say we are a good tourist and investment destination when what they see in our foreign missions does not represent what we say. Our government probably needs to be taken back to understand why our missions must be the face of Uganda abroad and that they must really be taken care of.

I am also perturbed because we are lamenting that out of 31 foreign missions, only two of them are manned by career diplomats. And yet these people are vetted by this Parliament’s committee of which the Speaker is the chair. I do not know how they go through the Appointments Committee without the requisite qualifications. Now we are the same people lamenting. How did they get there in the first place? Mr Speaker, you chair the Appointments Committee, we implore you to help us on this, so that next time we shall not be lamenting, but instead act accordingly.

I would also like to ask the Leader of Government Business to tell us next time we are debating, which ministry is housing itself so that we do an assessment. So far, what I have heard is that every ministry is renting. How long are we going to do this? How do we expect to progress when we are paying other people? It appears some of us here are the owners of these buildings and that is why we do not want to see ministries owning their own buildings. Thank you. 

5.12
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Committee on Foreign Affairs. Our missions abroad are the image of Uganda and whenever you leave your house for a trip abroad, you pick the best suit and shoes so that you can look presentable. Unfortunately, for us in Uganda, our missions abroad reflect our poverty. This is shameful. Why don’t we give priority to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs so that our poverty here is not reflected outside? 

The most worrying part is that some of the ambassadors and high commissioners have children below the age of 18 and they cannot afford to send them to school. Where do you expect them to study from? This is very shameful. 

We have international organisations where we subscribe to, but Uganda cannot afford to contribute. How can we benefit from these bodies? We need to be serious with our missions abroad and as Parliament, we need to put our feet down to see that more money is budgeted for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I do not know - during the indicative budget, that was the time to transfer money from one ministry to another, but we have let that period pass. Now we are lamenting. This time round, we need more money before we pass this budget. Thank you.

5.14
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their good report. However, I would like to once again express my shock regarding some of the observations and recommendations that they made. You will recall that I raised the issue of Uganda’s subscription to the Organisation of Islamic Countries. The Minister of Finance came here and assured this House and even the finance committee that the money had been found and the subscription would be paid and our candidate facilitated. To my utter surprise, this issue is coming up in the report. And according to my information sources – we even invited the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who came to our committee and said that the Ministry of Finance had not given the money. I am perturbed that the Minister of Finance herself is not here because she is the one who came to our committee. I am wondering whether hon. Omach will be able to answer this question. Does the Ministry of Finance know the benefits that we gain from international organisations? 

The Ministry of Finance should be aware that the Microfinance Support Centre enjoyed a lot of financing from the Islamic Development Bank. We get financing from this organisation, but Government has failed to pay subscription fees, while continuing to spend money on other useless things. 

Mr Speaker, I would like this House to take this matter seriously. If possible we should suspend approval of this budget until both the Ministry of Finance and that of Foreign Affairs come up with a solution to this. There is a $10 billion fund for poverty alleviation – a thing we are all crying about in our constituencies. The government cannot pay subscription fees for us to be able to enjoy this $10 billion poverty alleviation fund as certain states are already enjoying. But Uganda - after somebody has succeeded in getting something, then the government comes to claim it like in Kiprotich’s case. The man suffered on his own and all of a sudden, the government was waiting for him at the airport that he is a star of the Republic of Uganda.

The candidate for the post of the Secretary-General for the OIC is selling his property to go and campaign for Uganda and Uganda is just there seated. It is not contributing anything to his candidature. Surely, I would like this Government to be very serious on this matter and ensure that our candidate is facilitated and subscription fees paid. As it is, this post is rotational and it is now the chance for East and Central Africa, where Uganda, which has been a permanent member since 1973 -(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mawanda, for future readers of the Hansard, you might have to explain how a country can sit, because you said Uganda is sitting. (Laughter)

MR MAWANDA: Mr Speaker, what I meant is that the country is not minding and participating in as far as these matters are concerned. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is clear.  

5.18
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to support the committee for the work they have done. The committee has listed very many activities that are unfunded. I am just praying, requesting and pleading that out of the many, can Government just look at and only fund for us this consulate in Jedda. I know there are many of us who have not experienced - not because it is our intention, but we have just found that some of us do not go to Mecca for Hijja or Umrah. But those of us who have gone there and experienced, we as the Muslim community in this country are praying, pleading and requesting Government to at least put for us a consulate. I have gone there myself and it is Kenya which hosts us because when you reach Jedda, you are new and you do not know anything. When you arrive at the airport, you identify your country by your flag, but because we do not have a consulate there, you do not know where to go. You have to see a black person then you ask because when we are speaking English, we can easily understand the Kenyans. You can then know that this one is from East Africa because the English of the Nigerians is different. So, you can easily go to these people so that they accommodate you. Can Government really consider the plea of Muslims of this country? That is my request.

Secondly, I spent two years in this committee and as committee members, we went to Dar-es-Salaam. We had a very good meeting with our ambassador. One of the requests the ambassador put to us was that he lobbied an estate which he was interested in putting up our house and they would leave a portion for the ambassador to accommodate himself with activities of the embassy then the other part would be rented for 30 years. After that, we would own our property. But our own Government has refused that proposal and yet we are even doing nothing. You are given an opportunity, you reject it, and yet you are doing nothing! What is it that we want for this country?  

Lastly, I have seen that for more than five years, the recommendations of this committee -(Member timed out.)

5.21
MR CARTER ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have about four issues to raise. First of all, I am very grateful for the report of this committee. However, I think I should start with - I checked the report where they say our earning that is received from the foreign missions is about Shs 9 billion. That being true, I see an irony that out of the Shs 9 billion, we cannot even sacrifice  Shs 6.4 billion in order to either construct or renovate already existing properties abroad. 

I was in New York. It was very disappointing to look at Uganda House on which it is written very well “Uganda House” and comparing it with the Nigerian property which actually was subscribing to the standard of New York being called the jungle of concrete. Ours just stands little and very small and it looks really very miserable as the Member from Koboko said. Actually, we are putting the face of our poverty abroad. So, I would think that with these 50 years of Independence celebrations coming up, we must really give this money to the foreign nations. That brings me to the second point.

The 50 years of Independence Anniversary is going to be celebrated and imagine a situation where we are saying these offices abroad working are actually a bait for us for our direct foreign investment. Then it could be that these missions are allowed to have the celebrations, we give them the money and they use such avenues for attracting more foreign direct investment and trying to sell Uganda, and even increase on their ability to negotiate for grants, loans and so on. I would be very happy if we as Parliament provided that money. 

On the issue of education and children allowances - I will not mention names. A friend of mine who is working abroad, representing Uganda tells me that he cannot even go with his wife and children because he cannot educate them. Now, leaving them behind is also a threat to his marriage. So, where do we lie? Why can’t we give this money to these officers? 

And now I come to the point of approving political appointees. Surely, for heaven’s sake, someone fails as LC III chairman and then you appoint him, “Now go there.” I think something must be done. However, I am starting with my brother there, the honourable member who has just been speaking that we must not pass the budget of this committee until we are in line with what hon. Wadri Kassiano was saying. But also, in line with what the honourable Member of Parliament who rose up on the issue of guidance said -(Member timed out.)

5.24
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. However, I want a bit of clarification on page 18 where we are talking of the unfunded and underfunded priorities. I am a bit lost because I am not in position to discuss better because I do not know which one is unfunded and which one is underfunded. 

In an era when we are boasting of sky-rocketing revenue collections, I feel so bad that some of the major activities that brand Uganda and paint Uganda positively are either unfunded or underfunded. Like Members have said, the dilapidated nature of the missions abroad paints a very bad image about the potentially good picture that we can present. 

I would, therefore, wish to address the committee and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the fact there is need to boost some of these critical areas. For example, you talk of construction and renovation of missions. It is also part of the unfunded or underfunded items. The critical human resource function, induction training - we have just had new appointees to these foreign missions and in induction training, attachment of such people may be part of this unfunded priority. How shall we ensure that we put our people in a position where they can function well and productively for the best interests of this country to avoid a repeat of what we read in the media recently, embarrassing situations as a result of lack of skills, lack of induction and lack of training?

Finally, it is very unfortunate when we read about people who are functioning and representing our country abroad when they have no running or valid contracts. I believe we all know that they take very critical decisions that commit Uganda to different stakeholders -(Member timed out.)

5.28
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 19 - 4.5, about pending ongoing activities and programmes for the previous financial year 2011/2012, my concern is about border remarking along the South Sudan, DRC, Rwanda and Kenya borders. This is a serious issue for the committee and the government to think about, because you cannot have a State where you are not sure of the border. We need to reconsider this as an activity which we should take on as Government.

My second point is about the recruitment of the technical staff in missions abroad. The committee has told us about the political appointees, but they have not told us how the technical staff in those missions are being recruited. So, we want to know. The report does not tell us exactly what is happening. Why do we have those drivers who are recruited by the government and they are not on the payroll? We need to know how they are recruited.

On page 18, about construction and renovation of Uganda’s properties, I do not know why the committee omitted the mission in South Africa because we are told that it is in a sorry state and yet it is not on the list of missions to be renovated. I want to know why South Africa was left out.

Lastly, it is about the slavery of girls abroad. We had discussed this issue, but in this whole report, the committee has not come out to tell us exactly what is happening. What is the status now? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We have the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the time is limited.

5.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Is it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, it is.

MR MBABAZI: To respond to all these?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MR MBABAZI: I thought you would give me the sum total of the time you gave each one of them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is five minutes.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Colleagues, first, I apologise that the ministers of Foreign Affairs are on duty and they have not been able to come, but they are working in knowledge and confidence that the Leader of Government Business is here.

Since you have given me little time - I had hoped I would give a comprehensive response, but I have a broad picture of course of what is happening in our diplomacy. I just want to say right from the beginning that we have taken note of all the details that have been mentioned by colleagues. We will look at them and where necessary, we will bring responses to them in due course even after the budget process.

I wish to begin with this idea about slavery of girls, I think mainly, in Malaysia. I have had discussions myself with our representative, our Consul General. We met in State House not long ago and we have taken up this matter with the Malaysian Government. Obviously, colleagues will appreciate that this is a matter in the hands of the host government and, therefore, we give them all the confidence that they will carry out sufficient consultations so that the necessary remedial measures are taken.

Generally speaking, about financing of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, I take note of what colleagues have said and in fact what one of you said, the minister himself had been lamenting before the parliamentary committee and publicly. The minister was actually advised that budgeting is a collective process. We all sit in Cabinet, look at the resources, and actually participate in determining the measures that will generate the revenue of the country. Once we have made these estimates, then we go ahead to propose allocations collectively and all of us participate. So, it is alright to come here - because we are required by law to do so actually - and say these are priorities, we have not been able to fund them because we do not have enough resources.

Parliament and the whole country should know that we have priorities which we consider and regard as priorities as a government and as a country, but which we are not able to fund at the moment, but which we hope as our revenue generation improves, we will take care of.

The state of our embassies abroad; yes, some of them are not really up to scratch. They could be better. I want to tell my honourable brother from Padyere that at one time, Mr Speaker, as you know, Uganda House was the most prominent building in the location where it is today. As time passed, the size of that building is a reflection of our history. Where we started is where we were some time ago when other countries which have had stability and development - the buildings around it reflect that, but we are beginning. We borrowed money on hire purchase, renovated the building and actually accommodated two friendly embassies.

We are looking at plans of bringing standards in light of the location of that building, Uganda House, and we hope as revenue improves, we will improve that as well.

Our diplomacy as the report specifies very well has registered many achievements and we need to expand our diplomatic work. That is why we are opening new embassies, new consulates. 

The volume of business that is going on between China and Uganda -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Five more minutes

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you. I think this one kept his timer at two minutes. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then I can take it back to two minutes.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: No, no, no, not you; the other one - the time keeper. I was just saying that Guangzhou is the epicentre of the Uganda-China trade and we think it is very important that we have representation there to protect our Ugandans who go there. They have problems of language. In China, I can tell you from the knowledge I have, the rule of law relating to trade is not very protective yet, because I know one or two who have been victims. So, we need a place like that for that increased trade to improve the relationship between ourselves and the Republic of China, and of course to protect our citizens.

Education of the children of our diplomats is definitely important, but the reason why we took a decision some years ago to cut the costs is that it was not affordable. We simply could not afford it. We hope that in the near future when we have enough funds, we will be able to look after our diplomats indeed as people who can afford. 

Hon. Mawanda, yes we took a decision to sponsor a candidate for the office of Secretary-General of the OIC - the Organisation of Islamic Conference. We are working hard and are determined to have a budget to support this candidate. It is true that we have been having serious constraints, but it is also true that we have given him some support and we hope this support will incrementally rise. 

I have a problem of minutes; but generally, people have been talking about funding. Hon. Huda was talking about funding the Jeddah Embassy to cater for our Muslim brothers and sisters who will go, especially to Jeddah and so on - Jihad. Embassies, embassies –(Interjections)-, my apologies. I withdraw that one. That was a mistake. I want to withdraw that one very clearly. I did not mean Jihad. I am sorry that was a slip of the tongue. It is -(Interjections)- Hijja in Jeddah. My apologies. I mixed up things. My apologies my friends - I apologise 1,000 times. Please, please, I mean it. I mean that apology. 

Finally, I want to comment on the question of appointments because I have seen in the report and in many comments by colleagues that out of 31 ambassadors, only two are career diplomats. No, this is not true. It is true that those who are career Foreign Service officers, who are now ambassadors posted abroad are two. But I want to make two clarifications. One, that many years ago, we decided to create ambassador as a rank in Foreign Service. So, there are many ambassadors who are career diplomats even if they are not posted either to head or even to deputise heads of missions. Secondly, I made this statement I think about 15 years ago. Once someone is appointed ambassador, all ambassadors are appointees of the President whether you are from Foreign affairs or whether you are like my brother hon. Kassiano Wadri from Terego. Once you are appointed ambassador, you are ambassador and actually, you are a career diplomat. There is nothing that stops you from being categorised clearly as a career diplomat. You are, but the point about people whose profession has been diplomacy all their lives –(Interjections)- yes, there are many who are at ambassadorial rank in the ministry who serve at that stage, and who may not be heads of missions, but they are certainly ambassadors. 

The Uganda-South Sudan border; the heads of state agreed that it should be demarcated on our two sides and we enclose liaisons. This was at the level of the Presidency and the official levels. We are all in contact with them and there is no danger.  The fact that we have not finally earmarked or put the – what do you call the stones? –(Interjections)- the mark stones – is not likely to jeorpadise our relationship with the Republic of South Sudan.

 I thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable members and Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for stepping in on time. Members, the question is that the report of the committee on –

5.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we would like to thank the committee for the prayers they have given, and in these prayers on page 24, they did not include a corrigendum of Shs 1.2 billion. In addition to their prayer, I would like to clarify that under the recurrent expenditure, they will add Shs 1.2 billion, which was used for the Great Lakes Conference held early this month. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is additional. Honourable members, with the improvements made, unless the chair of the committee has something to say, I will put the question. 

I put the question that the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2012/2013 be approved and adopted by the House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall – thank you very much hon. Omwonya for being a good member of this committee -(Applause)- and taking charge. Somebody passed me a note that it is like in the military. In the military, if the commander is not there and the 2IC is not there and war breaks out, you do not wait for them to come back. You take charge and proceed. Thank you very much for taking charge and proceeding. You have saved the day and won the battle.

Honourable members, you recall that we adjusted that matters of urgent public importance can be communicated to the ministers, but for the formal bringing to the House, we scheduled that they should happen just before we adjourn arising from the problems we had with the urgent matters and how they were affecting our Order Paper. This would be an appropriate time for the honourable member for Ntoroko to raise the matter, which she has discussed with the Speaker. 

5.46
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. There are heavy floods in Ntoroko District in the sub-counties of Bweramule, Rwebisengo, Kanara and Butungama. Three people have so far died; people and animals have been displaced; there is no food; no shelter; and people are now living in camps. Transport and access to other sub-counties is completely cut off, and there is a likely outbreak of Cholera. But our district has not received any assistance from Government.

I wish to bring it to the attention of this House that Ntoroko District faces a lot of disasters every year. It starts with long spells of drought where animals die and people lack water and so on. After the drought, we get heavy rains. At the moment, River Semiliki and Lake Albert have burst their banks. Water has spilled over in the low lying areas of these four sub-counties. And at the moment, people are moving around with locally made boats to move to their areas.

My humble appeal to the government is to urgently intervene and provide relief to these affected areas. Provide shelter, mosquito nets and other utensils for the people. Otherwise, the situation is very pathetic and people are suffering. They need urgent help and assistance. 

5.49
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable colleague from upstream Lake Albert because I come from downstream of Lake Albert. 

Last Saturday, I went to Butyaba and I was perplexed that in the month of August, we could have a semblance of floods in an area which last flooded in 1961 and 1962. That speaks volumes. Those who have been studying the hydrology of this area would remember that in the 60s, there was a flood which affected Butyaba Port and the vessel which used to work between Ntoroko, Buliisa, Butyaba across to Nimule through to Packwach and DRC was halted because of that flood. 

Now, I want to inform the minister in charge of water that there is a fear that after every 50 years, there is a possibility of reoccurrence of that flood. I have been following this for some time, up to Egypt, analysing the hydrology of this area. And as we look at the floods in Ntoroko, we should remember that the floods upstream will come to Wanseko down to Nebbi, Pakwach and reach us. Also, particularly to see whether what we are told by the Department of Meteorology is true because the months should be October to November when the floods come. And what is worrying us is that they have come in August. So, if it is going to happen for the next three months, then there is going to be a problem. So, I request that basing on this information, you check to avoid further problems. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.51
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I want to express our sympathies to the people of Ntoroko that have been affected by these floods. I had actually not yet received that information, so, I cannot tell this House our response. But as you know, we have a ministry for disaster preparedness whose responsibility is to respond to such disasters. 

It is not always the case, of course, that we can prepare enough in advance for the disasters to avoid damage and distraction both to property and to life. Where we can, we attempt to do so, but as we are trying to do so –(Interjections)- for instance, in light of the experience in the Mt Elgon Area, we have a committee of Cabinet which has gone and produced a report, which will eventually come to Parliament to give you a report on what we are proposing to do in order to avoid disasters that will come. 

In this case, we have had erratic behaviour of seasons and rains heavier than expected, as you have heard, in Butyaba and Buliisa. In Kanungu, you remember we lost bridges and other major problems occurred. These are problems of nature that we must contend with. Today, the big news is about the hurricane that has hit Jamaica and is heading to the state where the Republican Party is holding its convention in America. And three states of the United States of America have declared a state of emergency because of these adversities of nature. 

So, I would like to urge my sister - I have heard what she has said. I wish we would have more information so that our department can respond as quickly as possible. Thank You. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable members. We have been able to complete all the business that was scheduled for today. Congratulations! (Applause) 

Tomorrow, we will take the same leaf and I hope that more committees are ready with their reports. This House is adjourned to tomorrow 10 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 28 August, 2012 at 10 O’clock.) 

