

Tuesday, 28 August 2018

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you have seen, we have Bills on the Order Paper and we need to find an opportunity to finish with these Bills at least this week. 

If we finish all the Bills on the Order Paper this week, I also propose that next week, since the Prime Minister is here, we use the time to clear every urgent question that has been raised by Members and has not been responded to. In that way we shall de-clog this part of the Order Paper which is running now to five pages. Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please alert the ministers; any minister who has any response to an urgent question or question for oral answer should be prepared next week. We are going to finish with all of them, to clear the stage for the work of Parliament for the coming weeks. That is what will be done. However, for this week, we have today, tomorrow and Thursday’s sittings. We should finish these Bills and pave way for what will happen next week. 

Honourable members, you recall that I communicated to you last week about my visit to Makindye to see hon. Kyagulanyi and to Rubaga Hospital to see hon. Zaake. I made a report of what I saw when I met them. This is now also to brief you that on Friday, after that visit, I went to Gulu Prison. My intention was to go and see what is going on there. I also had it at the back of my mind that there was going to be a debate today on some of those issues. The minister had made a statement and there was a report that was supposed to be presented today. Therefore, I decided that I needed to also discover for myself what was going on. 

When I went to Gulu Prison, I was led by Commissioner Frank Beine, who is a commissioner of prisons. I was with Senior Superintendent of Prisons (SSP) Margaret Orik, the Regional Prisons Commander (RPC), and I was also with Mr Musinguzi, who is the Officer-in-Charge (OC) of Gulu Prison. With them was also Dr Joseph Andama, who actually is in charge of running the affairs of Luzira Prison but because of the high profile people that had been put in Gulu Prison, he had been asked to relocate to Gulu to look after these people and ensure nothing happens.

I was able to see hon. Paul Mwiru. He was wearing a sling and had an injury on his shoulder. It was dislocated, so the doctor recommended that he keeps the hand immobilized so that he can heal. He was being treated with painkillers.

I met hon. Gerald Karuhanga who had no complaint except that he had been restrained and could not do anything. He said, “The last time I came here, I had brought people from the European Union to support this prison. I did not know I was going to be a resident here.” He was okay and nothing had happened to him.

I then met MP–elect, hon. Wadri Kassiano, and his question was: “Mr Speaker, do you know whether they have gazetted the results?” He was more focused on coming to Parliament to take oath and continue with his work. I did not know whether he had been gazetted but I have been informed that the Gazette is out and he is likely to take oath tomorrow. He also had not had any contact with anybody and had no complaints or injuries or anything else. 

I again met hon. Kyagulanyi. He still had back pain but he was walking by himself. The other three had come in earlier and we were already talking. He came in late and said he had to take it easy; he walked slowly. The doctors said they had checked his kidney and there was no problem. Dr Andama said they took him to Lacor Hospital to have an independent evaluation of his position and they found that there was no interference with the kidney. They did an x-ray and there was no fracture. What he had were muscle spasms and that is what is causing him a lot of pain in the back. 

That was my visit to the affected Members of Parliament. As of Friday, that is what I can report to this House about what I saw. Honourable members, when I was in prison in Gulu with them, they told me that they had made a bail application to be heard on Monday, which was yesterday. At close of business yesterday, I learnt that all four of them and other people had been granted bail. It is only hon. Kassiano Wadri whose bail conditions said he should not go to Arua. If he has to go to Arua, he has to seek court permission first. That is what I was able to see when I went to visit these people. 

I also saw the other people who are not Members of Parliament and saw the condition they were in. I am, therefore, reporting to you what I saw and hoping that today’s discussions will help us move ahead with what we need to do, rather than take us back to what we should not be focusing on. We should endeavour to go on and consolidate the interests of the people of Uganda to move ahead with what they need to do, what matters to them most - their survival, economic welfare and all the other things that relate to them such as children going to school, medicare and so on. I thought I should communicate that to you so that you know where we are. 

I was hoping that some of the Members, like hon. Gerald Karuhanga, who had no issue, would be in the House. It would have been good to see one of them in the House. I am sure they will possibly be joining us any time. 

2.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank God for our colleagues that you have communicated about. 

I would like to know from you – and this is also reinforcing what the Rt Hon. Speaker wrote to the President - about the perpetrators of this problem, about those who tortured our colleagues. Probably, the Leader of Government Business will tell us. If not, what business do we have here? 

Like the Speaker said, without bringing these people to book, there is no business in Parliament. This is not the first time this has happened. The first time, Members of Parliament were tortured right here in Parliament. This is the second time, and there will be a third and a fourth time if we continue to move like this. 

Therefore, I just want to reinforce what the Speaker, hon. Kadaga, said, that there will be no business in Parliament if these people are not brought to book. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. If you are referring to the letter, a copy of which was sent to me, the wording is a bit different from what you have stated. It could be a different communication; I do not know. However, if it is the same letter that I received yesterday, it did not say that. 

The letter stated that if the request of the Speaker would not lead to action taken against the people who did whatever they did against the Members of Parliament, Government business is likely to suffer in the House. It did not say it in the terms you have stated. There is a likelihood of Government business suffering. That, of course, is predicting that Members might not be receptive to Government matters since they would not be happy with Government. That is what the letter I read states. Let us go on. 

In the public gallery this afternoon, is a delegation of staff from the Parliament of Ghana. It comprises Mr Alhassan Y. Issa, Mr Charles A. Boafo and Mrs Josephine Adotey. They are here to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

Can we go to the business of the House. 

2.21
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In your communication, you reported to Parliament the visits you made to our colleagues. I would like to thank you because this has not happened in the past to people who are accused of that type of offence. I would like to thank you and Parliament for the attention it has given to this matter.

Mr Speaker, there are two issues that the Speaker’s letter raises. I am addressing the Speaker as an institution. First is the arrest and processing of the people who tortured the Members of Parliament. Secondly, the likelihood, as you have rephrased, of not handling Government business before that is done - the arrest of the people who tortured our colleagues. 

My understanding is that Parliament cannot disregard the issue of the welfare and security of its own Members and continue with business of Parliament as if nothing has happened. (Applause) Mr Speaker, I invite you to help us who are in this Parliament. I remember the time some of my colleagues were suspended. I was never suspended. I was removed from this House by the SFC; they strangled me and I had to go to hospital in Naggalama. 

I would like to invite colleagues, even from the other side - they are clapping. I told the Prime Minister that even you are clapping; having been trained by Obote, you would not be clapping. I was in Luzira in 2011 in the ward where the former Vice-President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, had been and two ministers, hon. Jim Muhwezi and hon. Mike Mukula. Subsequently, hon. Sam Kutesa, hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana and hon. John Nasasira survived by a whisker. Therefore, when talking about issues of excesses, they are non-partisan. I remember when I went to see hon. Chris Baryomunsi during the Nebanda crisis at Jinja Road Police Station; he had been denied even sandals. He was walking like we were still in the Stone Age era. 

Mr Speaker, before we proceed with business, I think the issue of the security and welfare of the Members of Parliament must be addressed first. (Applause) I fear you might be here presiding over Parliament and we are invaded again or another Member of Parliament is beaten as he comes to attend to Parliament business. 

Therefore, I am raising a procedural issue. I would like to find out whether it would not be prudent for the recipient of the letter to first answer the issues the institution of the Speakership is raising before we proceed with the business of Parliament. On the issue of those who tortured and beat up Members of Parliament, the Speaker categorically said that we want them arrested and also prosecuted like other criminals before we can proceed with all our hearts clear, with the business of Parliament. Otherwise, it is going to be very difficult for me to sit here. I do not know whether I am going to be picked again because they are swearing that they will continue. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the bit of swearing has not come to my attention, so I will not comment on it. 

There are two things here; there is the House of Parliament, its activities and its Members who conduct the activities and the privileges and immunities that are accorded to them in the course of doing their work in Parliament. Secondly, a communication, a copy of which I have seen, was sent yesterday to the President - I am supposing because I am not sure. I received a copy of this letter yesterday and it bears yesterday’s date. As to whether the President has received it as of now or not, I am not sure; I do not know. 

The question is: If it is being handled at that level, should we not respect that process of the discussion between the President and the Speaker of the House? We should do what we should do and wait for that. If there is nothing and we have confirmed that, then we can take additional steps to deal with this matter. However, as of now, as we wait for this discussion to continue and the officials to be taken to court, whether arrests are going to be made or they have already been made, and we get a report from these people - It was a procedural matter, please, can I – 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you are asking a question – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am just thinking through because you asked me. Those are rhetorical questions. That is my thought process. I was not seeking an answer. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, with your indulgence – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you volunteering some answers? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Yes, I am volunteering some. I do not know what is wrong with the people of Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) background; Prof. Kamuntu –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I really admire your patience and understanding. Some of us are particularly concerned. 

The Speaker must be heard in silence. Secondly, when you stand up, everybody must sit down. I saw you last time seated there and you ruled repeatedly that the report was not ready, but Members would stand, until your patience ran out and you adjourned the House for almost a week. The time of Parliament is wasted. Today –(Interjections)- I rose on a point of order. 

Mr Speaker, I have been very patient. You had to adjourn the House for a week – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Without provocation, hon. Nandala-Mafabi was referring to me when I was sitting there. Today, hon. Ssemujju is referring to me without provocation. Which political party did he belong to? Yes, I belonged to the UPC, but what were you before you joined the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC)? 

Is it in order therefore, Mr Speaker, for hon. Ssemujju to be referring to my background, which I do not deny, when he does not tell us his own background? What actually annoys me is that he is speaking while you are speaking and he is debating with you, when you should be heard in silence. Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, when you talk of people of UPC background, you have to be careful because of how far you might end. (Laughter) This is because you might also need to have a discussion with the Leader of the Opposition to find out some history of northern Uganda, so that when you are speaking, you do not generalise things. You might end up climbing the wrong tree. So, please raise your matter. Of course, I had guided but I allowed him to volunteer an answer. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much. I take your advice. When you have been part of very bad history, there is always pain when it is mentioned. I will be very cautious next time. 

I would like to raise a further procedural point. Now that the matter is being processed, why don’t we wait until that matter has been processed so that we are comfortable when we sit here? I do not want us to be in a situation like the one that is always quoted in the statement, “When so-and-so was being tortured, I did not bother because it was not me until when it was me and there was nobody to defend me.” 

I am begging you, Mr Speaker; this Parliament can wait for two days. The answers as regards to the people who tortured our colleagues and whether they are being handled the same way suspects are handled, can be got with your help, and then we will proceed when everybody is comfortable. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a procedural matter. You will have to cite for me the rule that permits “further procedure” because “further procedure” is technically a challenge to the Speaker’s ruling. However, if you know your rules, you know how to challenge the Speaker’s ruling. This thing of “further procedure” should stop. If I have ruled and you are asking for further procedure, that means you are challenging my ruling in an ad hoc manner. When you proceed in an ad hoc manner, you deceive the Speaker. 

Honourable members, let us do this: The letter was written yesterday; whether it was received yesterday or not, I am not sure, but I received mine yesterday. Can we give it time to get to where it should get to, until a response is obtained, while we proceed with our work? If there is no response, then we have the proper justification to take the next step and do what needs to be done. 

If we start now, it will not look nice, in my assessment. What will look better is if the letter is received, no action is taken, then we shall have recourse to now make a demand. It would make more sense to me. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise counsel. We were boxed here by the Special Forces Command (SFC) and the head of this institution, the Speaker of Parliament, wrote a letter to the President requesting to know who these people were who came to Parliament, who ordered them and why they beat up Members of Parliament. There was not even an acknowledgement of receipt of that letter, which I am aware of. No one has responded to it. We have healed after getting treatment and we are back to business as usual. Now, the other day again we faced problems. 

Therefore, as an institution, before even being told – The Speaker wrote to the Office of the President concerning what happened during the Constitution amendment process when there was a scuffle, but no one has replied. To me, it is serious. I am waiting for the reply. I would like to know who boxed my eye. I am waiting for that information up to now. Therefore, it cannot be business as usual, because it is becoming continuous in this institution. 

I think if it is time to take action, it has to be now. Our colleagues are in hospital; we cannot start processing Bills, drawing budgets and carrying on with business as usual. Something has to be done, so that the Executive can respond. I seek your indulgence.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker wrote to the President last year, has she confirmed to you that he has not responded? We cannot speculate over these things, honourable members. The response was received by the person who wrote the letter. It was not for Parliament - The Speaker wrote and an appropriate response was received by that office. 

Like this one you are talking about, hon. Ssemujju, I suppose you are not entitled to that communication but you saw it on social media. Were you entitled to receive that letter? It was a communication from the Speaker to the President. If the response comes, it is going to come to the Speaker and not to the Members of Parliament. How it is processed is another matter. Not so? 

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, I believe that if we take the first step, it will also put pressure on the authority to act. Nothing has been heard from those who were tortured and no answers have been provided. I am very sure if the Rt Hon. Speaker had received an answer, she would have communicated it to the House. 

Even up to now, some Members are still nursing the injuries they sustained during that torture, and yet torture is outlawed in this country. Why do we have to condone that and then just move on with business as usual, yet there is a very big attack on the institution of Parliament? 

Mr Speaker, we all have to put pressure on the authority. The Leader of Government Business is here; he can tell us if the perpetrators are being looked for and are going to be brought to book. Nevertheless, there is no way you can defend that torture that occurred both in Parliament and Arua. At least our honourable colleagues have been released now but we also need those who tortured them to be brought to book. 

The other time I made a statement here saying, “Today it is me and tomorrow it is someone else.” Who knows? Did hon. Amama Mbabazi ever think that the Public Order Management Act would affect him when he was pushing for that law here? – (Interruption) 

MR SSEWANYANA: I rise on a point of information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you giving information on a procedural point? 

MS BETTY AOL: Let me conclude. Mr Speaker, do not force us to walk out because we do not want to do so. It has been very difficult for us because we have been facing tough times for the last two weeks and this is now the third week. If you want to force us to walk out, then we shall do so. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker can never ask you to walk out. You know the circumstances under which I can do that and you know I can, if the need arose. However, if you are now soliciting me to ask you to go out, I decline that request. Walking out is an exercise within your right and you can do that anytime, but you cannot say that the Speaker has forced you to walk out. If you decided to walk out and I said, “Stop her from walking”, I would be wrong. Therefore, there is no guidance in the rules and there is no point of privilege. So please, resume your seats, Members. 

Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Lira Junior School in Erute County, Lira District. They are represented by hon. Charles Angiro Abacacon and hon. Joy Atim. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome. Thank you.   

Honourable members, that was my proposition to you. We have issues that are related to the same subject matter. If it is your view that you want to take that line – 

2.44
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We thank God for our colleagues who gained freedom, including Gen. Kale Kayihura today. I am one of those people who have ever been in prison. To be given bail is something you praise God for. As a House and an institution – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what circumstances were you in prison? (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, please allow me to leave that behind. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. 

MS ANYWAR: I am responding to your communication and that is why I am thanking God for our colleagues who gained their freedom. 

Mr Speaker, as you communicated and guided us, probably as leaders of this country, we should now look for a way forward on how we are to proceed with this issue. Last week, as you communicated, you paid a visit to our colleagues who were in hospital and in prison. We thank you for that fatherly undertaking. However, if the head of the institution, like the Speaker, reaches out to all of us and we challenge the outcome in the media, then I think as an institution of Parliament we should be guided. 

When you went and paid a visit to our colleagues, the media reported that indeed what you communicated was contradictory. As a Member of this Parliament, I was taken aback because we appreciate all your undertakings as our head. Should there be something that does not add up, we have our ways of reaching your office. That is probably when we would iron out some of these things. However, when it goes out there that we, Members of Parliament, are challenging the head of our institution, then that is a reason for worry. As the head of the institution, I think it would be good for you to help us manage what we are going through so that we do not appear to be coming from two different worlds. 

Mr Speaker, what is going on in the media is worrying and as leaders of this country, we must take charge of how the country should be governed. I would think, Mr Speaker, that you guide us so that we can also guide the country. If we are going to communicate irresponsibly, we are going to cause trouble in the country. 

I would pray to my colleagues - we are leaders, the chosen few. As we make our points and firm positions, let us be mindful that the whole of Uganda and the world is looking at us. It should not be careless communication. Somebody must manage what goes on in the media. 

Otherwise, as a country, we shall all pay for that which is not desirable and that is why I am praying that we should be guided as a country, so that we move forward in harmony and in respect of human rights. We do not condone it but we should do it in a dignified way as leaders because we are signaling to those looking up to us. For God and my Country.

2.48
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We understand the position you are in and you are here to make sure we are safe and to ensure that the people of Uganda are safe and whatever we do is to protect Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, we also want to thank you for your indulgence in this matter because you have allowed us to talk about it and we know it pains you as it pains us. However, you know the history of this country and it is that history, which is making us raise these issues. There are some colleagues who may be happy now because of what is taking place because they have not been attacked but tomorrow, they could find themselves in that position and in politics, there is no permanent situation.

Mr Speaker, the Speaker wrote to the President and somehow we got a copy of the letter and it is true members of Parliament were beaten. It is also true some are still out on police bond - I am one of them. It is also true that we expected the people who beat us to be brought to book or they would tell us who the people who attacked Parliament are. 

Now, we have allowed that the Speaker will communicate at an appropriate time. In Arua, members of Parliament were beaten and they are now on treason charges. Mr Speaker, I recall we had bad spots in Mabira Forest where many people died. It is when one Member of Parliament died in that spot that they went to clear the place and it became a better place because previously those who were dying were not Members of Parliament. This was hon. Henry Balikowa from Budiope. 

If we do not address what is happening now, anybody will get a Member of Parliament whether NRM or from the Opposition and beat him or her and say, “Nothing will happen.” 

Mr Speaker, I am worried, supposing they beat you, what will happen to us? (Interjections) Please, you may say so but these are serious matters. I saw hon. Kamuntu speaking here - I have a lot of information. Hon. Kamuntu had problems when he was in Nile Bank and he was being taken to Luzira; he cried like a baby. We are the ones who saved him in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. He cried at that time but he is here speaking as a big person. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we pray that before we do anything; there is an attack on Parliament and we must deal with this attack before we do any another business –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Nandala for giving me way. On 5 March 2015, there was a Member of Parliament called hon. Stephen Mayende Dede for Bukooli who was arrested in Muterere Town Council in Bugiri District and he was detained for three weeks.

By the way, for the record, he is a member of the NRM. It took the good will of this House in a motion that was moved by hon. Paul Mwiru - it was a heated debate here and Parliament ordered that he should be released. There were about 22 of them arrested and kept in Nalufenya for almost three weeks without any reason in violation of the Constitution. Mr Speaker, an attack on one of us should be an attack on all of us.
Finally, how can you be so quick to punch when other parties make mistakes of the same type that your party makes? I think that is what we call political hypocrisy and it should not be entertained here. Politics should stop when we are campaigning. Here, we are national members of Parliament who must be protected at all costs. Thank you very much, hon. Nandala, for giving me way.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you know the Member of Parliament they have talked about. He also cried here when he came to present his statement. He said they were “killing” him for nothing. The people who saved him were these members of Parliament in this House - and he was from the NRM.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to plead with our colleagues on both sides of the House that the matter we are dealing with is a serious matter. You are not even sure tomorrow you may not be in NRM primaries and you become independent - they will finish you.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like plead with you and we know that you know the laws very well; you are a very intelligent person because I have been with you for quite long. Why don’t you gazette this period we are in of the House and we discuss this matter and find a solution to it? Maybe we can pass a resolution as a House urging the Executive to handle this matter as quickly as possible? Failure to do that - if a Member of Parliament is not safe, what about just an ordinary individual or a voter? How safe is that person? 

If a Member of Parliament can be tortured - I have ever slept on the floor in police custody. I was removed from Mbale and taken to Tororo during the time of the Constitution amendment last year. I slept in Tororo for three nights on the floor. I know how it feels. I was not beaten but the cold cement beat me properly. The tear gas I inhaled beat me.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, use your good office to enable us deal with this matter. We are allowed to suspend all our rules and deal with the issue of members of Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I request you to take a decision on this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether what the Member for Budadiri West is saying fits in the general flow of what the Members have been saying. Should we proceed with the business of the House? The discussion from this side seems to suggest that we should not proceed but wait for something that the House has not pronounced itself on. Well, that is the other opinion but what are the facts, honourable members?

As we speak, there are matters in court. I was hoping that the honourable member would not comment because I have recounted some of these issues. I am sure that if those cases existed, you could have represented them before court. These matters are substantially before court. Are we now going to handle it this way? (Members rose_) No, there is no Member holding the floor.

Honourable members, if there are encroachers and there are no cases involved, what is the right course to take? I thought the Articles of the Constitution allow citizens of this country to access courts when there are violations of their rights. Those options are still available. 

What I am saying is; it seems that we are not prepared to proceed. If we are not prepared to proceed – no, I have restated the contents of that letter and there is nothing like that. What the letter says is, if those people are not arrested, there might be difficulties in processing Government business in the House. It does not say that Parliament will not sit. 

Honourable members – who is holding the floor? Hon. Sseggona is not holding the floor. (Members rose_) Order. Please resume your seats. There is no Member holding the floor.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before we refer to the letter from the Office of the Speaker, there is one fact that is known in this country and the whole world: that there is an attack on members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, what Members are saying is, we need it to be known that there is an attack on members of Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And who doesn’t know that?

MR KIBALYA: Very good. Therefore, the procedural matter I am raising –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we need to make this clear. Who does not know so far? Is it you? It cannot be the attackers because they are the ones who attacked so they know that they attacked.

MR KIBALYA: Mr Speaker, my fear is that whenever there is an attack on members of Parliament and we just come here and continue with business as usual, we are opening the gate to whoever wants to insult or beat an MP to continue with impunity.

It is very easy to arrest an MP who has tortured somebody but very hard to arrest an army officer who has insulted, assaulted, beaten and tortured an MP. It has taken ages – since the 13th - to find even one officer who participated in that but it was easy for the other side to find out the MPs who participated; whether rightly or not.

The procedural matter I am raising is, it wouldn’t be right for us to continue with business as usual without sending a message and putting a stop to this impunity that is going on amongst the army officers who are making it a business to come and beat MPs.

When we were growing up –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Raise the procedural point.

MR KIBALYA: I wanted to add something.

THE DEPUTY SPEAER: No, please. You have raised the procedure.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have a comment from the Government on this matter?

3.04
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, the Arua incident was unfortunate and has had significant ramifications in the country in terms of violence, some of which came to Kampala. The first point I want to make is to condemn the attack on President Museveni in Arua because that was the genesis of this problem.

Mr Speaker, since that incident, a number of Ugandans were apprehended; over 30 and these included some of our colleagues in Parliament.

The security organs got involved in the situation and some of the people arrested have been going through the processes of the law. Fortunately, all of them have now been bailed out.

The point I am making is that the matters before us are matters that are being handled by courts of law.

Secondly – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I am always restrained, especially when it comes to Rt. hon. Mzee Livingstone Ruhakana Rugunda, the Prime Minister. (Laughter) First, I nodded in approval, when he condemned the attack on the presidential motorcade because at least the issue of the attack on the presidential motorcade is in court. 

However, I was waiting for the Prime Minister to condemn the killing of Yasin Kawuma, who was not a combatant - (Interjections) - at least my ears are still working – for the benefit of hon. Mwesigye - I was waiting to listen to the Prime Minister of this country condemn attacks. Unfortunately, he concluded by indicating that the point he wanted to make was that and not condemning the torture, which is not in court. He did not condemn the killing of civilians, including Yasin Kawuma and the late Sekiziyivu in Mityana and the girl in Kyambogo, who had nothing to do with the violence. I am opposed to violence but is the Prime Minister, therefore, in order to proceed in a very dehumanising manner, first, to be lopsided yet he is the Prime Minister of this country? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What hon. Sseggona is asking me to do is to force the Prime Minister to condemn something. (Laughter) I am sure by now he is rethinking what he is requesting me to do because I thought statements of this nature are voluntary statements owned by makers; they cannot be compelled into making them. If the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister is not condemning anything else other than what he has done, I cannot force him to do so.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Let me also say that there has been loss of lives associated with a number of these incidents emanating from Arua, which obviously, we must regret. 

Mr Speaker, let us continue to do business as usual - (Interjections) - let investigations, which are going on continue so that we have a rational basis on which we can take a decision.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, point of procedure from hon. Theodore Ssekikubo.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are memorable events in this country that have lingered on and the Parliaments then stood up to the challenge of the day.
Mr Speaker, there was the infamous attack on court by the Black Mamba, around 2006. Parliament at the time was in recess but Members appended signatures and the House was recalled to handle a very critical matter – an attack on the third arm of Government. Parliament went on record by pronouncing itself on the attack of court by the Black Mamba. 

It is also important to inform Members that the judicial officers took a very strong decision to lay down their tools to condemn the attack on courts even where no single judge was brutalised; the judicial officers stood up in support of their institution by laying down their tools for a week. Parliament too moved to condemn the attack on courts of law. 

The Government knew how bad and ugly it was and since then there has never been another siege on the courts of law. Members –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on procedure.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am making reference to the past incidents so that it can guide members of Parliament, who are seated in this Tenth Parliament, to know that there have been challenges in this country and they have ever been handled. There was even an abduction of officials of Mengo: hon. Sseggona, hon. Nambooze, Mr Peter Mayiga, who is now the Katikkiro of Buganda, and others. 

At that point, Parliament was again on recess but signatures were galvanized and Parliament had to sit, as a matter of urgency. I will not mention many others, including the one involving one of us – hon. Nebanda; Members know about all these.

The reason I am standing is to raise a procedural matter. In situations where members of Parliament are brutalised and we do not know the final outcome of their bill of health but we continue sitting here, who else will ever stand up for this institution if you, members of Parliament, cannot do it yourselves when you are still here? (Applause)

I am touched by this kind of attitude by members of Parliament – because you are comfortable here, you think another day it will not be you –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for members of Parliament to be completely out of touch with the reality that Parliament is itself being attacked; that the brutalisation of members of Parliament; the arrest and torture of members of Parliament and the public - not all the 33 detainees were members of Parliament, some were members of the public. You win an election but you are on handcuffs and you cannot be let to be sworn in!

Mr Speaker, I plead with the honourable members not to be ambivalent on this point. Be touched. Some of us have stood here to call for special sessions and indeed we have alleviated the plight of all those who had been under attack. 

Is it procedurally right for the honourable members – with the Frontbench members, who sometimes may also fall in the Backbench – to sit here without any concern when their own institution is under attack? If we proceed in this manner, will there be another Parliament for you to come and sit and legislate?

Mr Speaker, I am beseeching you and Members to know that an attack on any one of us is an attack on all of us. Let us stand strong as the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. We are here in this Tenth Parliament - other Parliaments have discharged their duties, how about we, the Tenth Parliament?

Mr Speaker, it is my humble prayer that you take matters concerning members of Parliament as very vital for our sitting here and, therefore, we demand that a full explanation and undertaking by Government be rendered on the Floor of this House so that business can continue in the normal way.  I pray, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils from SOS Hermann Gmeiner Primary School Gulu. They are represented by hon. Lyandro Komakech and hon. Betty Aol. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, if the entire population of Uganda was 300 or 400 people, they would be the ones sitting here and the entire country would be taking the decisions; the points made by hon. Ssekikubo are valid.

When the courts were attacked, Parliament had to be called from recess because it is the last point of recourse for the people of this country. When there was a problem at the Buganda Kingdom where some of its leaders were affected, hon. Ssekikubo said Parliament had to be recalled from recess since it was a vital matter. That was because Parliament is the last resort for the people of this country. 

Honourable members, I hate to see the day when this Parliament refuses to sit and therefore, living the future of this country in a mess. I do not want to live to see that day. (Applause) As clearly indicated by the honourable member for Lwemiyaga, Parliament is the last point of reference. When something goes wrong, Parliament is called from recess, and I agree with him since it is the final point, where representatives of the people of this country sit to decide matters affecting them. Just imagine a situation where Parliament itself is not sitting. Where will people go?

If Parliament is not sitting – I am wondering; I am not soliciting answers and I want you to ask yourselves the same question - Parliament is not in recess; it is right here in this Chamber but it now refuses to sit, where will the people of this country go? 

Honourable members, like I said in the past, there are two big problems. One concerns the aspect where there are some members of Parliament who do not want to sit and deliberate and the other is the aspect where the Speaker does not want to preside over Members who do not want to sit and deliberate – (Hon. Ssekikubo rose_)– what clarification? May I know, from the experts who know how the President responds to these matters, how much time we should give the President since we are not going to be sitting? Are you the expert, hon. Kasibante? 

Honourable members, I am asking about how much time you think should be given to the President since you are now deciding his calendar. How much time do you want to give him?

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, before I talk about how much time we should give the President –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not know that? Then sit down because that is the only question I have asked.   

MR KASIBANTE: Okay, it should be two days.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House is adjourned for two days. Let us resume on Tuesday, next week. 

(The House rose at 3.21 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 4 September 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 
