Monday, 29 August 2005
 
Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and hope you had a peaceful and fruitful weekend. I have got some sad news but I do not have the details. When I do, then I may give you the full detail. But, I understand hon. Bright Rwamirama lost a brother over the weekend. I think burial was yesterday or the other day. I also got a message that the honourable member for Moyo District lost a daughter but I do not have the particulars. When I get the details, I will announce them so that we can do the needful. Thank you very much. 

The Order Paper will be adjusted because they should have included the report from the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. When we constitute ourselves into the Committee of Supply, we shall start with Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, which I understand will be ready to give its report this afternoon. (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) Yes, did you want to say something?

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Yes, Mr speaker. I am rising on a point of public concern with respect to the publication called The Daily Monitor of 20 August 2005 where it was reported that six dogs, which have been detecting drug trafficking and robbery –(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: But then you should have seen me and told me –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I have already seen you, Mr Speaker. –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: And you told me that you wanted to make a statement on this?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: No, you did not.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I came this morning and I saw you –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Did you talk about it?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, I did.

THE SPEAKER: Please, sit down then and be honest. Did you say anything?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I did, Mr speaker.

THE SPEAKER: About what?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I came to report the matter regarding the IGG and I also said that there was a matter related to the dogs which are about to be killed.

THE SPEAKER: No, you did not. Can I say what you wanted to say? Do you want me to say what you told me? You told me - let me put it on record because – you said, “The Bill which we have passed, Bill No. 2, which is going to the district, can it come back?” I said, “No, either it is endorsed or not.”  That is the only discussion I had with you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.54
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. My statement is being circulated following the concern of the Global Fund on the alleged mismanagement of its aid to Uganda by the Project Management Unit (PMU) the body designed to implement the programme, and their decision to suspend the aid given to mitigate the impact of HIV, TB and malaria. The Government of Uganda has taken the following immediate remedial measures:

1.	The Government has appointed a Commission of Inquiry to investigate the management of the project. The Commission will be headed by the Principal Judge, hon. Justice Ogola, and other members of the commission will be Mr Tumusime Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, Mr Ben Okello Luwum and Mrs Lydia Obonye Labu. The Commission will begin its work next week and it is expected to report its findings within one month.  
2.	The government has ordered a full audit of the project to be carried out by the Auditor General. 
3.	Further, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development suspended all the staff of the Project Management Unit (PMU) with effect from 26 August 2005 pending the outcome of the investigation. 
4.	In the interim, to avoid interruption of the critical life saving activities funded by the Global Fund, a reputable management and accounting firm will be appointed as a caretaker to carryout the activities previously undertaken by PMU. The said firm will report directly to the principal recipient, which is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Critical activities of the project will not be interrupted and Government is doing all it can to normalize the flow of the essential funds. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.05
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also take this opportunity to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for coming to this august House timely to tell us how and what is happening. I would like to put the following questions to the Rt hon. Prime Minister regarding his statement.  

(i)	How did this matter come about?
(ii)	How did we come to know it?
(iii)	How did it reach the press?  

It is my assumption that this matter was brought to surface by an established well-known accounting firm in a way of an audit or pre-audit. This accounting firm is known to do reputable work. Why is it necessary for us to establish a commission of inquiry to look into a matter, which has been professionally established by people who know what to do in that area, in other words to establish whether the money is properly spent or not? 

It is clear according to these people’s report that the money was misused. It is not my interest to do the preliminary investigation but now that the Minister has given us a statement, we would definitely ask him questions pertaining to what is contained in his statement. If indeed the money has been misused according to the auditing firm and among other places in the report you read that this money, like all other moneys from abroad, is channeled through Bank of Uganda and Ministry of Finance, then you turn round and ask the Governor of the bank who is supposed to be a witness to be on the board? 

That is the first stage of a cover-up. We believe this is a whitewash trying to mislead the general public. Much as I appreciate the fact that the Government has timelily come up with a statement, we are just trying to mislead the august House and the general public.

Two, handling $200 million through a bank and there is a serious hemorrhage of this magnitude, definitely the Ministry of Finance and Health would have called people to order and said, “Look!” Even the exchange rate - some of us who know something about exchange rate, when there is a heavy flow of dollars into the country or out of the country, it affects the exchange rate. Definitely, you ask the recipients, you ask the donors - there is a problem here. 

Not long ago in this august House, Mr Speaker, you brought a report to the effect that the Ministry of Internal Affairs and specifically the Police department had mobilized over $10 million to put up houses for the welfare of the officers and men of the force. The Ministry of Finance denied the Police that facility because it would have destabilized our micro-economic whatever stability. Now, how can it be that when some donor, the US government among others, brings in $250 million, the micro-economic stability is absolutely stable, but a miserable $10 million – Oh, no! It will upset our situation.  Then when we develop a serious hemorrhage in the flow of the fund, nobody comes up and says, “There is a problem here”. Why did it take so long before the Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Finance, PMU and the executing ministry - why could they not put a halt on this one? 

It was in this august House six months ago, when I brought up the same matter of the Global Fund and I mentioned three companies as an example that they are beneficiaries of this fund and I was suspicious that these funds were not going to their proper destination. I can repeat it without fear. An NGO run by my honourable colleague, a member for Rukungiri District is one of the recipients. One company called –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable, why don’t you discuss the statement of the appointment of a commission to inquire into this matter. That is the essence of the statement. We shall know exactly what happened.  

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, thank you for your guidance.  I was just going under our Rules of Procedure that when there is a statement, we debate it.

THE SPEAKER: Yes; do.

MR AWORI: Now, when I am debating it Mr Speaker, I am digging out this information. I have established a fact that this is just a whitewash by trying to mislead us. There is no way a person who is supposed to be a principal witness at the inquiry is also sitting on the board. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: That is quite valid; yes.

MR AWORI: This matter –(interruption)

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to inform you that in the so-called report, the Governor of Bank of Uganda is an aggrieved party because it is alleged that two banks namely, Stanbic and DFCU, connived probably with some people and manipulated the exchange rate to the loss - (Interruption) No, the Bank of Uganda is aggrieved and they are the ones supposed to find out even now if it is true. So, Bank of Uganda -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, the point is this, I think they were directly dealing with the Governor, Bank of Uganda. Now you tell us that he is an aggrieved party. (Applause) If he is aggrieved, he has an interest. I think this is the point. I think the case for hon. Aggrey Awori was that he is actually the one who is aggrieved. That was his version. So, either way, if he is aggrieved, then he cannot be a judge in his own court. (Applause)  I think that is the point. We do not know, but on the two sides, that is the point that is being made in respect to the Governor, Bank of Uganda.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your guidance in this matter. But I am at the same time happy that the minister has supported me in the case, because he was giving me information and in the process he has told me that actually the judge, and he rightly put it, is an aggrieved party. Although I had put it very mildly by saying he should be a witness, now we see he is more than a witness, he is actually an aggrieved party. I had also in my initial statement said this man was partly to blame because these funds went through a conduit he controls, that is Bank of Uganda, there is no way he can also come to sit on the board.
  
The next point I am trying to illustrate is that the Government consistently - when you bring matters in this august House, matters of concern, they brush you off, “Do you have evidence? They ask. Until it has matured - until it has burst out. I say, “There is pus flowing from this wound, dress it” They have not taken it seriously. This is not the only one.  

Mr Speaker, finally, I do not take this matter very seriously - this matter of setting up this commission of inquiry - for the reasons I have mentioned and over and above that, the principle of setting up the commissions of inquiry.

It has been the history and the culture of this government to set up commissions of inquiry, when they come up with recommendations, nothing happens for 20 years.

3.06
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA PROSCOVIA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I also want to thank the Prime Minister for finding it necessary to inform this country about what is going to happen. I also do not find much solace in the team that has been named and the action that is being taken. For once I have found three Os - names starting with “O”. The point I am making is that I have found three Os onto a commission and it makes me very suspicious, because when it comes to times of appointing political leaders, the Os are very absent. And when it comes to investigating, cleaning up the act, the Os surface. 

This is why I am bothered. I am bothered for using the O’s to clean up an act that we saw long coming.  We asked at appointment time, “Don’t we need people from that qualification to head those particular ministries?” and we were told, “No, it is not necessary, they are only providing political leadership.” and this is the result. I keep asking myself, when it is a World Health Organisation (WHO) meeting drugs, who is the technical person?  

Who is presenting Uganda’s case, with technical knowledge?  We have been told repeatedly that it is not necessary.  When you are going to purchase drugs and technical names are involved, how can we provide political leadership at that point.  This is how the whole crux of making Ugandans vulnerable in health crises becomes a problem.  

Mr Speaker, I do not doubt our colleagues’ competence as ministers, but the Ministry of Health, right from the start, needed people who understand medicine. Now, whom can I blame for ignorance that TB or HIV tablets are called this or that? I cannot blame them because we approved them, well knowing that we would have done better with medical people in that ministry.  Now, the cows have come home and we all must share the blame, because when we are dealing with the globe, we must be equal in status, but we were not.  

For a long time, there have been problems in that ministry, just as in Drug Authority and National Medical Stores. There have been problems with condoms; their size and expiry. All these things have been happening for a long time and we have been shy to point them out. 

I believe that is why hon. Muhwezi, the minister, has not given this statement himself and yet, he is here. This Global Fund is only a tip of the iceberg, for there are many other problems that live and thrive in the Ministry of Health.  We have monies of Kisoro and Kamuli hospitals, which we know have problems also. The entire management and leadership of Ministry of Health need our attention.  

Mr Speaker, it is made worse, when they add, now, Ministry of Finance. It will be a bigger problem when the Global Fund goes to Ministry of Finance. Even in this Ministry of Finance, things are not right. They cannot offer leadership in the interim to the so many Ugandans who are going to die of malaria, TB and HIV. It cannot happen. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to tell the Prime Minister, that this statement is not good enough for Ugandans. I propose that he withdraws it, so that he pays attention to the so many lives at risk.  They have been dying even before the Global Fund was suspended out of malaria.  We have had a blood shortage in every hospital.  

Our schools are going to have an outbreak of Tuberculosis because of the way they sleep and it is even going to be made worse by lack of nutrition, in addition to drugs.  We are going to lose the momentum we had developed in fighting HIV. We are going to lose even the leadership we had established globally, as a nation. 

Mr Speaker, I would like this House to really join me to request the Prime Minister to go back and do some more work. He should bring us a better response to this tragedy of Shs 280 billion. I do not know whether the newspapers are correct because the he has not even told us how much money is in issue. This is an issue of money but we have been given a narrative without even a single mention of a shilling. How can this be good enough for a nation?  

Finally, No. 4 is just guesswork from the Prime Minister’s point of view. “A reputable management and accounting firm will be appointed” to do what? A management and accounting firm; to dispense chloroquine or Anti Retroviral drugs? What is the issue here that you are appointing a caretaker for?  To manage what? There are no funds, I am told, since they are suspended. Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. Muhwezi: Thank you, hon. Salaamu Musumba, for giving way. The Global Fund made a report, which was not discussed with anybody; most of the issues raised can be explained, as the inquiry will find out. However, the Global Fund Geniva, said because of caring for the people who are ill, we would like an arrangement with Government in order to go on giving drugs and other health essential commodities like condoms and so on. 

Therefore, the principal recipient who is the Ministry of Finance, has to put this caretaker to work with the Global Fund, to make sure that these flow. Tomorrow, a delegation from the Global Fund is arriving in the country and they are going to discuss with Ministries of Finance and Health to sort out the problems before they lift the suspension.  I should explain that the Global Fund has three courses of action to take when there is a problem:
·	The serious one is to cancel the grant as they did in Burma.
·	The second serious one is to change the principal recipient who is the Ministry of Finance.
·	The third one, if there are some queries, they suspend, discuss and later continue with the flow of funds.

MRS MUSUMBA: I thank you, Sir. Mr Speaker, finally, we are told in the last sentence that critical activities of the project will not be interrupted. That is an assurance but which are these activities? 

“Government is doing all it can to normalise the flow of essential funds.”  When the minister chose not to present this statement, I thought he had given full powers to the Prime Minister and so, Mr Speaker, when it is mentioned that “there is need to normalise”, it means there is something not normal. Can we know when this happened? 

From an average legislator like me, my reading of events is that things went wrong last Friday. The duration between last Friday and today, when the press took the Ministry of Health unawares, you cannot say, “normalise.”  So, it is a pointer to the fact that there is something going abnormally, which I would like to know.  What has not been happening normally and for how long has it been happening? What do you intend the caretaker to normalise? 

Mr Speaker, more questions will be asked and I hope there will be answers this time round. I thank you.

3.20
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank the Prime Minister for this statement but as my colleagues have said, this is not a statement worth reading in Parliament. If you are talking about mismanagement of the global funds for AIDS, TB and malaria; how much? Do you want us to depend on information in the newspapers? 

You have not told us under what conditions, because mismanagement is wide and even ambiguous. For how long has there been mismanagement?  The Prime Minister should tell us what we are required to do as Ugandans. What are we required to do so that we access these funds? It is not only for the Prime Minister and Minister of Health but for all Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, I also plead with Government to ensure that the Executive has secrets. Such things – I know it is good if news comes out in the press, but such things discourage the direct beneficiaries of this money.  If it comes out and you are a direct beneficiary of ARVs, what hope do you have?  Government should keep secrets, because the fact that this got to the newspapers shows that there is leaking of information to the press. This is not good for the direct beneficiaries.  

Mr speaker, when you look at the Prime Minister’s statement –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you hon. Kasule Lumumba for giving way.  When you talk about information leaking to the press from Government sources, I would like to state categorically that this is the first donor’s report of concern that we have received.  Other donors even prior to Global Fund have been expressing concern about the money they have been bringing to this country for the same cause.  

However, since their money was always between US$ 20 or 30 million, they have not been raising hell. Global Fund, which is 90 percent funded by the United States, a powerful Government, expressed concern and that is why they authorised a powerful reputable accounting firm to look into this matter.  Otherwise, we have had cases in the past where funds towards malaria and AIDS have not reached genuine beneficiaries. 

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is very good to ask that question, because as will be disclosed in the inquiry - and I have been quoted by the press to have said that we were surprised this report - which I am sure will be torn into pieces - happened this way. Price Waterhouse Coopers, who are the local fund agents under the arrangement work with the Project Management Unit all the time. They are the ones who monitor what goes on in the project.  Indeed, many times they have told the unit not to spend this and that amount of money. However, this time round they were doing what they call “a normal review.”  They looked into the records of the unit and those of the “sub recipients”, the NGOs and compiled this report. They later took it to Geneva without letting any of us know and that is why it does not qualify for an audit. For an audit, you ask questions and get answers.  However, all that is here would have been explained had they asked the people concerned. So, it came in the press because by the time – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When you say, “the report”, do you have that report?

MAJ. GEN.  MUHWEZI: Yes, I can lay it on the Table; it is here, Mr Speaker.  

(Whereupon the honourable minister laid the report on the Table.)

MAJ. GEN.  MUHWEZI: They took this report to the Under Secretary, and for all that time I was not aware of what was happening. I have never been informed about anything. The same day, they made a press release in Geneva to the effect that they had suspended the grant. Mildmay has already complained by writing a very strong letter to the Global Fund, hence tearing this report into pieces. Ground Agents have also written and all the other recipients who are talked about can explain the issues they raised. So, you can see it got to the press before we got it; how could we have informed you before we received this report?

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I think it is clear for an ordinary mind that there is a problem in Cabinet itself and the way they operate.  If a Prime Minister comes and gives a statement and all the time the minister has to get up to give information; this information the minister ought to have given the Leader of Government Business to include in his statement. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, the statement is to the effect that they have appointed a commission of inquiry into what has been stated. That is the purpose of the statement.  It is not to explain what went wrong, since they may not know. It is to say, we have set up an inquiry to dig out all that went wrong and then later we shall know. That is the entire purpose of the statement. 

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, thank you for that guidance, but Mr Speaker, there are particular issues which the  –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you do not just stand up and talk. She is on the Floor.  I was saying that the statement was meant to explain that a commission has been set up. That is all.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker Sir, although the statement was given by the Prime Minister, in all fairness to the Minister of Health, I think he should be allotted some time to explain matters relating to this statement. This is because the statement is very brief yet the minister appears to have a lot of information. Therefore I think it will be good if after the Prime Minister has spoken the Minister of Health and even the Minister of Finance are given an opportunity to substantiate on a few points. This way we will have a balanced debate if we allow them to tell us their side of the story. Everybody in the country is concerned so we cannot simply go around this subject in a light manner. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my understanding of this statement if you look at the first paragraph is that following the reports of alleged mismanagement of the Global Fund by the body designed to implement the programme, a decision has been taken to suspend aid that has previously been given to mitigate the impact of HIV, TB and malaria. 

As a result of this, the Government of Uganda has taken the following immediate remedial actions; a commission has been set up to inquire into all that has been going on so that a position can be established. The Prime Minister is not explaining the mismanagement. Rather he is saying that a commission of inquiry has been set up and when a report has been released, we will be able to discuss this meaningfully. This is my understanding of the statement.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you know, we cannot debate meaningfully on issues that have not been probed. The purpose of my statement was simply to state that we have instituted a commission of inquiry and that everyone is free to testify.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister stood up in this House and made a statement on behalf of the Government. It is my assumption that the Minister of Health is a member of that Cabinet and that government. Is it in order for the two representatives of the Government to present different views on the same matter? 

The Prime Minister is telling us that they are setting up a commission of inquiry. The Minister of Health on the other hand is saying that there is nothing to look into and that even if an attempt is made to do so, it will be torn to pieces. Is it in order for the Cabinet to mislead this August House by presenting two points of view?

THE SPEAKER: Officially we are dealing with the Prime Minister’s statement and not that from the Ministry of Health. If anything he is not making any. Honourable members, much as we are all concerned about what we read in the papers, we need to know what is happening. We need to know whether there was actually any mismanagement, how much money was embezzled if any, and how much aid actually came.  And I think that the purpose of the commission is to do exactly that. 

However you have raised the issue of the composition of this commission. You have said that the Governor is a complainant and an interested party, therefore he should not be part of the commission. As regards this, we can assist whoever is setting up this commission by stating that we have a query about the Governor being part of this commission because of the following pertinent reasons. Should we just assume what happened? No. I think that is the purpose of this commission. All we can do is advise on the composition so that the commission can start its work.

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I was coming to point number 4 of the statement. When the Prime Minister says that a reputable management and accounting firm will be appointed, can we know the time frame for this? This is because in point number 1 of his statement he said that the commission of inquiry would begin its work next week.  When are these caretakers beginning their work? If you leave this open it might extend to even a year.

Lastly Mr Speaker, I want to add that it is sad for us to have such a situation, most especially when Uganda had established its name on issues relating to HIV/AIDS. It is a pity because we have earned this name painfully under the leadership of His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. I think the ministers in charge of finance and health should first of all apologize to Ugandans because it is going to be very difficult to get back this reputation.  

The mismanagement of these funds started with people being rewarded politically by having their NGOs registered and taken on. Now it has turned out that these NGOs have been using this money in constituencies to de-campaign fellow politicians like people in local councils and even members of Parliament. Our opponents are running around with these NGOs and helping fund various programmes. This was the beginning of mismanagement.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you have that kind of vital information, why don’t you assemble and take it to the commission? I believe this commission will be an open one that will put all its information on record. We are not instituting a commission of inquiry by ourselves. Either we agree that there should be an inquiry or not but the issue is to set up a commission to dig out the facts.

MRS RUTAMWEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just thought I should give some information. I believe I am committed member of NRM yet despite this, my NGO applied for this fund twice but I never got it for my constituency. Therefore if it is a matter of using this fund to reward political supporters of whatever party, then how come I never got it, yet it is on record that I applied for it? I thought this information is very important. We should not use every opportunity that comes up and interpret it politically. If we do we will never reach the nerve of the problem. I thank you.

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank her for that information. Since you have directed that we give information to the commission of inquiry, I will do that. However I request hon. Rutamwebwa to go and find out if her political opponent did not access money from that fund under another NGO.

3.35
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter is very critical but since we have been restricted to the statement by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to suggest something. In paragraph 4 the Prime Minister has said, “A reputable management and accounting firm will be appointed as caretaker to carry out the activities previously undertaken by the PMU and that the said firm will report directly to the principal recipient, which is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development”.  

Mr Speaker, all along the booted PMU has been operating with the Ministry of Finance as the recipient and now we want to put a new caretaker to report to the same. For a long time we have been complaining about the fact that Ministry of Finance owns all the projects. It has been on the Floor of this House that each and every time we have a project it is the Ministry of Finance that is in charge. 

I suggest that in this particular instance, Bank of Uganda be the principal recipient. I do not know how this would fit within the current framework but I think that instead of leaving Ministry of Finance as the principal recipient this aid should be channelled through Bank of Uganda who can then –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. I think that our contributions should be equally balanced with information. You must first ask certain questions such as how they determined the principal recipient and whether PMU has been an agent. Once you have got this information, you will be in position to contribute meaningfully. But to contribute without requisite information is to make contributions that are general and not directed anywhere in particular. 

Therefore, what I think we should do is ask whoever is here how come it was decided that the Ministry of Finance should be the principal recipient when this aid deals with health issues. What is their role and can the Bank of Uganda be recipient of this kind of aid? This is how to deal with issues like this. Sometimes I see people contributing when they should have started with asking questions. We should start with the question, get the information then use that information to develop your contribution. 

I do not know what the view of the Parliament is concerning whether the people who are setting up the inquiry should be the same ones to select members of the team. Anyway, let us continue please.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the reason I ventured into that was because of the shallowness and lack of detail of this statement.  

THE SPEAKER: No, the statement was limited to an announcement by Government that they were setting up a commission of inquiry. Maybe you should ask about the terms of reference.  

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: Honourable Speaker, I have some clarification to make but I also hope that when the inquiry takes place, what hon. Mwandha was suggesting will come up because members do not seem to have enough information about this. There was an agreement signed between the Government of Uganda and the Global Fund and of course like any other matter concerning aid, the Ministry of Finance signed it. 

Therefore the Ministry of Finance is the principal recipient and this is an international arrangement. Even now, because the Global Fund has problems with the Project Management Unit, they have demanded to sit with the principal recipient and agree on another structure to use in order for funds to continue coming. That is why we are saying that since PMU has been set aside, as the principal recipient, Ministry of Finance has to find a caretaker to work with the Global Fund in the short term and ensure that drugs continue coming.  

MR MAFABI: Where has the Project Management Unit been? You are now saying that the Ministry of Finance is going to appoint a caretaker to monitor the money. Under which ministry was the PMU housed?

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: We shall circulate all this information.  There is a structure for this arrangement with the Global Fund. Because this fund is for malaria, TB and HIV/AIDS, the principal recipient is the Ministry of Finance through the permanent secretary, the accounts officer and the Project Management Unit. Therefore the Project Management Unit is below the permanent secretary of Ministry of Health who reports directly to the Secretary to the Treasury in the Ministry of Finance.  

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I have two remaining questions.

THE SPEAKER: We will conclude this debate by giving an opportunity to the honourable member representing Workers and the Chairman, HIV/AIDS Committee.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the last two questions I have are that first of all we have been told that funds have been suspended although some life saving lines are still open. I would like to know what specific critical areas have been affected by the suspension of this fund and the status of the situation as per now.

I would also like to know whether it is meaningful to have a commission of inquiry at this point given that a response is being prepared to negate the report by Pricewaterhouse Coopers. If Government already has a response, is it necessary to set up a commission of inquiry to investigate which will only deplete our resources and time?  I would have thought that it is enough that we have the answers.  If our donors are coming, let Government prepare a response to their questions instead of entangling ourselves in a commission when we already know that everything is set and ready.

3.44
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is an academic and knows as much as I do that inquiries are meant to add to the existing body of knowledge. Our friend, the honourable Minister of Health, Jim Muhwezi, has stated here that he has information that will negate anything that is raised by the Global Fund. Now if information already exists with the Government authorities, what is the purpose of an inquiry? We know that these inquiries cost a lot of money. Therefore I submit that this inquiry is not necessary since it will only serve for public relations.   

The Prime Minister knows that things have not been going well and from his statement you can see that he has not even told us what exactly has gone wrong. This House should reject the proposal to use taxpayer’s money to put in place a commission of inquiry since the information already exists.

Finally, in paragraph 4 the Prime Minister has informed us that there will be a firm to care take and take charge of these activities in the interim. May we be advised on how this firm will be appointed? I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are certain things, which are reserved for the Executive, and others for the Legislature. The decision to appoint a commission is an Executive one. This statement was made to us so that as representatives of the people we could be informed of what is being done and for us to comment on its composition. I do not think we can stop the Executive from carrying out its functions.

3.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the Prime Minister for coming out with a statement that highlights key government actions that are being taken to solve the problem. Of course the suspension of funds for AIDS was bad news because I know that just a few days earlier they had suspended funds to Burma mainly because the military government there was not allowing free influx of donors. To hear that after Burma they had also put Uganda on CNN and BBC after our attempts to portray a very good image and most especially without even consulting our government is something else. In other words the procedure and the timing of the announcement needed more elucidation. 

The main challenge and problem is that many more people are going to be affected. This is because even before these funds were suspended there were already challenges associated with procuring drugs for Malaria that had led to the involvement of other international organizations. Many people are dying everyday because of Malaria yet we cannot get money because the World Health Organization wants some financial commission before they can allow this procurement to go through. It is, therefore, very disheartening that this is happening to Uganda. Already the drugs that we were expecting were not going to be enough so for those not to come is very bad indeed.  

I am not so sure that this commission of inquiry is going to help a lot as, members have said. However, I support it because I believe that when it is set up, people with information either concerning NGOs or the public sector will come forward with it. Also other aggrieved parties like people living with HIV, concerned NGOs, the PMU, the Solicitor-General and the public will go and either give information or defend themselves. 

My only concern is that a lot of money is going to be spent on a commission of inquiry consisting of mainly Justices. I would have preferred to see more experts say from the Institute of Public Health, people with high repute who know how Global Fund, World Health Organization and PEPFAR operate and who are knowledgeable about STDs, HIV, and how all these are affected. To get Justices and a few other people and put them together means they will only listen yet it would have been good if some experts who are knowledgeable internationally in the area of HIV/AIDS supported them.

Furthermore, I would have preferred it if we used the second option of the Auditor General’s office. This is because PriceWaterhouse Coopers is a local Fund agent and as such it is working solely on behalf of and in the interests of the Global Fund to ensure that money from there is used for what the Global Fund wants. As Ugandans we also have our Auditor-General who should work on our behalf by going out and auditing every institution that benefited from the Global Fund and establish where funds amounting to US $45 million went. They should not be as selective as PriceWaterhouse Coopers.  

Once they come out with a report, as Parliament we can request the Auditor-General to bring it here as soon as possible and then we can debate it. It can also be shared with the Public Accounts Committee as well as other committees that are responsible. Although the idea of a commission of inquiry is good, I am not very sure about involving these judges. It should be the Auditor-General to do this work instead of disturbing these judges.  

The other thing I want to say is that you were talking of suspending the Project Management Unit (PMU) as part of the recommendation from the Global Fund. However, if you send these people away they will go and look for greener pastures elsewhere. How then are you going to get the information that you need? When the Julia Ssebutinde Commission was set up to investigate Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) they did not have to suspend most of the staff for Ssebutinde to carry out the inquiry. It was done as people continued to work and gave information at the same time. All you need to do is get the information that you think is critical or that people can tamper with and keep it. But to suspend people might not help you in getting the information that you need. However, that is up to the appointing authority.

The other information I have or the other information I want to give is that Uganda must start looking for funds from our own budget to seriously fund HIV/AIDS in the long run. By the trend of donors, by the way announcements are made, I think we must be prepared for even more announcements because sometimes there could be some other agenda that is not clearly apparent. 

The other information I also I want to give is that there seems to be a question of how funds for HIV/AIDS should be channelled. You will find that the civil organizations, the NGOs, they would have wanted this money to be channelled through an NGO umbrella organization who becomes the principal recipient instead of saying the Minister of Finance is too strong for them. 

On the other hand, you will find the Uganda Aids Commission saying, “For us we are clean, we are okay, maybe these funds should be channelled through us”. Then you will find now the Minister of Finance will be saying, “Now, since Ministry of Health has not performed well, let us control these funds”. So you will find that the small NGOs that are being probed or that have been probed will become a pony in the chess game played by giants. It is a question of who should control these huge amounts of money. That seems to be a major issue in this inquiry.  

I remember one time suggesting that maybe in future the Government should think of having a ministry in charge of AIDS because in Rwanda they have it, in Burundi there is that Ministry and in many other countries, even Namibia –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: I would like to inform the member on the Floor that in Uganda we have the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Health covers all health problems in this country, including AIDS.

I would like also to inform him that he is saying that the composition of the commission of inquiry is inadequate and it should include people who have experiences in the medical field. I would like to inform him that the composition of this commission is correct except that we should in fact include the Police because it is all about impropriety, not about dispensation of drugs.

MR DOMBO: Thanks you very much honourable member for giving way. Mr Speaker, through you, I want to seek clarification from the honourable member. He seems to be saying that there could be a bigger problem of bigger giants fighting for where this money could be stationed. He seems to relate by saying that the small NGOs that have been inquired into could be a pony like on a chessboard. This report was written by PriceWaterhouse Coopers. Does he seem to imply that PriceWaterhouse could have also joined this game of fighting, so on whose side is PriceWaterhouse fighting?

DR TUMWESIGYE: I cannot answer that question but back to hon. Eresu’s question, when I talk of experts I did not mean doctors, but expertise of people who have an idea on the international organizations dealing with HIV/AIDS, how they channel their funds and how they operate. You could just add one or two on that panel because the problem starts from the way money comes and how it is distributed to various organizations.  Therefore, by having somebody who is an expert but maybe neutral and independent, it could help the people who are on the commission. 

With respect to hon. –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, for the court to decide on professional negligence by the doctor, the Judge need not to be a doctor. There are ways of making inquiries and this being an official commission, they will identify the kind of evidence they want, the kind of experts they want and who will assist it. Otherwise, if you start saying that these commissioners should have this and the other, you may not end the list. So, they have a mechanism of being assisted. If a commissioner of this nature is there, as hon. Eresu was suggesting the Police, the Police will be there to assist the commission and experts will be able to explain this and the other. Otherwise, you will be making a very big commission. 

However, all these points are points that we should really take to this commission. For instance what you have said about NGOs and so forth, this is the kind of evidence that will go to the commission.  Eventually when they draw their report they will say, “The solution is this, we should do this, do that, eliminate this and the other,” then that is how it is going to work. The essence is: should we encourage this commission, should we refine that so that we go to other issues? Because as you see on the Order Paper we have other matters to consider. I had agreed to -(Interruption)

DR TUMWESIGYE: Let me conclude. I wish to conclude by pointing out one other area. I think hon. Awori was talking about organizations that can be linked to politicians and hon. Mugyenyi also raised that question. What is very crucial is that many people have investigated to see what has been the key to Uganda’s success in the battle against HIV/Aids. They have found that whereas many countries have carried out interventions, which is almost similar to Uganda’s interventions, they have not succeeded as much as Uganda and they point out that this success in Uganda has mainly been because of the involvement of political leadership right from the Presidency to the LC III chairpersons and all the politicians. The high level political leadership in Uganda has led to the significant decline.  

Therefore, when an organization - because for sure there are many Members of Parliament and there are many LC chairpersons, many politicians who are chairpersons of the board, who are patrons or who have organizations that they support. So, for anybody to deny certain organization funds, if it can technically qualify, will not be good. Also, it is not good to say because such organization has maybe this Member of Parliament as a patron, or the chairman of the board, it must not be doing good things, it must be doing only bad things. 

So, I want to indicate that it is not fair, because I think there are many organizations and politicians who support various organizations, which are involved in HIV/AIDS. That does not necessarily mean that they are not doing a good job. They should be investigated, they should be queried, if need be, but they should not be put on the defensive. I thank you.

4.05
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am just going to restrict myself to the statement given by the Prime Minister. I read in the New Vision, I think Sunday Vision, what appeared to be the details of the report of the accounting firm.  

PriceWaterhouse Coopers is an internationally known, professional, accounting firm. When the Prime Minister stated the concern of the Global Fund over the alleged mismanagement, it gave me the impression that the Prime Minister does not believe in what this firm did, which to me tantamounts to imputing a wrong motive on a highly reputable firm of accountants. 

Mr Speaker, the accountants who did the job under PriceWaterhouse Coopers belong to the same profession as the accountants in the Auditor-General’s office and most likely they belong to the same profession like the accounting firm, which is going to do an interim management of the project. So, I find it difficult when the Prime Minister says, “alleged mismanagement”, it means he does not believe in that report. I do not know where he gets his evidence for not believing in the report submitted by a highly reputable professional accounting firm. That is my first concern.

My next concern has already been talked about, the inclusion of Mr Tumusiime Mutebile, Governor, Bank of Uganda on this commission. The Minister for Health supports this view because Tumusiime Mutebile is the complainant.  

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI:  I would like to withdraw the statement I made, because it has been misinterpreted. What I meant was that he is a technical person who is needed on that committee. That is what I meant.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my advice is that we should not go – because for instance I have personally seen this report, which I have just received. Would you like me to read you one paragraph? It says, “Had we performed additional procedures or had we performed an audit or review of the financial statement in accordance with international standards on auditing or international standards on review engagements, other matters might have come to our attention that we have not reported to you.” This is telling really that even the report itself is telling you that certain things were not followed.  

So, I would rather that all these matters be discussed by the commission, otherwise you may assume many things are perfect when they are confessing here that they did not follow certain procedures. Let us not tear up this report, let us use it, the report is here, available for you. Let us use it to really find out what went wrong, please.

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Speaker, I quite agree with you although my real concern is that if we are going to get a report of a commission of inquiry, which will convince everybody, people like the Governor, Bank of Uganda, should not be on it because even that report, which I read, there were issues of exchange rates, which were wrongly used and which appeared to be very fraudulent. So, even if the governor has a good case to put, it is better that he puts it as a witness and not as a member of the commission. 

The Prime Minister should tell us the identity of all these other people. I know Mr Ben Luwum was at one time proposed for the position of Auditor-General and under some mysterious circumstances the Government withdrew his name. This lady, Lydia Obonyo Labwo, I do not know her. It is important that we know these people because the credibility of the report will depend on the kind of people that are going to sit on this committee.

Under paragraph 3, there is the issue of the project management unit. In the report I am referring to there were allegations that in fact the head of that unit was not the best candidate for the job but for reasons not known by anybody he is the man who turned out to be the person appointed to head that particular unit.

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member for giving way. This issue has been raised many times especially in the press and I think I should make this statement. When PMU was being informed, the Permanent Secretary invited applicants and thousands and thousands of people applied. The Permanent Secretary hired a private firm in the names of Ernest and Young who interviewed the people who were short listed and gave three names for each of the eight offices that were advertised in the order of competence, I presume, and the first person was appointed.  

But in the case of the project co-ordinator, the top most, Dr Mutumba, was listed No. 1 with 68 points, and Dr Muhebwa was listed No. 2 with 63 points. It so happened that Dr Mutumba, No. 1, is heading a project in the Ministry of Health, the Nutrition and Early Childhood project, which is still going on up to today. So naturally the Permanent Secretary took the next on the list, that was Dr Tiberius Muhebwa. 

Dr Mutumba complained to Geneva in fact - he was also very indisciplined - he wrote to Geneva and Geneva delayed the release of funds because of that. It took months until the IGG intervened, investigated and found the Permanent Secretary right because Dr Mutumba had lied that the project had ended and he was ready to take up another project but as things turned out, up to today that project is running in the Ministry of Health and that is why Dr Tiberius Muhebwa, who was the second, was recruited as the co-ordinator of the project.

MR MWANDHA: Finally, Mr Speaker, in fairness to this House, the Prime Minister should have indicated the terms of reference of this commission because what are they going to investigate? We should know. There is so much concern about issues of lack of accountability, using wrong exchange rates, using agencies, which do not exist, so many issues and I think the very short statement by the Prime Minister did not go far enough to provide the information we would have needed on a matter of such great importance. I thank you.

4.14
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I presume this commission of inquiry is being constituted under the Commission of Inquiries Act - if the Prime Minister could give me a hearing because I am going to raise a few questions.

One, if I am correct that this commission is being constituted under the Commission of Inquiries Act then the President issues a commission. I would like to know from the Prime Minister whether the President has already issued that commission?

Two, if it has been issued, then under section 1(2) of the Act, all the terms are given and even the subject of inquiry is given and all the details.  So, if the Prime Minister could please have the commission laid on the Table of Parliament then most of these issues being –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Abdu Katuntu for giving way. That is the original Commission of Inquiries Act. It required the President to issue, in fact to establish, a commission of inquiry. The law has been since amended to replace President with minister; I will lay the amendment on the Table tomorrow afternoon. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, before me is the revised edition of the laws of Uganda but that notwithstanding even if it is the minister, can we now even know which minister has appointed this commission? When you look at the Prime Minister’s statement he is talking about “Government” so if the issue is changing President to minister, can we know which minister?

Having said that, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, are we now in the legality of the format of the commission? We are talking about the need to have a commission.

MR KATUNTU: Yes, Mr Speaker, once you talk about a commission, we go about the terms under which this commission has been appointed and its terms of reference. We do not have them and the statement of the Prime Minister does not provide any of those details.

Three, it seems this was hurriedly done. When you look at section 5 of the Act, it provides for the Secretary of the Commission of Inquiry, how do you have a commission of inquiry without a secretary? Mr Speaker, can we know from the Prime Minister whether there is a secretary who has been appointed or the whole thing was so hurriedly done that it does not even have a secretary?

Four, this is an issue slightly of a general nature regarding the nominated chairperson, hon. Justice Ogola, the Principal Judge. When I was still on the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of this House, every other time the Judiciary came before us, they complained about backlog of cases and also having judges being assigned some of these tasks every other time. 

For the three years I was on that committee and the last year being one of the heads of that committee, we had that complaint. I would like to know now whether this appointment has been done in consultation with the Judge himself? Because as you realise, the Principal Judge is not only performing judicial functions, he is also the Administrative Court of the High Court with its unlimited jurisdiction. Having this Judge out of court and taking off from his administrative responsibilities and giving him further responsibility really affects the running of the High Court. 

As of now the Judiciary has got a problem of Judges. It would have been better if due consultations were made to have some of the judges who are not over burdened with administrative responsibility together with judicial duties to head this particular function, otherwise we are affecting the running of the High Court. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.20
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank all hon. Members of Parliament because this matter is very dear to all of us. I will begin with some questions raised by hon. Katuntu. Let me say that the Chief Justice was consulted and he accepted because he was also aware of the importance of this matter. So, this arm of the state has agreed to perform this vital role, so there is no cause for alarm.

Let me also say that obviously we do have secretaries and we shall not hesitate to appoint one but if necessary one of those people could be a secretary but it is a matter, which we are going to address. This matter was so urgent that we had to handle it expeditiously. We had to! Of course the terms of reference must include probing the allegations made by the Global Fund, that is the most critical matter.

On the issue of the Governor Bank of Uganda raised by many people, as you know the Governor is the supervisor of banks. He has technocratic knowledge, he is also a former Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Finance, and so he is a very useful person in having on this committee. Of course when you are appointed on these committees and you realise that there is a conflict of interest you can always get out of it. Even the Judge himself, Justice Ogola, could ask anybody who has a conflict of interest to get out of it and I am sure he is such a distinguished Judge that these are some of the primary questions he is going to ask them.  

If later on –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, the crux of the debate is that they have shown you that the Governor of the Bank of Uganda being a complainant, others have said he is a witness, definitely you cannot serve the two roles, being a witness and then investigating. This is what they are telling you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: He is not a witness; he has no personal bank involved –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification, how can the Prime Minister know who is going to be a witness? He cannot know! The commission must sit and know who it is going to call. When you look at the subject matter, chances that the Governor of Bank of Uganda will be a witness are high and this is the issue we are raising. Why can’t the Government be humble enough to nominate some other person other than Governor Mutebile?

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, the reason why the Governor can surely not be a member is given in this report that, “The rates at which PMU translated foreign exchange into Uganda shillings were much lower than the margin rates communicated to us by the banks who received the funds resulting into a shortfall of Shs 517,150 million.” This discrepancy needs to be explained, nobody else will explain it better than the Governor, Bank of Uganda.

MR AWORI: Point of procedure –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, you have heard the views and it is up to you. You are the ones constituting this so it is up to you take it or not.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Governor does not own these banks; he supervises these banks. That is all –(Interruption) 

MR AWORI: Point of procedure –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But there are no procedures here. This is his position. You have made your position known. It is up to him to go and think about it. You do not have to cause him to think about it and decide just here.  

MR AWORI: Essentially, Mr Speaker, when you have been gracious to give advice to the Prime Minister, I think it should be equally gracious of him to accept your advice. Do we need a motion for us to assert our position?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the point has been made. Let us conclude this matter. We have other items on the Order Paper.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, there was the issue of PriceWaterhouse Coopers being a reputable audit firm, but as you said yourself, as it was said in the report there are issues, which have to be verified and there are aggrieved people. So when you have aggrieved people it was essential to have this commission of inquiry headed by such a prominent Judge so that even aggrieved people may clear themselves. But it is also important to remember that even PMU may be cleared, who knows, and if they are cleared, they may be restored.  

There were issues for example hon. Musumba Salaamu said that there are two “Os” or people with names beginning with “O” and so on. That was a very unfortunate statement. I do not refer to people in terms of their tribes or names; I refer to Ugandans. It was a very unfortunate statement. These are Ugandans with skills and I hope no such statement will ever be repeated in Parliament.  

Some honourable members said that my statement was short, including hon. Lumumba Kasule and so on. Of course it had to be short. As you know if I wanted I could have made a report of 300 pages here but I have taught for 34 years at university and I know you deal with the matter, which is critical. I am setting up a commission of inquiry. That is all. Any other issues will be determined by that commission and you should give evidence to it. I call upon you, I urge you honourable members to give evidence to this commission. It has been given one month and we shall handle this matter expeditiously. If they can complete earlier, the better. I thank you.

MOTION MOVED IN ACCORDANCE TO ARTICLE 163(9) OF THE CONSTITUTION FOR THE APPROVAL OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE AUDITOR OF THE OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL TO CARRY OUT AUDIT FOR THE PERIOD JUNE 1998 - JUNE 2005

4.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Mr Speaker, according to the Order Paper, I would have expected a motion to be moved by the Minister of Finance in accordance to Article 163(9), and then I will present the Finance Committee report on behalf of the chairman who is not here.

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Sir. I was almost worried that the Chair could not see that the Minister of Finance is effectively represented, but thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am sorry.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that this House considers a motion in accordance with Article 196(9) of the Constitution for the approval of the appointment of the auditor for the Office of the Auditor-General to carry out the audit for the period of June 1998 to June 2005. I beg to move.

MS KIRASO: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Can you justify it, please?

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Sir. Under the Constitution when the Auditor-General’s chambers have to be audited, this House does specifically appoint an auditor to do so. The appointment of the auditor is considered because while the Auditor-General is the auditor of all government accounts and he reports to this House directly, he too needs to be audited and it is this House that has in keeping with the provisions of the law, the mandate to establish who will be the auditor.  

A number of firms were short-listed and an appropriate report has been made to the committee, and when we bring this motion we are ready to have the committee make its reaction to our presentation. I beg to move, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS KIRASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am presenting this report on behalf of the Committee on Finance Planning and Economic Development. As you had pointed out earlier, the chairman lost a brother over the weekend, and the vice-chairman is on a public accounts mission in Lira. So I am standing in for the chair, on behalf of the committee.

The appointment of auditors for the Office of the Auditor-General, as has been mentioned by the minister, is governed by the provisions of Article 163(9) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and it states; “The accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General shall be audited and reported upon by an auditor appointed by Parliament.”  

The accounting officer for the Office of the Auditor-General is accountable to Parliament, as reflected in Article 164 of the Constitution. The accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General fall under the Ministry of Finance, which the above committee oversees. The committee analysed the request by the minister to appoint the external auditors and now wishes to report as follows:

That the committee analysed the evaluation report of the Ministry of Finance and the evaluation report covered the technical, financial and individual information, and debt monitoring aspects of the evaluation.  

As already noted, this is a constitutional provision to enhance the efficiency and the effectiveness in public expenditure management.  The Office of the Auditor-General has not been audited for the last seven years, a period ending 30th June 2005. The report from the Auditor-General’s office is expected to recommend improvements in the controls in order to achieve efficiency and effectiveness in the public expenditure system.

The Government, through the second Economic Financial Management Project EFMP II, co-ordinates this process, and the committee was informed that the request for expression of interest was run in a local newspaper, the New Vision from 1st to 4th of April 2005.  

Nine firms expressed interest but only five qualified to be short-listed after attaining a minimum score of 50 percent.

THE SPEAKER: Are you going to tell us, which one you recommended, or you want to go through them all? Proceed.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, the report has been circulated and I did not intend to read it word for word because most of the information is more or less procedural. I was just giving a preamble.  

On page 2 of the report, those are the nine firms, which participated. On page 3 of the report, those are the five, which were pre-qualified, and I believe that this report is part of the Hansard. The scores were based on the following variables as indicated on page 3 of the report.  

The firms, which were short-listed, were invited to submit their proposal but only two submitted and the two were KPMG and Johnson and Nyende. A technical evaluation committee evaluated the two and we were informed that both firms qualified for the financial evaluation.

The details of the financial evaluation are on the top of page 4, honourable members. And the observations of the committee are that both firms qualified and have the capacity to carry out the work. However, the financial score by Johnson and Nyende was more attractive, and Johnson and Nyende had a good writing on technical evaluation. This implies that the two can do the work effectively at a less cost.  

The difference between KPMG and Nyende is US $30,000. The procurement process was transparent and in accordance with the law governing this particular process.

The committee observes that the advertisements were made in one local newspaper and for a very short period and would like to recommend that in future, the coverage should be a bit wider and firms should be given more time.

In conclusion, in compliance with provisions of Article 169, after critically analysing the evaluation reports, the committee recommends that John and Nyende be appointed the auditors for the Auditor-General’s office for a period of seven years, ending June 30th 2005. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR WANDERA: Some clarification. We are appointing this auditor for the period June 1998 to June 2005. I would like to be advised what we have as Parliament to appoint an auditor for the period June 2005 to 2006. Do we intend to wait for the seven years to elapse? No, but shall we have to wait for another seven years, because if it takes a long period, it ceases to be of value?

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that we should wait for seven years to appoint an auditor.  This is being done today to take care of accounts that have been in arrears. However, we cannot appoint an auditor ahead of time. So we will have to wait for the accounts of 2005/2006 to fall due and ready for auditing before we appoint an auditor.  

THE SPEAKER: I hope it is clear. I put the question - you have heard the recommendations – so I put the question to them. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for the report.  

4.34
MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT  RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(I)	The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the Fiscal Year 2004/2005 
(II)	The Budgetary Proposals for the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the fiscal year 2005/2006

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the motion has been debated so I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE REPORT ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS

THE SPEAKER: Now we constitute ourselves into a Committee of Supply. Can you advise us, honourable member?  

4.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Mr Speaker, we are not ready. The proceedings we held this morning with the Ministry of Justice were with a large group of five institutions. The information they gave us this morning has not been processed. The meeting ended at 2.30 p.m.

THE SPEAKER: Will you be ready in the morning?

MR OULANYAH: We will be ready perhaps tomorrow afternoon. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So we shall have the committee set for tomorrow to make its report in the morning and then see how we can adjust to accommodate the report that we have not received today. With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. to sit as a Committee of Supply.

(The House rose at 4.40 p.m. and 
adjourned until Tuesday, 30 August 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)


