Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Thursday, 22 August 2019

Parliament met at 3.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I just have two matters to communicate. The first is that I have received a request from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development be allowed to team with the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to deal with the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill.
They said that there are aspects of finance, which they want the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to support the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on.  It may slightly take long but they should work together on that Bill.  
  
The second is that I regret to announce the death of a number of relatives of our Members. Hon. Jackson Mbaju has lost his mother, hon. Reagan Okumu has lost his father and hon. Okin Ojara has also lost his mother. Burial ceremonies will be during this weekend. I invite honourable members to stand for a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a number of guests in the distinguished strangers galley. We have pupils and teachers from Kirika Primary School in Kibuku represented by hon. Barnabas Gonahasa and hon. Jenipher Namuyangu. They are very smart.  You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have pupils from Teachers’ Alliance Junior School, Mukono Municipality. They are also very smart. They are represented by hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Peace Kusasira. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Kibanga Primary School in Kalangala Islands, represented by hon. Nabayiga and hon. Julius Mukasa. They are very smart. You are welcome to Parliament. (Applause) 

We also have a delegation from Bulidha sub county in Bugiri District. There they are represented by hon. Solomon Silwany and hon. Agnes Taaka. (Applause)  They are here to observe the proceedings of the House.

In addition, we have former workers of the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation. They are also from Mukono and are here to witness the proceedings of the House. You are welcome. (Applause)

There were only two matters of national concern.

3.06
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on two matters of national importance. The first is to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development regarding issues of Rural Electricity Authority (REA).

There is a phase of rural electrification in Agago District but the implementation is not up to date. They have left out very many areas in the area between Wol Trading Centre, Okwadoko Health Centre and Okwadoko Primary School.

Also in Lira Kato, some places were left out. They also left out some places between Omiya Pachwa Trading Centre and Omiya Pachwa sub county and Laita Parish, Laita Health Centre and Laita Primary School.

These are areas that require electricity. They were supposed to receive electricity but the delivery of the electricity poles stopped along the way. Therefore, we would like to find out from –(Interjections)– do you want to inform me on matters of electrification in Agago? (Laughter) Okay. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to add is that what is happening in Agago is countrywide. For example, in Bugiri, REA is very slow that the process of having to start from the sub county has become a daily song and yet, nothing takes place. In places like Ngora and other places, it is slow.

Therefore, Parliament has to take a stand and we come up with a serious decision on the issue of rural electrification. It is an issue that we committed ourselves to deliver to Ugandans and we must deliver it. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much, hon. Silwany, for that additional information. Madam Speaker, the plea of the House is that areas that were meant to be electrified in the first and second phases of rural electrification must be implemented to date, instead of leaving them half way and then, we come here in piecemeal trying to ask questions here and there that are not responded to.

The second matter of national concern regards a matter that I have raised twice in this House. I would like to seek your guidance on how to proceed on the complaints from civil servants of Agago District - I have quite a number of employees complaining about fraudulent loans that are given to them.

Some have not asked for the loans but they find monies on their accounts and whenever they try to find out why the money is on the account, nobody responds only for them to begin seeing deductions on their pay slips. They claim that the civil servants have borrowed a loan from them for six months and they deduct for six months and more.

Therefore, I placed before this Parliament a number of this request from the district and this House agreed, through your directive, that the Minister of State for Micro Finance, hon. Kasolo comes to this House and explains why Ugandans are being duped by financial institutions that make our people suffer, especially workers who earn little money. They come and fraudulently dupe them and make them perpetually poor and indebted when they have not asked for loans.

Therefore, I would like to beg for your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that I table before this Parliament, details of the complaints from Agago District both on Bayport and Platinum.

Madam Speaker, even after your directive, I tried to reach the minister and the different financial institutions to give an answer to my people. However, up to now, the teachers, police officers and nurses and all sorts of civil servants who have complained have not received an answer.

Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence to lay this at the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Go and lay it. I am directing that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Micro-Finance) appears here in the next 30 minutes to answer this question. (Laughter)

This is an old directive. Find him in 30 minutes to come here. Otherwise, we shall issue sanctions. (Applause)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to lay on Table a sample of the complaints from Agago District against Bayport Financial Services and details of names of these employees. A total of 21 cases complained against Bayport Financial Services and quite a number have complained against Platinum Credit (U). I beg to lay these two on Table.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We should have an answer in 30 minutes. If he is not here, something will happen. It is three months since I gave that directive. He is not regular in this House, if I may add.

Concerning REA, I direct the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development to come and give us an update on the performance of the rural electrification programme countrywide next week on Thursday; updates on the whole country.

3.13
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. For the last two or three days, piggery farmers in Bujenje and the entire Masindi have lost several animals to the suspected outbreak of swine fever.

I have received the same complaint from Rakai in Kalisizo and other parts of the country. This calls for intervention from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries as soon as possible before farmers can lose more animals. It is my humble prayer. 

THE SPEAKER: What is the issue, honourable member?

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My procedural issue is related to his because it concerns the same ministry. Three weeks ago, I raised an issue about foot and mouth disease. Markets have continued to be closed and I have not yet received an answer. 

I see the item is numbered 12 but we have been adjourning the House before it is answered. I do not know if it could be brought forward.

The school holidays started on Friday. Parents are going to fail to raise school fees and more markets are being closed. We still have no vaccines and yet, there is still no answer from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I beg for your indulgence in bringing them here to answer these questions.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let me check the date we gave the minister but of course, this touches the economy of the population. What is on the Order Paper is the issue on counterfeit drugs from Zimbabwe. The Clerk will check for me which date we gave the minister to come on the issue of foot and mouth disease in Gomba.

The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should be here within the next one hour to answer – yes, this touches the economy of the people.  Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since this week began and even last week especially when you are in the Chair, the front bench is hardly represented. 
As a matter of fact, since this week began, we have only had three ministers of state present; my neighbour and young brother, hon. David Bahati, hon. Werikhe and my learned friend and senior colleague appeared once –(interjections) I am on a point of procedure –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, you are very aware that for the last two weeks, I have been appearing in this Parliament and contributing. That makes about 10 continuous days.

Is it in order for the honourable Shadow Attorney-General to allege that I have appeared once? The other day, yesterday and today, I am here and I was here last week. How many is “once”?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to look at both benches. However, of course, the Government side has bigger responsibilities to be here. In particular, I do not know why I have not seen the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Ministers. Where are they?

3.19
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to speak on a matter of national importance of over-detention of suspects in police custody at Mityana Police Station.

On 07 August 2019, there was a murder case reported at Mityana Police Station at Minana-Galabi, which is in Mityana Municipality. Police reached the scene two hours later and managed to identify the deceased as Kamada Kimbugwe who was alleged to be a landlord in a long standing land wrangle in the area.

The same area covers three villages; Minana-Galabi and Kamuvoobe with a population of about 1,000 residents. Investigations commenced immediately, sniffer dogs were taken to the scene but not much was recovered. Some suspects were arrested.

The deceased was murdered in the course of delivering letters that had been written by hon. Persis Namuganza, the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

The letters were written on 6 August 2019 and given to the victim to deliver to some people the minister had summoned to appear at her office on 13 August 2019.

The six suspects who were arrested on 8 August 2019 include;

    i. The LC1 chairperson of the area, Ibrah Muyingo;
    ii.  Vice chairperson of the village, Robert Ssenyange;
    iii.  John Kulumba Senior; 
    iv. John Kulumba Junior; 
    v. John Kulumba’s wife called Jane Kulumba; and 
    vi. John Kasule. 

Madam Speaker, it is now two weeks. The file was taken to the Resident State Attorney, who perused and guided police accordingly. However, the Regional CID, Wanyama, Wamala Region, has failed to adhere to the Resident State Attorney’s guidance. The suspects are still being detained at Mityana Police Station. 

The residents of the three villages are on the run. They are neither in their homes nor anywhere in the community and this can cause insecurity in the area. 

My prayer is for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to explain why suspects are being held for two weeks. Despite guidance by the Resident State Attorney, they have not been taken to court and not given bond. (Interruption) 

MR ZAAKE: Thank you, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, in Mityana, we have very many cases of that nature, especially involving land wrangles. People are put in police cells beyond the mandatory time of 48 hours. They even spend months in cells and nobody is concerned about it. Even when you talk to the police personnel, they do not do anything about it. 

Concerning the case hon. Nabakooba is talking about, there are elderly people aged 60, 70 and 80 years, who have been in police cells for over three weeks. We have tried to consult everywhere and they are not letting them out. 

Today, they even arrested a reverend father because he talked about the issue of the murdered person who was in charge of the land. They allege that the whole village contributed towards getting pangas and killing one person, just like how they alleged that many of us got a stone – 

We beg that Parliament intervenes and these people are freed today because even the mandatory time already expired. They also do not have any evidence for those people to be in prison. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Attorney-General to respond? Are you aware of the issue of people who have been in custody for over two weeks in Mityana?

3.24
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Madam Speaker, what I would like to assure the honourable members is that Government has put in place a mechanism to ensure that suspects are brought before the law within the time stipulated by the law. However, I also know that in some cases, situations may dictate that some people be held for slightly longer periods, although that is discouraged. When it happens, we prevail upon those officers to produce them before court or give them bond. 

I am also aware that there may exist some indiscipline in some quarters; people being overanxious and doing what they are not supposed to do under the law. When such a situation happens, we should be informed so that we can take corrective measures. 

The particular incidents mentioned have not been brought to our attention. I appeal to the honourable member and all of you, honourable members, that whenever such things occur, come to us quickly. We always give some relief.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nabakooba, please, supply the details to the Attorney-General so that they can assist you.

3.26
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern. I was approached by a group of young people who participated in the previous update of national identity cards as officials of the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA); the agency responsible for registration of national identity cards.

Madam Speaker, these young people told me they were given jobs and promised to be paid at the end of the activity. Unfortunately, the activity ended in March. They are counting about seven months now of arrears and they have not received their payment. 

As a Member of Parliament, I kept wondering – this was a national activity that could have been – (hon. Abala rose.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is not for debate.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, this is a national activity and I am told they were no payments across the country. It is very unfortunate for an activity that was known and budgeted for. The young people do not even know when they will be paid. 

As members of Parliament, we need the information so that we tell the young people when Government is planning to pay them. As for now, they keep promising them payment and – (Member timed out.)
 
THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister for Internal Affairs come and update the House? When will you pay the young people who worked for NIRA, which was a nationwide exercise? I know that all of them have not been paid. Can he come and update us on Wednesday next week?

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ACCREDITATION FOR CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT BILL, 2018

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Accreditation for Conformity Assessment Bill, 2018” be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? (Members rose) It is seconded.  
(Motion seconded)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, accompanying the Bill is the certificate of financial implications. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for perusal and report back.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME BILL, 2019

3.29
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Bill entitled, “The National Health Insurance Scheme Bill, 2019” for the first reading accompanied by the certificate of financial implications. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? (Members rose) It is seconded by several Members of the House. It is sent to the Committee on Health for perusal and report back. 

PRESENTATION OF PETITION BY FORMER EMPLOYEES OF THE DEFUNCT UGANDA POSTS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS CORPORATION (UPTC)  OVER FAILURE BY THE GOVERNMENT TO PAY THEIR TERMINAL BENEFITS, PENSIONS PACKAGES AND COURT AWARDS ARISING FROM HIGH COURT CIVIL SUIT NO 135 OF 2003 AND CIVIL APPEAL NO. 230 OF 2013

3.30
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I wish to present a petition and the humble petitioners are the former employees of the defunct Uganda Posts and Telecommunication Corporation (UPTC) over failure by Government to pay their terminal benefits, pension, package and court awards arising from a court case and an appeal. 

Madam Speaker, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament investigates the conduct of Uganda Telecommunication Limited, Uganda Posts Limited and Uganda Communications Commission, to establish why your petitioners, totalling to 823, have not been paid to date. 

I would like to lay on Table a copy of the said petition. I beg to move.
 
THE SPEAKER: Isn’t one of them under receivership? Isn’t that under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs? Honourable members, the petition is sent to the Committee on Information and Communication Technology, for perusal and report back.  

3.32
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I am puzzled on how we should proceed. It is true that that money is owed. However, the matter has been a subject of litigation. The beneficiaries started with the High Court but the successor companies appealed to the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal heard the case and upheld the ruling of the High Court. Again, the successor companies appealed to the Supreme Court and the case is pending.

Therefore, if we institute an inquiry, wouldn’t we be acting subjudice? That is exactly the same question that the court is being asked to determine.

The issue is not whether the money is owed or not; the issue is who is liable to pay the money? That issue is being investigated by court. Yes, there is no dispute on the quantum and on the entitlement of the employees. It is known but what is in court is: who should bear the responsibility and the court is soon coming up with the verdict.     

3.34
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, UPTC was 100 per cent owned by Uganda Government. It is one of the companies, which was privatised. When it was done, it meant that the Privatisation Unit was responsible to pay the costs related to the process of privatisation. This involved terminal benefits but at the same time, UPTC had National Social Security Fund (NSSF) contribution; they also had internal pension scheme. The company, which should pay their money, first, is NSSF because they contributed their money to the NSSF fund. The second should be the scheme where they contributed voluntarily. 

Thirdly, the Government should pay their terminal benefit. These are very old people and some of them even died.

Madam Speaker, if you invited former employees of UPTC to come here, you would be surprised to see these employees struggling to walk in here. 

The issue of Government trying to punish their people by running to the Supreme Court - Deputy Attorney-General, this policy must stop. You are paying wrong people billions of shillings and making these poor ones suffer. Please stop. (Laughter) 

3.36
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a procedural issue pertaining to this matter. First, I would like to say that I have good information about the matter because a similar petition has been tabled before this House. It was being considered by the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development of which I am a member.

As a committee, we met the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Attorney-General and the petitioners. As I speak, there is almost a complete report on this matter.

I would like to inform the Attorney-General that there is no case in the Supreme Court. While there was an appeal, that appeal was withdrawn. The matter, which was in court, recently, was on recovery proceeding on the money. So, it is not an issue whether they should be paid or not and whether they are owed money or not.

The report is almost ready and it can be tabled here maybe in the next one week. My chairperson is not here but probably, it could be brought in the next few days.
I am wondering how it can go to another committee to start considering a matter, which has equally been considered by a committee of this House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you had not told us that you are ready; you are just saying it now.

3.38 
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. As he has rightly put it, we considered the report and met with the petitioners and made a conclusive recommendation to this House. 

I have been moved to another committee but I pray that if possible, let the committee receive the report and incorporate what hon. Nambooze is putting across to let our citizens get justice on this case. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason people are continuously coming up is because they want their money. For now, let me defer the ruling on this matter. I will want to examine the forthcoming report and see whether it touches the issues, which are being requested for and then, I will come back to you. Thank you. 

Honourable members, in the gallery, we have students and teachers of St Maria Goretti Manyogaseka Secondary School. Those are students from Kassanda. They are represented by hon. Simeo Nsubuga and hon. Benny Namugwanya. You are welcome. (Applause)


PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO € 101.88 MILLION FROM THE UK EXPORT FINANCE (UKEF) FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOLAR POWERED IRRIGATION AND WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM PROJECT

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a proposal to borrow up to € 101.88 million from the UK Export Finance (UKEF) for the Development of Solar Powered Irrigation and Water Supply System Project across the country. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

TREASURY MEMORANDUM ON THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT ON THE ACCOUNTABILITY SECTOR FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Treasury Memorandum on the report of the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government) on the Auditor General’s report on the accountability sector for Financial Year 2014/2015. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Public Accounts for perusal and report back.

Yesterday, we considered the report of the Committee on Equal Opportunities and we deferred it, pending the responses from the Prime Minister, the Minister for National Guidance, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development who were not here yesterday. I would like to reinstate that subject. As soon as the Prime Minister comes, we receive the responses. - Equal opportunities? Tell us where the man is. It is over 30 minutes now.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we have established that hon. Kasolo, the Minister of State for Micro Finance is right now in Bukomansimbi at a function and it will not be possible for him to come to the House within 30 minutes. We apologise and request on his behalf, that a presentation is made on Tuesday next week, at 2.00 p.m. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, remind him that he is a Member of Parliament. I think he has forgotten. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES ON THE FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE STATE OF THE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES IN UGANDA FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development? Let us defer it and go to the questions for now. They were both not here yesterday and on Tuesday. Where are they?

3.44
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Madam Speaker, one of the reasons the size of Cabinet was blotted from the constitutional provision of 21 to 78 was for effective representation of Government in this House. 

Out of the 78, there are only eight. Where are the 70? (Laughter) The 70 are now bogging us with work and yet, they know very well that as Members of Parliament, they are duty-bound to be here, to respond to issues that Members of Parliament and the public may wish to know. 

There is no ministry with only one minister. The appointing authority had it in mind that at least, every ministry must have more than one. Even under the Presidency, Fr Lokodo, you are many. Therefore, why are these people perennially absent and bogging us with work in this Government? 

Madam Speaker, I think you need to crack the whip on these ministers. In as far as they are Members of this House and you are superintendent over this House, they need to know that when we come here, we do not come in vain, to waste time and at the end of the day, we have no work delivered to this country.

This is a very serious concern that you need to pass so that the Head of the Executive here in this House, through the Prime Minister, appreciates that there is need for them to be here. What is it that the 70 men and women are doing out there if they are not in this House? I beg to submit.

3.46
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometime back, the Speaker who was in the Chair gave a directive that during any given sitting, each ministry should be represented by at least a minister. We thought the ministers were going to adhere to that. 

Since the ministers are answerable to the President, we request that you write to the President officially. If he is engaging these ministers during the time of sessions, let him communicate to you that his ministers will be away and you will get them a specified time so that during that period, we present and discuss issues that concern those that are around. Otherwise, we present issues, they promise to bring reports – (Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, hon. Kibalya. Madam Speaker, some of the ministers, maybe they know that there is no reshuffle, they take this House for granted. (Laughter) Yes, because the President in his wisdom even gave ministers without constituencies. They are never here. Some of them may not be on official duty. 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, you could use your office to communicate to the appointing authority and we get the way forward.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the President appreciates the work of Parliament. That is why Cabinet was shifted from Wednesday to Monday so that the Members should be here on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. There is no excuse for them not to be here. I think they have forgotten that before they become ministers, they are members of Parliament first. We are going to deal with them now as members of this House.

3.48
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, you are very correct. The President and Cabinet respect this House very much. Actually, there is a standing Cabinet resolution that every day, each ministry must be represented in Parliament by at least one minister. That is a running resolution, which Cabinet made. 

However, like Members of this House, sometimes, there are unavoidable circumstances when you do not get even one minister in the House. If you look at the Members of this House, in proportion to their numbers and the Members of Cabinet who are here in proportion to the numbers of members of Cabinet, we are almost the same. (Interjections) That means that circumstances that apply to members of Parliament also apply to members of Cabinet.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 80/4/10

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, this is a response to a question for oral answer raised by hon. Yeri Ofwono. 

The question was: “The Government embarked on the process of acquisition of land to fast-track the development of the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) system linking Rwanda and Uganda to Mombasa Port. 

“a)Can the minister explain to the House the reason for delay in:

    i) Disclosing the value of some property that were assessed in the selected project areas, particularly in Tororo Municipality?
    ii) Valuation of all project-affected property?
    iii) Payment of all project affected persons whose property was valued?

    b) The measures put in place by the Government for the continued operation of public utilities such as schools and health centres that were earmarked for demolition under the project.”
	
I would like to respond as follows;

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Works and Transport continues with plans to develop the SGR as a priority project. The SGR is being developed as a regional project together with Uganda’s Northern Corridor Infrastructure Programme (NCIP) partner states of Kenya, Rwanda and South Sudan. In Uganda, the Malaba-Kampala SGR (Eastern Route), 271.643km has been prioritised ahead of the Northern Route (762km), the Western Route (383.I2km) and the Southern Route (280.3km). Key activities are ongoing on the Malaba-Kampala SGR route, among which land acquisition is critical.

The right of way for the entire Malaba-Kampala route has been set out and assessment has been done for 97 per cent of the route. The remaining three per cent comprises assessment for sugarcane and tea plantations, fish ponds and Kampala Station – close to the Kampala Railway Station.

The total land compensation cost estimate is Shs 534.2 billion. Valuation reports for the districts of Tororo, Butaleja, Namutumba, Luuka, Iganga and Mayuge, worth Shs 137 billion have been approved by the Chief Government Valuer.

Valuation reports for Mukono (corridor and station), Kasoli Housing Estate, Jinja (corridor and station), Wakiso and Kampala, worth Shs 397 billion were submitted to the Chief Government Valuer for approval. Out of the total compensation estimate of Shs 534.2 billion and approved reports worth Shs 137 billion, only Shs 62 billion has been paid to 3,527 project-affected persons (PAPs) over the last four years due to limited and non-performing budgets.

In Tororo District Corridor (Tororo Station and Nagangera Station):

    a) The total assessment value is Shs 68.447 billion and the total number of PAPs is 1,624.
    b) Total land to be acquired is 375.86 hectares, out of which 238.77 hectares is private and the balance of 137 hectares is public land (belonging to URC), road reserves, NEMA, NFA, Uganda Land Commission, among others.
    c) Total amount paid out in Tororo is Shs 36.364 billion.
    d) Total land acquired to date is 1,305 acres. The balance to be paid is Shs 32.082 billion. The areas where disclosure is not yet done in Tororo include Water Village and Kasoli Housing Project.

What are the reasons for delays in disclosing the values of some property that were assessed in the selected project areas, particularly in Tororo Municipality?

Madam Speaker, in Water Village, both Uganda Land Commission and Tororo District Land Board claim ownership of the affected land and each separately issued freehold offers or leases to different persons for the same plots of land. The Ministry of Works and Transport has engaged both of them and in a bid to resolve the impasse, Uganda Land Commission has recalled the lease and freehold offers and undertaken to identify alternative land for the affected persons to pave way for SGR development. 

In addition, ULC requested the District Land Board to also recall the leases and freehold offers because the land is not under their mandate as provided for under the Land Act, 1998 – as amended. The District Land Board has not yet acted as per the advice of ULC. The Ministry of Works and Transport continues to engage the stakeholders to resolve the issue.

In Kasoli Housing Project, the land is registered in ULC for Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The assessment of the area was made and a draft report was submitted to the Chief Government Valuer for approval. However, he returned the same with a comment that the SGR project clearly indicates the PAPs. 

The Kasoli Tenants’ SACCO claims that the project was meant to benefit them and, therefore, they are the rightful PAPs. Given that the land ownership and the housing project were under management of Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, this created an impasse. Several engagements have been made with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the SACCO, the Attorney-General and the Office of the Auditor-General to resolve the impasse. The Ministry of Works and Transport continues to engage the stakeholders to resolve the issue.

Reasons for delays in valuation of all project-affected property

Madam Speaker, as pointed out earlier, the entire route has been set out and assessment done for 97 per cent of the route. The remaining three per cent comprises assessment for sugarcane and tea plantations, fish ponds and Kampala Station.

Valuation of sugarcane, tea plantations and fish ponds delayed due to the PAPs’ rejection of the assessment methodology by the Chief Government Valuer that involved use of district valuation rates. 

The PAPs claimed that their property was commercial crops and, thus, wanted the assessment to include crop cycles and business losses. The Ministry of Works and Transport has since engaged the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to guide on the way forward. Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has since nominated two officials to be part of the assessment team and the assessment is planned for the first quarter of Financial Year 2019/2020.

At Kampala Station, the delay was due to several infrastructure projects that are planned within the vicinity. These include the Kampala Flyover Project, the multi-model transport hub and other projects by Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) and National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC). Uganda Railways Corporation has since developed a concept for multi-model transport hub for the area, while the Kampala Flyover Project and plans by NWSC and KCCA have been harmonised with the SGR project. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport continues to engage URC and it is planned that the assessment will be completed by end of the first quarter of Financial Year 2019/2020.

What were the reasons for delay in payment of all project-affected persons whose property was valued?

It is true there has been delay in payment of all assessed properties because of lack of sufficient funds. Out of the total compensation cost estimate of Shs 534 billion and valuation reports worth Shs 137 billion, which were approved by the Chief Government Valuer, only Shs 62 billion has been paid over the last four years. This is because of insufficient release of funds to the SGR project. Below is a table; I will not go into the details because this report has been uploaded on the iPads.

You can see that the total budget for the Financial Year 2019/2010 for the SGR has been reduced from Shs 38 billion to Shs 20 billion. This budget is too small to enable reasonable acquisition.
Measures Government has put in place for continued operation of public utilities such as schools and health centres that were earmarked for demolition under the project.

Madam Speaker, a 60-metre wide right of way from Tororo to Mukono District and 30 metres wide in Wakiso and Kampala districts is being acquired. When deciding on the alignment, keen interest was taken to ensure minimal disruption to economic activities while ensuring adherence to required technical standards.

The right of way affects 48 schools, out of which, six are Government schools, four health centres of which, one is a Government health centre and one Government hospital. These schools and health units have been assessed and the ministry is working hand in hand with Ministry of Education and Sports and Ministry of Health to ensure minimal disruption.

For private schools and health centres, the proprietors will be compensated directly. For public schools, health centres and hospitals, modalities of compensation and relocation are being discussed with the respective ministries. The plan is that compensation will be effected before vacation notices are issued out so that the affected persons have ample time to relocate their schools and health centres.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

4.03
MR APOLLO YERI OFWONO (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the response. However, I am not satisfied with his answers.

I would like to request that you come up with a select committee to look into this matter. The payment is taking long. Government had allocated land to individuals but they are now withdrawing it and I am sure it should be the select committee to look into this matter. Otherwise, why is Government now withdrawing the land at the time of compensation, which they had already given to individuals?

Madam Speaker, it is a very tedious exercise. I would, therefore, like to request that a select committee be created to look into this matter in detail. Thank you.


THE SPEAKER: Let me hear from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

4.04
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This particular housing estate was under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and it was money from the World Bank that we used to establish it as a low cost estate. 
	
The beneficiaries were civil servants or former civil servants. By the time the Standard Gauge Railway started acquisition of that land, the money that was in that housing project was from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

Madam Speaker, what is happening is that these people want compensation to be paid to them yet, it was Government’s money that purchased and established the housing estate through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

We have been engaging with them and we have got opinions from the Attorney-General, which indicate that, that portion of the housing estate cannot be paid to individuals. Otherwise, if some had paid, they only paid a portion and so, they cannot benefit from the compensation. 

Madam Speaker, when we communicated to them, they opted to go to court. That is the issue. It has nothing to do with them being the sole owners of that property.

THE SPEAKER: Is this matter in court?

MS AMONGI: Yes, Madam Speaker, when we communicated to them the Attorney-General’s opinion, which indicated that since it was the ministry that had purchased the land, they were only supposed to purchase those housing estates. We, therefore, indicated to them that they could not benefit from the compensation in its entirety but they opted to go to court and they gave us notice.  

What I cannot confirm is whether after giving us notice, they filed a suit or not. However, they gave us notice that they had disagreed with the position that was given on the matter.

THE SPEAKER: Can you give us feedback next week whether they have filed a suit or not so that we know how to move?

MS AMONGI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

4.07
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I represent 0.1 kilometres into the country as far as the SGR is concerned. Right from zero kilometres, we have over three claimants including the district, business community, great lakes and there are three families and so, there is a challenge here. That challenge has kept the whole project – even if it were to take off tomorrow, those issues need to be resolved. 

Coming to what hon. Ofwono has said - the minister has talked about money Government put in to build the housing estate but members of the community invested into that project too. That is why there is confusion on ownership as to who should receive the money. Who should be paid the money? There is DFCU Bank, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the district. Madam Speaker, it is a circus.

If hon. Yeri asked for a select committee, I think that might be the fastest way to understand the real issue on the ground so that this matter can be disposed of at once. 

In addition, when Government gets ready to start the SGR, there should be no litigation or issues that will deter the project from taking off. I appreciate Shs 36 billion that was paid and most of the beneficiaries were from my side. However, that amount of Shs 36 billion would have risen the community from poverty but little was done in terms of sensitisation; people used the money to buy alcohol and motorcycles. 

Therefore, for the next compensation, we must handle it very well. We must prepare the community well in order for them to benefit from the cost of that project rather than them losing it to alcohol. Their land has gone but they do not have anything. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, I will wait to hear the status of the case from the minister to guide us how to move on whether to have a committee or leave it to the court process. We shall update you in about a week’s time. Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, how quickly will you update us? 
 
MS AMONGI: Next Thursday, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable members, let us go to item eight because the Prime Minister is here. We will handle the other issues later.

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

4.10
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When we were considering the Commissions Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) report, the Prime Minister promised that in 90 days, he would bring amendments in response to reforms of Bank of Uganda.

The committee had suggested 30 days but he requested for 90 days, which you granted. It is now 120 days but we have not heard from the Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker, I am ready with my Bill; can I know whether the Prime Minister is ready with the Bill or I be allowed next Tuesday to present my Bill for the amendments of Bank of Uganda? Thank you.

4.11
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the point raised by hon. Mawanda is true. Government is actively considering the required amendments; you know this is a consultative and inclusive process we are engaged in.

We would like to bring in amendments that are comprehensive and thorough. As you were asking your question, I was interacting with the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and he has assured me that within two months, the amendments will be here - comprehensive and clear amendments. We hope that ndugu Mawanda will overwhelmingly support these amendments when they come.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mawanda, if you are ready, bring your Bill.

4.12
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. How has the Government of Uganda positioned itself to ensure sustainable agricultural production and value addition in all its products in readiness for their competitiveness, marketability in the East African regional markets and beyond?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue of value addition is a very well-known position and policy of Government, especially agricultural value addition because that is the mainstay of our economy, both in terms of production of agriculture, value addition and job creation.

With regard to the detail of policies, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should update this House on how far we have gone. Nevertheless, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as well who is in charge of the overall picture of the economy, could also give additional progress report on the matter.

4.14
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Rt hon. Prime Minister, this week has been awash with the news regarding our colleague hon. Anite with claims that the mafia in Government want to kill her. Can you assure this country that you do not preside over a mafia Government?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, like ndugu Okupa, I have seen this in the media. However, I am not aware of the existence of any mafia group in the Government of Uganda.

4.14
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Rt hon. Prime Minister, can you tell Ugandans when this country is going to join the other East African countries to ban polythene bags that are spoiling our environment?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue of polythene bags has been discussed many times by this House and other Government fora. The Government has embarked on supporting mechanisms to recycle whatever may be in the air so that polythene bags can no longer be a feature. Nevertheless, the plan of Government is to eventually eliminate their manufacture.

4.15
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, what are Government plans to appoint ambassadors, especially in the Middle East where a majority of our migrant workers are because in the entire Middle East, we only have one full ambassador in the United Arab Emirates.

Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Jordan and others have none. What plans to do you have to have fully fledged ambassadors in those capitals?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the Middle East has a big number of Ugandans getting jobs and it is true that Government prioritises that area in terms of representation. The gaps that are in place will be filled soon.

4.17
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, the main national road in Kashongi County runs from Ruhumba-Kashongi-Kashwa junction, a 33 kilometre road.

That road was planned for upgrade to tarmac many years ago but because of lack of finances, it was planned to be a first class marrum. Four months back, the contractor started on the road, widened and abandoned it. It has caused several accidents almost every other time. 

Whenever I speak to the contractors, they answer that they do not have the finances. When will Government release the funds to the contractors so that they can work on that road? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, since there is a contract and a contractor in place, the road is going to be done.  Sometimes, there may be a shortage of cash flow but as soon as this is sorted, Government will meet its contractual obligations and do the road.

4.18
MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, in July last year, when the chairperson LC1s were sworn in, they got a circular from the Ministry of Local Government, saying that they would be given stamps from the ministry but up to date, they have never received them.

There are challenges in villages because some people duplicated their stamps and when they take them to courts of law, they implicate the chairpersons LCIs and yet, these stamps were given to some other people who were not responsible. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The stamps for the LCIs -

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue of stamps has been raised here a number of times and last time, the Ministry of Local Government said that the stamps were on their way. Therefore, we should take that position to be the official position.

THE SPEAKER: Okay

4.19
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is very simple. The Government has introduced a number of administrative units and this is quite fine. 

Rt hon. Prime Minister, how is Government prepared to finance a number of these administrative units that have remained idle for a number of financial years?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government has decided to finance these administrative units in a phased manner. 

Secondly, Government has also decided that in future, no administrative units will be put in place, unless the financial requirements have been fully made.

4.20
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, Government selected a number of oil roads and out of these, there is a road that originates from Kyankwanzi District, which is Masode-Ntwetwe-Nkooko-Kakumiro-Nalweyo. In determination of that road, only a section that is in Kakumiro District was considered, leaving a section in Kyankwanzi District.

Rt hon. Prime Minister, when we consulted the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to find out why, they said a decision was taken by Cabinet. Uganda National Roads Authority says that in their original design, they had considered the whole section. When we consulted the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, he said it was so because they thought the pipeline was going through Kakumiro District and not Kyankwanzi.
When we studied the design map, the export pipeline and refinery pipeline are all terminating from Kyankwanzi District and the biggest portion is through Kyankwanzi, whose road section was not worked on.

Rt hon. Prime Minister, we wrote requesting for a Cabinet amendment as suggested by the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA. However, to-date, activities are going on in the area, especially the ones of the export road but only road works have been considered in Kakumiro District, not Kyankwanzi District. 

Can we know what we should tell the people of Kyankwanzi, whether Government has any deliberate effort to leave their sections out and take on different roads?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, planning for oil roads recognises no district boundaries. So, the critical point will be to ensure that all roads are properly done and are making the necessary connections in order to expedite the process of exploiting our oil resources.

If there is a discrepancy, distortion or a district has been abruptly and irrationally left out, the responsible department and ministry will be able to address that matter.

4.23
MR MOSES NAGWOMU (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Very soon, water as a natural resource will be a source of conflict. Uganda started a process of sharing River Nile in 2007 - 2010. Why has it taken Government very long to ratify the Cooperative Framework Agreement of sharing River Nile?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the agreement being referred to on River Nile was considered by Cabinet and the ratification process is in the final stages of being done by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs because Cabinet has already approved it.

4.24
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, when we raise issues in this House or when the Speaker directs Government to give statements or responses, most Ugandans are outside there waiting to hear the response or action taken by Government. However, we are very surprised by the delay of Government to respond to certain issues.

For example, six months ago, I raised the issue of operationalisation of Bunyoro University. The Rt hon. Speaker directed the Minister of Education and Sports to come and give a response. To date, nothing has been done.

Three months ago, I raised an issue on failure by companies, especially Continental Tobacco Uganda, to pay tobacco farmers. It is now over three months but there is no response. I wonder what time you give ministries or departments to offer us explanations.

Before you came in, Rt hon. Prime Minister, we had a challenge of quorum by our good ministers. They were only eight out of 78 ministers. We are wondering when we should expect responses in time, for the benefit of all Ugandans. That is my question.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, ministers and Cabinet take this august House seriously and when the Speaker asks Government to do A, B and C, Government takes it seriously. So, if the ministers have not responded in the timeframe as expected, I was looking for some of those colleagues but they are not in the vicinity – I will ask the Rt hon. Speaker so that within two weeks, the two ministers can come and clarify the statements that we have been waiting for. I hope that the Rt Hon. Speaker will accept this position.
 
THE SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, concerning the universities, two weeks is too long because it is really an old matter. Therefore, we would like an answer next Tuesday about the University of Bunyoro, Namasagali University and Rwenzori University. They were in the same resolution of 2015. On the one on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, they can come on Thursday next week.

MR KASUMBA: Madam Speaker, it is not agriculture. It is the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives that licenses the Tobacco Purchasing Companies and tobacco farmers have not been paid since. The same issue has been raided here time and again.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is here. On the tobacco farmers, several petitioners have come to this House over that issue.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, it is true that the issue of Continental Tobacco Uganda has been raised on this Floor. At one time, we even sent a copy of the statement and it was uploaded on the iPad but we have not had the opportunity to formally present it here.

Secondly, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry is currently considering the same issue. In fact, we are appearing before the committee next week for an in-depth consideration of this issue. There was a short statement here but we have not formally presented it; it is on the iPad. The committee is also still considering the same subject. However, we are ready to present the issue anytime.

THE SPEAKER: So, the matter, which is on the Order Paper should be brought on Tuesday next week. Clerk, bring up that matter.

4.29
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, there is a loan that was given by the Government of Italy of € 10 million to support the health systems in Karamoja sub region. I would like to know at what stage this loan is and when it will be brought to the Floor of this House. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: On the loan you are referring to, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has advised me that it is coming to Cabinet anytime from today. 

4.30
MR LAWRENCE MANGUSHO (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek answers from the Rt hon.Prime Minister on the issue of resettlement and boundary conflicts between the people of Sebei and Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA). 

The Prime Minister and the line minister know this has been a long standing issue. I have been making follow-ups and the minister has come to that place - we have people in Internally Displaced Camps and temporary settlements because we are constantly in conflict with our neighbours, the UWA.

In the last two months, we have lost two people in a gun exchange. During my follow-up, the minister who was supposed to chair the inter-ministerial committee told me that the other line ministers had failed to attend four consecutive meetings that she invited them to. 

Therefore, I am seeking a solution from the Prime Minister. When will this problem be solved? I wrote to you and the chairperson of the inter-ministerial committee has also written to you to inform you that the ministers are not attending the meetings. What shall we do? Our people are suffering. 

Government projects have failed to take off in the last two years. From the World Bank, the Benet Community should have got schools but they could not be constructed. We lost those projects yet, the children have no school. Rt hon. Prime Minister, what is happening? Will you ever preside over this issue? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the matter being raised is deeply appreciated because it is true there is a conflict between the Wananchi and UWA. The matter has been discussed by Cabinet and it has set up a team headed by hon. Janat Mukwaya, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We are expecting her report for discussion and subsequently, we will report to Parliament. However, we are anxious to get this matter clearly out of the way. 

4.33
MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, during the insurgency in Eastern Uganda, particularly Budaka, people lost their animals and other property. Government promised them they would be compensated. As a result, the people opened up bank accounts. 

To date, however, they have not seen any money. When is Government planning to compensate these people’s animals and other property that they lost? Their accounts are likely to be frozen any time from now. Can you answer to the concerns of the people of Budaka, Rt hon. Prime Minister? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the matter being raised by our comrade touches a number of areas in the country. There have also been issues of verification. The Attorney-General is in the process of both verification and compilation of the beneficiaries before Government takes the necessary measures of payment.

4.34
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is: on 30 July 2019, I saw a legacy green campaign that took place in Ethiopia and it was launched by the Prime Minister there. They planted over 300 million trees, which is a world record. 

We all know that Ethiopia is a semi-arid country and Uganda is a tropical country. I know the fight for tree planting has been carried out by several people including the Speaker of Parliament, when we planted some trees in Karamoja. 

Rt hon.Prime Minister, what are you doing to plant trees to save our country from global warming? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, let me take this opportunity to commend the Prime Minister of Ethiopia and his Government for massively embarking on the programme of tree planting and setting a very good example for the continent.

Secondly, let me recognise the repeated calls of the Speaker of Parliament on making sure that our tree planting day is activated. (Applause) In this respect, I must say there is a complete agreement between Parliament and Cabinet over this matter. 

It is a combination – you prepare seedlings but there is also the aspect of environment. So, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Minister of Water and Environment have been asked to make preparations so that Uganda, which should be in the lead, can quickly take its leadership role in the area of tree planting. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not picking Members who contributed last week.

4.36
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that over 78 per cent of the population of Uganda is young. In this current budget, we did not have money in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the Youth Livelihood Programme (YLP). Only Shs 4 billion was allocated for the official work. 

We were told that there is going to be a review and may be a supplementary budget. The youth are asking when they are going to get this money because we have just started the quarter. 

The other day, Government did not even have a budget for the National Youth Day celebration. Rt hon. Prime Minister, we would like to know whether the YLP is still continuing or it has ended. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the YLP has not ended. As hon. Asamo has said, this matter has been under intense discussion by Government on the best way of delivering this support to the youth. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and State House have been involved in the operationalisation of the programme. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is going to be more actively involved in that programme so that the youth can resume benefitting the way they used to, in the past. 

In addition, amendments are being made to ensure that the programme operates better and the conditions, which were rather stifling, are also reduced so that the programme can be made more accessible and workable.
4.39
MS MARY BABIRYE (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, why is it that the Chinese have continued to destroy the Lwera Wetland despite the efforts this Parliament made to save it?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the question of preservation of wetlands or of people who are injuring them is not so much of a racial issue but about anybody dealing in or destroying our wetlands.

I, therefore, expect the Ministry of Water and Environment to take action and report to this House on Lwera and other wetlands on the progress we are making in preserving, restoring and protecting our environment.

I will ask the minister to prepare himself and give us a report within two weeks.

4.40
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, I would like to ask about your level of preparedness in terms of setting up an emergency fire response unit at the Busitema Junction because that area currently has very long queues of trucks, trailers and fuel tankers.

With the accidents that are prone these days, any spark can lead to a big outbreak of fire and we will lose many lives and businesses. Therefore, I would like to know what plan Government has in setting up an emergency fire response unit in that area. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that question was asked and we asked the Minister of Works and Transport to give us his proposal for management. This was on Tuesday when we discussed that and asked the Minister of Works and Transport to prepare an answer on that issue.

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Gen. Katumba Wamala): It is true, Madam Speaker, you gave that directive but the issue of fire engines falls under a different ministry. However, we will interact with the Ministry of Internal Affairs because fire engines fall under them at the Department of Police. However, you told us to bring a report on accidents on the road and road carnage and what we are doing about that.

THE SPEAKER: Please, you should also bring the one on how to manage those. Yours was about widening the road in relation to that and then, the other one is about how to manage the fires.

MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, the issue is about widening that road and the road accessing Malaba because that is where the long queue is.

THE SPEAKER: We are talking about Busitema.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, there are two different issues I have raised so far. One is the plan by Government to widen the narrow roads because the traffic is high with many tankers that use the road and it is endangering the life of other road users.

The second issue is now about fire because these trailer drivers like smoking and anything can happen any time. There are very many congested areas along that road; like Busitema, Naluwerere and Malaba. Therefore, we need a well-equipped emergency fire response unit such that in case of anything, we are not overwhelmed by the fire because it would be a catastrophe.

THE SPEAKER: That is what we are expecting from the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

4.43
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, I have received information from a whistle blower to the effect that one of the Cabinet ministers in this Government hon. Idah Nantaba is in Canada seeking political asylum for fear of her life and safety in Uganda. What is the Government position on hon. Idah Nantaba alleged political asylum in Canada?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I would like to tell my brother hon. Mugume that hon. Nantaba is out of the country officially on duty and I dismiss the allegation that the whistle blower has intimated through his agents. (Laughter) I can confirm that definitely I authorised hon. Nantaba on her request to go for work outside the country. She should be coming as scheduled.

4.45
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, according to Rule 42 of our Rules of Procedure, ministers are required to attend the House at all times. However, on a number of occasions, failure by ministers to attend Plenary and committees have frustrated the work of Parliament.

What action are you going to take to ensure that the business of the House and committees is not frustrated by the ministers? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the question from my sister hon. Bamukwatsa that the front bench -(Interjections)- I must say it- Proportionately as I count, there are more ministers compared with Members of Parliament when you take the ratios now.

In spite of that, it is also true that both members of Parliament and ministers should attend both House and committees. It is also true that when ministers are not available because of other duties, they often advise and request other ministers to stand in for them and represent them in this august House.

In conclusion, I agree with the view that members of Parliament and ministers should never obstruct the work of the House or committees. They should be present.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have used the 45 minutes. Let us go back to the report of the Committee on Equal Opportunities.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES

MS MUGENI: Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: What rule?

MS MUGENI: Madam Speaker, using the relevant rule-

THE SPEAKER: No.

MS MUGENI: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence. Two weeks ago, I put up an issue concerning the bicycles for LCIs and the Rt hon. Prime Minister tasked the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development to give an answer.

I saw that item on the Order Paper on Thursday last week and I did not receive the answer. Even today, it is on the Order Paper and it has been skipped.

Madam Speaker, now that the Prime Minister is in the House, may I get the answer about what Government is planning to provide bicycles to the LCIs? Or if it has also changed the strategy to something else, may we also know as Members of Parliament. Thank you?

THE SPEAKER: You should raise a formal question. Didn’t I see that issue? Is it not supposed to be answered? The issue raised by hon. Mugeni was on the Order Paper; I do not know where it has gone. It is on the Order Paper. It will be answered. It is an important issue; you know that even Kamuli did not get bicycles. It will be answered by the minister.

Let us now get to the report of the Committee on Equal Opportunities. Let me start with the Minister for Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) and National Guidance.

4.50
The Minister for Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) and National Guidance (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You directed the Minister for ICT and National Guidance to come and brief the House on what national guidance does. I am exactly here to give that response –(Interjections)- my apologies –

The Speaker: It was not only what the ministry does but also how you are going to support the report of the Equal Opportunities Commission. However, start with what you do.

Mr tumwebaze: This particular brief is, first of all, to give a general exposition of our work and then we will show you how that comes in.

It is also important that the question you asked yesterday be answered in general because it is not the first time. There is a concern that we hear more of ICT and less of National Guidance. I beg that I give a full report, which has already been submitted to Parliament.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, in response to your ruling of 21 August 2019, I take this opportunity to brief the House on the work of National Guidance. 

While constituting the Cabinet of 2016, His Excellency the President reorganised Government by merging the Ministry of Information and National Guidance with the Ministry of Information, Communications and Technology, to create the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance. 
The National Guidance function was maintained under the Directorate of Information and National Guidance headed by a Director. 

In addition to the directorate, the Uganda Media Centre formerly under Office of the President and Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) under Office of the Prime Minister, were also transferred to the ministry and their roles were also to complement the National Guidance function.

At national level, the ministry has come out with the following measures to enable dissemination of information about Government programmes so as to create awareness among the citizens for effective service delivery. When this is achieved for all citizens, you create equal opportunities as well.

The first measure is that we initiated weekly Cabinet press briefings at the Uganda Media Centre. Previously, the work of Cabinet was in camera and the decisions of Cabinet would remain confidential. 

While Cabinet proceedings are still in camera, decisions of Cabinet are disseminated every Tuesday morning for citizen awareness and benefit. 

The Minister of ICT and National Guidance supported by the Media Centre and the ministers whose business was handled in Cabinet on the previous day routinely address the press on the decisions of Cabinet and their rationale. 

Disseminating information and creating awareness to the citizenry about Government services is the primary methodology of offering National Guidance.

The other measure is coordinating ministries and agencies to give timely information through regular press briefings at the media centre. 

Through the adoption of a communication strategy by Cabinet, every Ministry, Department and Agency (MDA) is required to regularly brief the media at the media centre on key policy and legislative issues in their sectors as they arise. I am happy a number of colleague ministers do this. After presenting the statements, media centre disseminates them widely.

Next is the creation of the Government Citizens Interaction Centre (GCIC). With partial support from the Government of Korea, a Government Citizens Interaction Centre was established at the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance and it operates a toll free call centre using the code 900 with fulltime online presence to answer citizen queries. A team of staff are dedicated to receive citizen queries and respond to them after liaising with the relevant sectors.

The ministry has also been encouraging MDAs, their leaders and staff to go online so as to serve better the rapidly growing audiences that consume largely content via digital platforms. 

Madam Speaker, I am happy to report that although there are still many Government agencies that have not yet embraced social media, our ministry’s guidance and whipping has yielded good progress. A number of Government agencies are not only active on social media but have also taken their services online. Another measure to guide the country is revamping of the National Broadcaster (UBC). 

Madam Speaker, I wish to first of all thank you for agreeing with our sector appeal of supporting the National Broadcaster so as to reach far and wide covering the whole country with all-inclusive content and as a medium for National Guidance. 

For many years, UBC and its stations were not funded and eventually its infrastructure entirely became obsolete. This hindered nationwide signal reach in various languages for both Television and radio.

UBC also experienced years of mismanagement as confirmed by many audit reports, Inspector General of Government (IGG) and Parliamentary investigations. We are happy to report that in the last three years, we have streamlined the management of UBC with a new Board and colleagues who watch it now can confirm that UBC is headed for the best. 

A national broadcaster is the primary voice and amplifier of Government programmes and therefore the primary tool for National Guidance since the ministry cannot reach physically everywhere. 

Madam Speaker, you may recall that it was UBC despite its challenges that pioneered the Parliamentary live broadcasts hence closing the gap between the elected and the electorate including live telecast of national events. 

Although this paper is not solely about UBC and its operations, I wish to add that without an effective national broadcaster, Government cannot effectively guide all the citizens. 

Liberalised private commercial media houses, though doing a great role to inform the country, cannot replace the role of a national broadcaster. 

Commercial media will try to balance commercial interests and issues of national importance. A national broadcaster like in other jurisdictions should not even be venturing into commercial advertising. It dedicates all its airtime to programming that builds the national value system of the Country. 

To do this development journalism holistically, however, it requires sustainable adequate Government financing to the national broadcaster as is the case in other jurisdictions. 

This observation was confirmed by a committee of experts I set up three years ago headed by a veteran journalists, Dr Peter Mwesige. The report of this committee and other reports including Parliamentary recommendations have continued to guide our efforts to revamp UBC. 

When the UBC Act was enacted in 2005, it created a provision in Section 14(1) (e) for UBC to generate its own revenues by imposing a television levy or what people call a television tax. Perhaps that is why Government was reluctant to prioritise UBC in its financing. It was hoped that it would generate its own money.

The said levy (TV tax) was found to be inappropriate and difficult to enforce. That partly explains the historical underfunding of UBC.

Another measure is the dedication of one hour airtime on all FM stations for national guidance activities. Due to the need to communicate messages of common good to the public, the Ministry of Information and Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) some years back agreed with private FM operators to dedicate an hour for citizen awareness on key Government programmes so as to create awareness on how to access and demand service from government. 

Since most FM stations are located at district headquarters and the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance could not recruit and post staff for national guidance due to wage constraints, the ministry agreed with the Office of the President that since Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) are the representatives of Central Government and responsible for monitoring of Government programmes in the district, they be responsible for the coordination and utilisation of this airtime in Local Governments to disseminate information and guide people about Government policies, programmes and projects.

The Ministry of ICT and National Guidance will continue to liaise with the Ministry of the Presidency, who supervise RDCs, to ensure that this airtime is used adequately to communicate information about Government programs and how people can access them and play their citizenry roles. 

Compilation of the National Documentary in collaboration with the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities

Madam Speaker, this financial year, and for the first time, funds were allocated to the sector of National Guidance to the tune of Shs. 11 billion to boost the national guidance function. Working with other MDAs to produce content of their work, the ministry is developing an integrated Government documentary showcasing our beauty as a country, investment opportunities and also highlighting the various Government programs on how they can benefit from them. 

If the budgeted funds are released or are made as appropriated by this House, this documentary will be produced by the end of the financial year. It will be distributed to all MDAs, embassies and local governments. It will also be aired at all foras, including national events. 

From these funds also, the National Guidance units (the GCIC, the media centre) will be supported to acquire capacity to collect, generate and process content of National Guidance from all MDAS. Content is the driver of communication and national guidance and so adequate research and collaboration has to be invested into make it ready for dissemination.

When the department of National Guidance was transferred to ICT in the reorganisation, certain functions of patriotism and civic education, which require wide outreach at various levels, were not funded. However, the Secretariat of Patriotism in the Office of the President does similar national guidance work on patriotism though targeting secondary schools. 

The Directorate of National Guidance partners with the Patriotism Secretariat and National Leadership Institute of Kyankwanzi to deliver national guidance messages to the respective audiences they organise in the different parts of the Country.

Madam Speaker, I wish to add that over the years, Government has shifted from financing what is regarded as consumptive areas and prioritised development expenditure. Most programmes of national guidance and citizen awareness creation are consumptive in nature, and thus, become the first casualties of budget cuts or no allocation at all. As a ministry, in an effort to mitigate this, we are embracing cheaper/cost neutral methods like digital communication channels and use of the National Broadcaster to reach wider audiences simultaneously. 

For the information and record of this House, the Directorate of National Guidance for years had at its disposal only Shs. 163 million available for a whole year to carry out these national guidance activities. This money is not even enough to finance the collection, processing and production of national guidance materials. 

However, with the enhanced allocation, in this financial year, as stated above, and if funds are released, National Guidance activities will be scaled up in more parts of the Country and across various medium of communication.

Finally, Madam Speaker, in 20l7, the ministry was mandated by Cabinet to supervise all Government Communication Officers in Government. We are currently working with the Public Service Commission to regularise this directive to enable the Government communications officers in the various MDAs report to the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance. 

The importance of this, Madam Speaker, is that the ministry will be facilitated with all round information from different areas about the various Government programmes from the MDAs to disseminate accurately, timely and widely. You cannot guide if you do not have the relevant information from the different sectors that implement their sector with specific priorities. 

Once again, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and Parliament, for recognising the role of National Guidance and for giving me the opportunity to update Parliament on our humble efforts.

THE SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Prime minister, yesterday, we had a lengthy debate on the report of the Committee on Equal Opportunities. There were many policy areas identified for the Government, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance. I do not know whether you have given them but we want to hear what you have to say because your staff were here.

5.04
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Well, Madam Speaker, I will need to have a closer look at them so that I give this august House well considered positions.

THE SPEAKER: That makes our work really hard. Do you have anything to say, hon. Asamo? 

5.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES (Ms Hellen Asamo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for giving us the view of the National Guidance Department. All the programmes that Government runs have structures; the youth, women, the disabled and elderly structures. However, it seems those structures have been put aside.

When we are dealing with issues of information, we are not given that particular information. Hence, sometimes a programme comes up and it is only the implementer who knows the programme; either the CAO or the CDO. 

How do we make sure that we decentralise information about programmes that support the less empowered and marginalised? Could it be possible for the Prime Minister to put on notice boards the groups that have been funded? When you go and visit them, they will give you the names of the funded groups and hide the paper. Hence, you do not know who has been funded for purposes of monitoring so that we know whether the money is going to the right people or not. 

Yesterday, the committee realised that a lot of this money is wasted and there is a lot of corruption down there. When you post the money for women, somebody gives them less and takes the rest. Therefore, Government needs to begin knowing that these structures are important. We do not have them for fun. I think we need to use them. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime minister, one of the key issues was the issue of the national roll out of the SAGE programme. The citizens are really discontented that some districts are not covered. Members are unable to explain this and they are continuously asked why their districts do not receive SAGE, yet this House resolved that we have a national roll out. Probably, you can say something about it. 

The other one was the treatment of the elderly, pregnant women and all the vulnerable groups in our society. They need to give them priority in the banks and hospitals so that they do not have to wait in queues for long. That was the debate; that we need to advise our citizens on how to treat senior people. 

That is why we wanted the Minister for ICT and National Guidance to be available so that some of these things can be said – nobody is saying them.

I also said that the Electoral Commission, during elections, is the only one that allows elderly people to vote first. However, after that, they go to hospital and have to seat for long; in the bank, they have to wait at the end of the queue. Therefore, we wanted to see Government move in to say, “Treat the elders properly and give them priority.” Of course, we do not have public transport but we also want the Government to progressively educate people about giving the front seats to the elders. That was the kind of thing we were talking about. 

Prime minister, there are areas in this country where there are no secondary schools. What else can the children who get out of primary do? The girls get married and the boys play matatu. All these concerns are there; that there is inequity in the country in terms of facilities, infrastructure and so on. These are some of the issues we wanted you to address. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, allow me make a couple of comments. There is the question of some areas of the country not having secondary schools, or for that matter, health centres and the long distances to these facilities. Indeed, this is the very reason Government came out with a clear policy of making sure that the services are based on well-known criteria; for example, a parish for primary schools and sub-county for secondary schools. This is to ensure even national distribution of essential services. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I could not agree with you more when you talk about the elderly. It is true that even our culture and humanity should respect elderly people and seniors. Apart from doing it out of our national cultural practices, I agree that the Government should come out with guidelines so that the elderly can be treated well in public places like in transport services, banks, churches and all institutions because these are people who deserve the respect and are prone to being weak and even sickly.

As leaders, we should set this example as Government considers the measures to be streamlined like the practice of respecting and honouring our elders.

THE SPEAKER: What about the rollout of SAGE?

DR RUGUNDA: Concerning the rollout of SAGE grants, we took this as a position and all I expect is a progress report from the responsible ministry. I would like to say that I normally want to give people proper time. With your permission, we have two weeks so that the minister responsible can come and brief this House on the progress we are making in rolling out the SAGE programme.

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, I was wondering whether the report has been adopted. I would like to propose that each ministry be given their area so that they can come back and address them in a detailed manner. 

THE SPEAKER: Should we adopt the report first? The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is not even here.

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the report presented by the Committee on Equal Opportunities Commission. 

However, I have been following the gender responsive budgeting of Kenya and some other countries in the region. The Committee on Equal Opportunities Commission and the ministry should be able to give us a clearer mapping to identify specific gaps based on the benchmarking done. Where are the constitutional gaps, the gender and equity gaps and where are the poverty gaps? We want to ensure that when we are budgeting, all these issues are taken into consideration. 

We are talking about issues, which are easy to listen to and deal with. For example, poverty; when you talk about poverty, we would like to know how you have mapped the poverty and where are the imbalances? We should not only talk about the jigger and the nodding disease, no. We need to know where poverty is deepening and how we can divert resources to deal with those issues.

Madam Speaker, we should also deal with the policy so that we can address the imbalance much more effectively. Talking about jobs, which you raised, we need to know the number of RDCs that we have in this country and how we have spread out in terms of regional balance. We are not only dealing with the police but we are also dealing with those jobs, so as to feel that we are all Ugandans and have shared the national cake. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we concluded that debate yesterday. However, since the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is not here, I think we cannot continue waiting. I would like to propose that we adopt the report and extract the areas that concern each ministry and send them so that they can work on them. Otherwise, we shall wait and waste more time. 

Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The question is that the report of the Committee on Equal Opportunities on the 4th Annual Report on the State of the Equal Opportunities in Uganda for the Financial Year 2016/2017 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk will extract the areas for each ministry and we shall send them. Rt hon. Prime Minister, this is very important work and this is the second time the ministers are not in the House when their reports are being presented. Last time, when they brought their reports, ministers were not here. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT INTERVENTIONS TO ENSURE CONSTANT WATER SUPPLY IN HEALTH FACILITIES

5.15
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Madam Speaker, Ministry of Health is cognisant of the importance of providing clean water to all health facilities across the country as a key to the achievement of the strategic goal, of accelerating movement towards universal health coverage with essential health and related services needed for promotion of a healthy and productive life in Uganda.

The Ministry of Health prioritises the provision of Water Sanitation and Hygiene, (WASH) services as stated in Sustainable Development Goal 6 (SDG6) as fundamental for patient safety and has been shown to reduce the risk of infection and diseases. Research has established that poor sanitation leads to diarrheal diseases, which are responsible for 17 per cent of all deaths of children under five.

The institutional framework for water supply and sanitation in Uganda stipulates that the Ministry of Water and Environment is responsible for determining priorities, setting policies and standards for water development as well as managing and regulating water resources.

At district level, the local Governments are responsible for the implementation of rural water supply and sanitation programmes. The NWSC is a parastatal that provides water and sewerage services in urban centres.

Access to safe and clean water is still a challenge in most of the health facilities. A total of 71 per cent of the health facilities in urban areas have access to safe and clean water supplied by the NWSC, whereas 56 per cent of the health facilities in rural areas are supplied with other safe water sources. This leaves out 29 per cent of the urban and 44 per cent of the rural populations to access water from unpredictable options including deep boreholes, shallow wells and protected springs. Others use water sources like tap stands or kiosks of piped water and rainwater harvesting tanks. 

The major challenge the Ministry of Health faces in ensuring constant water supply, is inadequate resources to finance the utility bills - water and electricity - in the health facilities. This has resulted into some health facilities being disconnected from the water supply, which in turn affects service delivery.

I have provided a table that gives the summary of the outlook of budgets of water per facility. Madam Speaker, as you can see, there are financing gaps for all levels of the health facilities amounting to Shs 9.6 billion. From the above breakdown, it is evident that there is a large funding gap and the available funding is inadequate to pay the water bills (tax inclusive), in the health facilities. 

It should also be noted that the urban facilities are connected to the sewage line, which incurs extra costs.

The optimal annual funding to cater for the health facilities that are already connected to NWSC, therefore, requires an additional Shs 9.5 billion, as this would support the facilities to offer services without disruption. 

The provision of clean and safe water requires a multi-sectoral approach. We have the following proposition for interventions;

    1. The Ministry of Local Government should work with NWSC in areas where the latter operates to supply water to the health facilities. As I had earlier mentioned, only 71 per cent of the health facilities in urban areas have access to safe and clean water supplied by NWSC.
    2. The Ministry of Local Government should work with the water production unit in their district to sink more water boreholes in health facilities distant from the national water.
    3. The Ministry of Health and Ministry of Local Government will continue to implement the water harvesting strategy in all health facilities being constructed as one of the efficiency measures to reduce cost and supplement water supply.
    4. The Ministry of Health, in partnership with ministries of Local Government and Water and Environment to establish a taskforce to access different options and indicative costs for supplying water to the health facilities that are located in water stressed areas like the cattle corridors and the Karamoja sub region. 
    5. Advocate for increased sector funding from Government, donors, civil society organisations and the private sector for increased water coverage, service delivery and sustainability.
    6. There is need for reprioritisation of plans and budgets in the local Government to earmark funds for safe water in the health facilities. In addition, the ministry will continue to promote preventive interventions. 
    7. Multi actors to continue mobilising partners in providing adopted technology for clean and safe water supply in local Governments for communities and health facilities.
    8. Work closely with the local Governments to sensitise communities and to have a sense of community ownership over the established water sources so that the community will continue to maintain and repair them over the years.

I would like to conclude by appealing to this august House to urge the respective MDAs to play their role in ensuring that all health facilities across the country access regular and clean water supply.

I request the members of this House to consider the additional Shs 9.5 billion to the health sector to cater for health facilities that are already connected to NWSC to allow for uninterrupted supply of water and delivery of quality services to the population. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not recall who asked that question. I think no one is entitled to a supplementary question.

5.22
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Madam Speaker, on water sources, I feel we can seek some guidance from the honourable minister. 

I remember, between March and May, there was completely no water in the Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. I would like to find out from the minister if the ministry could establish other sources of water apart from NWSC. That is, by drilling boreholes and installing pumps to the tank so that water is constant in all the health centres within the country. We should not keep on depending on NWSC. In case of any problems with their tanks, this would mean that the health centres and the hospitals will be affected.

THE SPEAKER: This is not for general debate. It was a question asked by somebody and the minister has answered. I think the Minister for Water and Environment wanted to add something.

5.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Dr Mary Kitutu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is just to inform the House that Gulu City is slated to benefit from the bulk water movement from River Nile because the current source of water cannot serve the demand. Plans are already ripe to get water from River Nile to address that issue. (Applause)

5.25
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, this is where our worry is. Health facilities country wide are suffering. 

Madam Speaker, you helped to sink a borehole in Kamuli for Kamuli Hospital. However, because of the stress for water around, the community will fight for that water more than the people in the hospital. Kamuli Hospital was cut off from water supply for about three months. 

We have water programmes, the departments that are in districts for water, the engineer - Can the concerned department come up with a comprehensive formula or approach to make sure that we get rid of this problem everywhere? It is not only in Gulu, it is in Kamuli and everywhere else. 

THE SPEAKER: The minister in her statement said that if we can help her to raise Shs 9.5 billion, she would be able to rectify many of the issues concerning water.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FINDINGS OF THE VERIFICATION TEAM TO THE UNITED KINGDOM ON THE CONTESTED BOUNDARIES IN TORORO DISTRICT

5.26
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (MS Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

His Excellency, the President constituted a team to go to London arising out of a meeting that he had facilitated between the two parties. He had sat with these two parties for over three different meetings. 

The sticky issue was on where the municipality falls. We were requested to go to London. When we returned, the team reviewed the report and I requested members of the team to give me time to forward the preliminary report to His Excellency the President for further guidance before we could debate or bring it to this House. 

The President has not given me further guidance on the matter. I have informed members of the committee on this position and I request the House to give me time to seek guidance on how I should proceed by His Excellency the President. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the last time you were here, which was about a month and a half ago, you told us exactly that. That you are going to consult the person who sent you on that mission.

Can we try and deal with people’s issues and get them out of the way? I do not know whether you go to functions like I do but you go there and people bombard you with questions that you cannot answer. You go to church and they are asking you, “what about this?” It is not fair to us.

5.28
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Madam Speaker, the issue of engaging technocrats to establish boundaries that are under contestation is quite a costly exercise. 

I am very sure when the team went to London to fish out the colonial mesh; it was because there is a problem in Tororo District - equally so, with all those internal border conflicts.

The Commissioner for Surveys and Mapping has gone and opened boundaries. The problem is that once these documents are got, the Executive is always hesitant to come and pronounce itself on the findings, thereby, leaving people down on the ground to kill each other over issues, which could have been easily solved. This is a problem. The other time I watched on national television when H.E President Museveni went to Tororo for a national function and the MPs from Teso and Japadhola lands were paraded in front of the public. The President emphatically said: “Can you begin to fight among yourselves here now?” Jadwong - hon. Oboth you were there. Even hon. Angura was there.

At that time our hope was that this discovery from London would have put this matter to rest. How long is it going to take to make these internal consultations? It was the same person who directed that the minister, as the head of the sector, goes together with the feuding members from the two communities and indeed they went to London. They went to London about a year ago. Surely, if it was easy to send this team at the expense of the taxpayers to go to London and obtain this information, how comes it is now difficult for Government to pronounce itself over the matter?

One thing I would say without any fear of contradiction is that many of these border issues are now being looked at politically. People are now eying 2021 and they do not want to commit themselves because they do not want to annoy any side. You cannot be on the fence. You must show where you are. You are here or on the other side. The map will certainly be your evidence and witness.

The Government – through Ndugu, who is here heading the Executive – please, listen to the plight of the people. How much more bloodshed do you want to see among these feuding communities before you realise that it is a serious matter? How many do you want to see dead before you realise that there is need to make a move. It is a high time the Government in all its sobriety stood up and pronounced itself on the matter.

After all, this map was not drawn during the NRM regime or Obote II’s regime or Amin’s or Lutwa’s regimes. This is a colonial map. What is wrong with saying that: “By the time the colonialists left, this is the document which was on the ground?” You will never be hated and neither will you lose votes if you produce that document and say, “excuse me, I am not part of this map. This is what we found”. People will go by that. 

This business of taking people for a ride in the name of politics, Madam Speaker, is going to cost us a lot in terms of feuding people who are not using their energies productively but are using their energies on political fights. 

As we talk now Tororo District Council is not operating because they say the speaker who is supposed to be the acting head of the council is from one tribe. The speaker cannot even move in the whole district. The council cannot sit; money which is being taken there cannot be superintended upon by the political heads, and civil servants are working without guidance. What service delivery are we talking about? These are serious matters. 

Assuming this was something which was happening in every part of this country, would the NRM government still be in existence? There would be nothing because your existence is about service delivery. If you are not delivering service then you have no usefulness as a government. You just raise up your hands or you take it Dr. Baryomunsi’s way – with hon. Bahati: in suits going to play football. That should be the way now. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter which we should put to rest once and for all so that Uganda moves in a united manner and we can see our people prosper through service delivery by this Government. Thank you.

5.33
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, one time I warned Parliament that this business of creating administrative units every now and then would bring us problems but nobody wanted to listen. Now, we have created them and more are being created. People said in Parliament that “those are the wishes and demands of the people”. 

The issue of Tororo District is well known. These people went to London – the Deputy Attorney-General has gone out. We paid for the minister to fly First Class. They got the information and have come back to sit on the information. Why did they use the taxpayers’ money and come and sit on the information? Did they go for tourism? 

Madam Speaker, this issue of Tororo is a serious matter. It is not only affecting the people of Tororo but even the neighbours of that area – the Bagisu, Samia, Kenyans and others. If you get me walking with Oboth-Oboth in Tororo, the other one gets angry with me. If Oboth-Oboth gets me walking with the other one, he wants to fight. The issue is bad. If the whole district which was created in the early 60s or late 50s cannot operate because the local government cannot operate and we come and sit here to ask the Prime Minister questions to which he does not even give the right answers, we are wasting time. 

Tororo is an urgent issue which must be dealt with as quickly as possible. I wish it was Mbale, we would have carried pangas. I do not know why these people of Tororo are sleeping. (Laughter) We are talking about deaths – people are going to kill one another. Do you want blood before you can talk?

Madam Speaker, use your authority and tell this Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development who went to the UK to present the report and map she got. She has everything. The President gave you authority to be the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Did he withdraw some powers? If he did, tell us. If he gave you powers that you are the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development come and say, “This is the map I got from London and this is what it is saying” instead of you coming to tell us “I am going to  consult”. Are you telling us President Museveni is going to draw another map? –[Mr Godfrey Onzima: “Information.”]- Okay, give; but you do not know Tororo. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: That is the chairperson of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. (Laughter)

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: I do not just know Tororo but the whole country and I am a national leader. I would like to give information to show the bitterness. I went to attend a function in Kiruhura and somebody was telling me: “Why don’t we solve some of these inter-border conflicts?” 

He said leaders from Tororo were invited at State House to resolve this problem. One of them – who was from one of the tribes – went to the urinals to urinate. When the other one from the other tribe went to the urinals, he said: “I cannot urinate here because the other one has already…” (Laughter) You can see that kind of hatred among the community members. The issue is serious. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you can see that somebody can even refuse to go to the same urinal with the other. I hope Angura and Oboth-Oboth go to the same urinal here in Parliament. If you do not, it is terrible. Madam Speaker, my apologies to the chairperson of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. 

Madam Speaker, we are the ones who created these districts. Why don’t we sit down and make a decision on the issue of Tororo?

5.38
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I think we should bring an end to the time where others sit in comfort zones while others are on fire. This issue of Tororo has been here for long. This issue was supposed to be discussed yesterday. The acting Prime Minister yesterday, hon. Bahati, gave us information that the ministers who were supposed to give us information were away and that they would be coming today with the information we wanted.

Madam Speaker, the minister we waited for more than 24 hours is now telling us that she is waiting for feedback from the President and yet the President failed to get an answer. He even sent a team to go and bring the answer. The team brought the answer but they also sent back the answer they brought to the President who sent them to collect the answer. We are now here waiting yet other people are suffering when someone is keeping the answer somewhere, yet to be brought to Parliament.

Madam Speaker, when a community has a problem, they do not want to listen to any developmental programme you bring; if they have issues, they do not want to listen to any other thing. Tororo does not want to hear anything developmental; they only want to know what is happening to what they wanted. Therefore, can we use Parliament to instruct the minister who is a Member of Parliament here to give us the answer we want? If not, the minister should tell us whether there is another forum where the answers will be given and decision taken.

5.40
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of these boundaries goes as far back as 2004, when hon. Crispus Kiyonga was a political commissar. He even attended the meeting and the list of the members who attended the meeting is here. We had hon. Henry Obbo, the former Member for Budama North County. Some of the references were pointing to 1947 boundary locations as indicated then. 

When they came to our committee, we listened to them and we agreed that we should get the report from those who went to London. Madam speaker, some of us have relatives there but the only thing they are waiting to hear is whether this is a genuine map or not. 

When they appeared before the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, they came with two maps. We are saying that if they cannot give us the report, can the honourable minister who went to London give us the map so that we compare it with the two maps they brought to the committee to scrutinise which of the maps is genuine? Otherwise, we do not want explanation but the maps. Can the minister get for us copies of the maps? Otherwise, the minister went to London and they got the exact map. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, I think you should have some respect for the people of Uganda. How can you keep people in suspense for 20 years? You went to London and collected the maps and the maps are not going to change. It is the same maps. Why don’t you just tell them what it is? I am sending another team to Napak and Karamoja and the President will say, “Give me the answers.”

5.43
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, I am actually addressing myself to that. I do not want to be party to a team which is going to London for tourism. But I want to be party to a team which is going to London, paid by the taxpayer and the report is brought and debated here.

I would like to appeal to the minister, and we politicians, that we seem to be doing work which is going to cause our people a big problem; issues of boundaries and maps. If we have all agreed that these were colonial maps, can we respect the colonial maps? 

Madam Speaker, I married from Tororo and I lost a father-in-law because of that conflict. And so, I know the pain. He got a heart problem but never recovered and he died. You can see how we are treating this matter.

Madam Speaker, hon. Oboth is my friend. How are we going to be fairing whenever I am in Tororo? For instance, when you go and attend a function there, you even fear to speak. I attended the burial of hon. Yeri’s mother – I appealed to Members from Tororo to unite the people. After my address, I was victimised.

What does Government want us to do as far as issues of boundaries are concerned? As I speak, Madam Speaker, we almost fought with my colleague from Napak in the lobby. Why? Government made a pronouncement and he was not satisfied and we have been referred to London. What happens when we go to London? Is this the way we are going to lead this country? This embarrassment must stop. We must be leaders and make decisions whether they are in our favour or not. I would like, therefore, to appeal to us that technical people should help us. 

Madam Speaker, as a country, we must move beyond tribes, boundaries and we must unite to look at bigger issues. Imagine we are debating boundaries and tribes. Where are we headed to as a country? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to remind the Government that this House has power, under Article 90, to compel the minister to produce those documents.

Article 90 (2)(3)(c)(ii) says “Parliament shall, by its Rules of Procedure, prescribe the powers, composition and functions of the committees. In the exercise of their functions under this article, committees of Parliament shall have the power of the High Court compelling the production of documents.” 
Honourable members, it is not a joking matter. Honourable minister, we are giving you a fortnight. If you don’t, the Committee on Public Service will compel you to produce those documents. I am just warning you.

5.46
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, for the record, I did not go to London to represent this House. I was representing the people of Tororo who are in conflict but I only happen to be a Member of Parliament. (Interjections) Madam speaker, protect me from the hecklers.

I do not know whether some of you were asked to - Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Today, the 22nd of August and the same year 22 August 2005, relating to what hon. Ssenyonga, one of the Members from Mukono was reading –

After that Kiyonga Report, from 22 August 2005, I just have a copy of the letter here. The Reference was MC 22 and written to hon. Henry Obbo, Minister of State for Labour and Industrial Relations. The letter was written by Prof. Tarsis B. Kabwegyere, the Minister of Local Government.

Madam Speaker, for some of us who were new Members of this Parliament, you may think it is august House new matter. It did not start with the London map. The matter was conclusively handled in 2005 when a new district was created in Tororo; the headquarters became a problem up to date. 

At that time hon. Apollo Yeri was the MP, the letter refers to him and the minister at that time - Government said that a municipality is represented by a Member of Parliament separately. 

Boundaries of counties and sub counties have evolved over time so the new district would not have a municipality as part of it. 

The old district called Tororo would be with West Budama County and the municipality and that was the position from Government.

A commission of inquiry was conducted, Professor Byarugaba, Tororo people have eaten rats, none of you can taste - Madam Speaker, protect me from hon. Wadri.

THE SPEAKER: Allow the honourable member to complete his statement.

MR OBOTH: Today he is unusually very vigilant in this matter forgetting that even when he had matters of Terego-Maracha it equally needed soberness. Madam Speaker, you are right you went to Tororo County and they asked you for the district, if you were to come to West Budama, they would ask you the same thing. 

We are like co-wives in Tororo we are not at peace and I would like to correct hon. Wadri, the one who gave you those talking notes was not correct. Tororo District Council is finally working but without a district Chairperson - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you see what the reality is, how long will it go on? Now I am worried should I go or I keep away, it has come to that.

MR OBOTH: As one of the delegates, in this House, I was the only person from the Japadhola side but we are happy to have other two members who were also from the Teso side.

When you see the draft report, we were in London with the honourable minister and things were moving on well. After coming back from London we had our first meeting in our office with the two cultural institutions, and getting ready that the report would be availed.

The challenge which I believe the honourable minister should be honest about; as the person who went to London is that we have never had the final meeting to adopt the report.

We are blaming President Museveni, everybody else but which report is there for the President to act on. We as delegates; I challenge any of them here, the minister herself -(Interjections)-

I will not put that on record again - we did not go as delegates from Parliament but we were chosen from our cultural institutions, two on the other side, hon. Veronica Eragu, hon. Angura is there.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Parliamentary Commission funded you.

MR OBOTH: No

THE SPEAKER: Yes

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I beg to defer, the money did not come from Parliament but the point I am making is that-

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, hon. Oboth Oboth is my good brother, they went to London, to some archives and they saw something. We are here asking who did you see he is not telling us what he saw but he is waiting for the meeting to be called and yet he went on our money, he never sold even one goat to travel to London. 

MR ANGURA: Information

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I do not want information for now, hon. Oboth Oboth spent our money and he has not come with a report but we allow him to sit here, is he in order not to give us the report from London?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, whether the money came from the ministry it is also money of the Government and the people of Uganda. Ugandans want to know what you found out when you went there and you were selected because you are members of this House. They could have picked somebody from the road.

MR OBOTH: Let me conclude, Madam Speaker, what I am holding is a letter from, the Ministry of Lands written to all the delegates-(Interjections)-it is a bit hostile-

THE SPEAKER: Order members.

MR OBOTH: I cannot proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, Prime Minister and the Minister of Lands, this is just a small sample of what is happening in Tororo and I think that we should be responsible enough to deal with it, good or bad.

5.56
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, this short period has indicated to this House how tense this matter is. The President sat with this team three times, twice in his country home and the last meeting they agreed–

The issue was both teams were being led by their cultural institutions. For the time when I was requested to come with the maps from Survey and Mapping, I came with the map, my team and the Attorney-General.

One, we sat in a meeting from 2.00 p.m. to 2.00 a.m. in the morning but they never agreed. In that meeting, the only agreement was that the two teams rejected the map which was in Survey and Mapping of Entebbe.

Two, the team constitutes membership led by myself and joined by the Attorney-General to go to London to verify the map that was presented by the Ministry of Lands. 

Three, when the map is returned from London, the report should be commissioned by His Excellency the President with the team by him calling the meeting. He commissioned it before them and they all agreed led by the cultural institution of the Japadhola and Iteso, they all agreed that when we return, His Excellency should call a meeting of these two teams and declare what the map of London says.

We brought the map and I called a meeting. When we went to the meeting, we agreed on the terms of reference. However, when we returned to write our report, the teams almost fought from my office after disagreeing on the terms of reference.

In my own wisdom, I said that since the President commissioned that, the only thing he wanted was for us to bring the map to show where the municipality falls. Since these people were not agreeing to the terms of reference, I said, “Let me write a report to only indicate that Tororo Municipality falls in this county.”

We wrote the report and submitted it to His Excellency, the President. I did not commission – (Interjections) – excuse me! I did not commission myself to go to London. I was not party to the Jopadhola and Iteso who agreed that when the map comes, it should be His Excellency, the President to present the map to them; I do not have that mandate.

If this House would like - you can actually request His Excellency, the President or you can direct me – (Interjections) – yes -

THE SPEAKER: Order! Allow her to speak.

MS AMONGI: Secondly, Madam Speaker, when His Excellency, the President commissioned that team, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development paid for all of them because it was the President who commissioned them; it was not paid from this House. 

I would like to conclude like this: the Speaker has given me two weeks –(Interjections)– she said a fortnight. I would like to pledge that within a fortnight - Good enough, the Leader of Government Business is here – we shall ensure that we get to His Excellency the President and make sure we bring a report, with the consent of the one who commissioned the findings. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, boundaries are boundaries. I do not know. What is the report about and what are the terms of reference about? A boundary is a boundary; what can change about a boundary? Anyway, honourable minister, I have given you a fortnight. I have given the minister a fortnight to bring us the information about that issue. [Mr Terence Achia rose] Honourable member, you also have border problems. Please sit down.

6.02
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the kind opportunity you have given unto me. I, first of all, would like to thank this House for bringing out the issue of Tororo as a priority. God should bless all of you because blood has been shed; people have died over this same issue; it is not a joking matter.

In Tororo, people blatantly refused to participate in LC I elections. They thought it was a joke but they did it. They said they were ready to suffer until Government listens to them. Right now, the people of Tororo are saying that they are not going to participate in the forthcoming elections. They are not voting for MPs, the President or anybody. So, it has ceased to be a joking matter anymore.

Why did we go to London? We had three meetings –(Interjection)– my brother went but I followed it closely. I was on WhatsApp and all. So, why did we go to London? If my people went, it means I was there spiritually. We went there because in the third meeting, at State House in Entebbe, an agreement was reached when the President put a question and said, “If you go to London, will you accept the outcomes of the map?” Both sides said, “Yes, we shall accept.”

Hon. Oboth then got up – and this is why we ended up going to London – and said that the map brought by the minister was a forgery from Nasser Road. He also claimed that the Permanent Secretary was an Itesot who had forged the map. It is on record though you want to put me to order – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I do not usually rise on a point of order. However, I am hesitant; I cannot stand and watch when a debate on a matter that is given due regard in this House is almost being vulgarised with lies.

I was in State House. An issue came about – I never said that the maps were from Nkrumah or Nasser roads; I never said that and I challenge my sister to prove that. At least I had the privilege to work in Government before coming to this House –(Interjections)– Parliament is Government; actually the third arm of Government or one of it –(Interjections)– what is your interest on this when it is not about Bamasaba? (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, is hon. Nyakecho in order to attribute unpleasant words and a dishonest statement to me, when I actually did not say them?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the difficulty is that I was not there but what we can understand is that you all did not agree with the local map; that is why you went to London.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, we people of Tororo County agreed - and I should put the record straight but the team from West Budama rejected it. They said the map was a forgery; that they wanted to go and get the authentic maps from London and that is why we came to travel. Today, I would like to know – and I would like somebody to answer this question – who is sitting on the map that came from London?

Secondly, is it because hon. Oboth chaired the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs that passed the Togikwatako that he is being favoured? They are playing favouritism; it is true. There is politics at play because it is what I was told.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have made a ruling. I have given the minister a fortnight to produce that report in this House. Let us go to the next item. (Applause)

PRESENTATION OF REPORTS OF PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATIONS ABROAD

I) COUNTRY REPORT OF THE HIGH LEVEL POLITICAL FORUM ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT: UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS NEW YORK, 9–19 JULY 2019

6.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, I lay on the Table a report of the delegation of 23 Ugandans that included parliamentarians and technocrats to attend a high level political forum on sustainable development in New York.

Madam Speaker, the main subject was focusing on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGS). The theme of the conference was, “Empowering people and ensuring inclusiveness and equality”. 

The conference concluded with an adoption of a ministerial declaration and we also discussed six out of 17 SDGs in details. These included the fourth SDG that focuses on inclusive and equitable quality education, and promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all.

Another SDG was the eighth one, which focuses on promotion of inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all. 

The other SDG we discussed was the tenth one, which focuses on reducing inequality within and among countries. 

The other SDG we discussed is the thirteenth, which covers taking urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. 

The sixteenth SDG was also covered in details. This promotes peaceful and inclusive society for sustainable development, providing access to justice for all and builds effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels.

Finally, we discussed the seventeenth SDG, which focuses on strengthening the means of implementation and revitalising the global partnership for sustainable development.

Madam Speaker, as a country, we came up with conclusions and recommendations. We said, just to share with the House, that the office of the Prime Minister, which is the focal point of SDGS should be held responsible for the delivery of this noble mandate. The office accepted the responsibility because this time they had representation in New York. 

We also agreed that during the process of NDP3, the SDGS should be fully mainstreamed so that we do not have a duplication because once we implement the NDP3, then we should be sure that we are covering SDGS 70 per cent of NPD2 addresses the SDGS. 

Madam Speaker, in brief, that was what we agreed on in New York. I beg to lay the report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I would like the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to take an interest in the fourth conclusion, which states, “SDGS should be integrated into the national budget” since it underscores the fact that SDGS set an ambitious path to 2030. We hope that in the forthcoming budget, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will integrate the SDGS. 

II) THE PARLIAMENTARY NETWORK REPORTS ON THE WORLD BANK AND INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

6.12
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I lay these reports, I would like to report that during the spring meeting, which took place in April this year, a parliamentary network on the World Bank and IMF carried out elections to elect nine members of Parliament to the board. I would like to report that I was again elected as a board member and at the same time, I was declared to be in charge as the chairperson of the African region. 

I would like to thank the team from Parliament of Uganda, which was in Washington. The Ugandan team included hon. John Baptist Nambeshe, hon. Syda Bbumba, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo and hon. William Nzoghu. I got the highest number of votes in the whole elections. 

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations from the House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

I would like to lay the reports on:

    a) Global Parliamentary Conference of 2018,
    b) The Parliamentary Field Visit in Hanoi Vietnam of 2019,
    c) The Annual Meeting of Parliamentary Workshop, 2017 and 
    d) The High-Level Parliamentary Meeting at the World Bank and IMF which was held in Indonesia in October 2018.

Madam Speaker, the report of the spring meeting is being finalized and it will be ready. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reports are now available for your use. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE GOVERNMENT TO WORK ON IMPEDIMENTS THAT ARE MAKING UGANDANS POOR

6.15
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to work on the impediments that are making Ugandans poor. I am moving it under Rule 58, sub-rule (k) of our Rules of Procedure. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded. 

MR NIWAGABA: Most obliged. 

“WHEREAS the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals, 2030, Goal one, advocates for zero poverty and that economic growth must be inclusive to provide sustainable jobs and promote equality;

AND WHEREAS Vision 2040 depicts transforming Uganda from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country within 30 years;

AWARE THAT the National Development Plan 2, which is ending this Financial Year 2019/2020 envisions attaining middle income status with a GDP per capita income of $1,039 but the current GDP per capita stands at $800 and the priority sectors to propel growth among others include agriculture, minerals, oil and gas;

FURTHER AWARE THAT the poverty level in Uganda currently stands at 21.4 per cent with the majority population in the rural areas as per the National Household Survey Report by Uganda Bureau of Statistics for 2016/2-17;

CONSIDERING THE FACT THAT both Government agencies and the private sector continue to sometimes act with impunity in mistreating Ugandans in the sugar growing sector, the fishery sector, citrus sector, mining business, thus making Ugandans lose income, hence increasing poverty levels;

NOTING that Government has, at times, retrogressively acted in the sugarcane sector by:

    i. failing to stabilise prices of sugarcane per ton and leaving it to be at the will of the factory owners;
    ii. failing to prevail over the factory owners from putting quarters of sugarcane supplies from farmers;
    iii. failing to provide the alternative markets to farmers whenever there is routine maintenance of factories leading to the closure at the same time for the same period;
    iv. failing to provide alternative markets for excess supply of sugarcane that is not absorbable by the existing factories;
    v. failing to prevail over factory owners who prefer dealing with sugarcane outgrowers that have obtained loans from them as against the outgrowers who have declined obtaining loans from them;

FURTHER NOTING THAT Government has, at times, acted retrogressively in the sector of fisheries by:

    1. compulsory ordering fishermen to use boats of  size 28 feet and above, which are not only expensive but only affordable by the rich;

2. 	stopping people who use fishing nets that are cheaper as well as stopping them from accessing the lakes;

3. 	Using the army that continues to destroy fishing nets at arbitrarily.

4. 	forceful eviction and depopulating some islands and closure of some landing sites from any economic activity thus forcing people into unemployment;

FURTHER NOTING that Government has in the mining sector put a blanket ban on mining tin holders from exporting tin, tantalum and tungsten that add value through processing the ore form zero per cent to concentrate levels of not below 50 per cent and which sector has been employing over 20,000 additional miners paying taxes and loyalties in millions of US dollars. As a result, many of the youth involved in this sector have been unemployed. Both the central and local governments are losing taxes and royalties;

FURTHER NOTING that the Government has the citrus crop sector

    1. failed to establish a stabilisation price for farmers growing fruits whose prices are so unattractive as to encourage more production and continuous supply of fruits;
    2. failed to establish modern stores for farmers to keep their fruits safe yet the factories are ready to buy these produces;
    3. concentrated governance in the majority of government official in respect of Soroti Fruit Factory with minimal governance input from farmers;
    4. supply of seedlings under the operation wealth creation programme that are of inferior quality to the extent that the fruits so produced from the said seedlings are unsuitable for juice production; and 
    5. failed to set up irrigation schemes in the citrus fruits growing areas to ensure increased production throughout the year;

FURTHER NOTING that the Government has failed to resolve the border issue with the Government of Rwanda leading to loss of business by the border people and other manufacturers especially the Irish potatoes growers in Kigezi region and cement manufacturers;

NOW, THEREFORE, be resolved by Parliament:

    1. That permission be granted to sugarcane growers to sell their raw sugarcane to any market available for them especially the Busia Sugar Millers limited in Kenya or any other willing purchasers both within and outside Uganda.
    2. A policy be put in place to ensure that sugar factories closure for routine maintenance is done at different times, for each of the existing factories in such a way that at no time should all the sugar factories be closed for routine maintenance.
    3.  The Ministry of Trade Industry and Cooperatives arouse the sugarcane growers to form and register their own cooperative society and which society should be supported by Government by way of licence or otherwise to start their own factory.
    4. The small factories within the sugarcane growing areas that have capacity to crush cane of at least 300 tons per day be licensed by Government.
    5. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries allows unconditional access to the lakes by small fishermen using acceptable fishing gears including hooks, boats of size 20 fit without engines and other acceptable fishing gear that is cost effective to the majority poor fishermen.
    6. The army deployed in the fisheries sector must observe the human rights of fishermen and stop forthwith the want on violation of their rights under the guise of enforcing the law.
    7. The army stops forthwith the forceful eviction of citizens from islands and landing sites and closing the same from other economic activities whether related to fishing sector or not.
    8. The Ministry of Energy and Minerals issues export permits to companies holding mining leases that add value to the extracted ore in 3Ts minerals that is Tin, Tantalum and Tungsten through processing the mineral internally from the ore form of zero per cent to concentrate levels not below 50 per cent.
    9. The mineral police protection unit is strengthened to curb smuggling of mineral ore outside Uganda.
    10. That Government establishes a stabilisation fund for citrus farmers and other crops that suffer lower prices due to over production and lack of market.
    11. That the farmers shareholding and governance in Soroti Fruit Factory be increased to levels where the farmers form the majority of the governance structure.
    12. The seedlings supplied under the operation wealth creation be of such quality that is acceptable for use in this production.
    13. Irrigation schemes be set up in citrus growing areas and other water stretch areas to increase water for production.
    14. That Government of Uganda reports to parliament on the progress made to resolve the border dispute with the Republic of Rwanda.” 
I beg to move.

Madam Speaker, this motion is supported and seconded by my colleagues; hon. Henry Kibalya, hon. Jenifer Nantume and hon. David Abala and each will highlight areas of their specialities. 

I will only restrict myself to few areas and these are; that as the Shadow Attorney-General and part of the leadership of the Opposition in Parliament, we did make an oversight field visit to the sugar corporation of Uganda limited to consult on the sugar Bill, 2019. However, we were surprised to be turned down on account of closure for maintenance of the factory.

We did realise that at the same time all the factories in the country had closed down. Of course as you may realise, once that is done, our people growing sugarcane have nowhere to supply.

In respect of the fisheries industry, we have had reports of landing sites being arbitrarily closed to all economic activities including those not related to fisheries. We believe these are matters that affect our people from continuing to join the monetary economy.

In respect of mining, we are surprised that in as far as Gold is concerned; we have one company that refines gold, exports it without paying taxes. However, around 22 companies involved in other mineral sectors particularly the 3Ts and who are doing value addition by processing the ore from zero per cent to at times 50 to 70 per cent have been denied licences to export and this has led to unemployment, poverty and loss of revenues for local Government and the country at large.

Therefore, I beg honourable colleagues that you support this motion that we thus urge Government to help our people in these areas so that they continue to perform their economic activities unhindered. I beg to move.

6.25
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to second the motion and my areas of specialisation will be in the field that concerns the region that I represent most; the sugarcane growing area of Busoga.

Madam Speaker, you realise that the East African Community and these other countries around East Africa import crops from different countries. Sugarcane is a crop that is grown like any other crop from the soil; it is planted and it germinates.

Kenya or any other country imports pineapple, watermelon, maize and so on from Uganda without a licence or permit. It is an issue that if somebody has to go to sell sugarcane in Kenya, you must have an inspection licence and import licence.

Madam Speaker, at a time when we are handling the the statement from the minister, I will be compelled to lay on the Table the Import licence that the sugarcane growers have just obtained from the Kenya health inspectorate service. It is a condition.

However, after even acquiring this permit, they have been instructed to get in touch with Kawanda and get the inspectorate form where by somebody is supposed to inspect the sugarcane and it must be free of bacteria and very many things that are not clear.

This is now the tricky situation and what is more disturbing is that the person who is supposed to inspect your sugarcane must inspect the plantation, inspects after you have cut, when you are loading and delivering. It must not have leaves or moisture. It must be clean.

After inspecting the plantation, he or she must be convinced that you have loaded what is supposed to be. This is an area we need to address.

Secondly, the sugarcane growers have no control but it is the millers that do. You plant your sugarcane after getting a loan, it matures in 18 months and the miller may buy it after 30 months. The quality that you get from the sugarcane after 30 months is not the same as what you get from that of 18 months. You get a loan whose duration is 18 months but nobody is ready to buy the cane.

In a situation where the millers have full powers - for example, Kakira Sugar Limited stopped registering the outgrowers in April. They have told them that they will again register in January.

Therefore, those that planted their cane privately must know where to sell it. This is a crop that you cannot crush from home. It is not maize that you can turn into other use; it must go into one direction.

There are countries like Mauritius that have specialised in sugarcane growing but they have an area where Government has control over the sugar that is produced. The millers and other factories produce the sugarcane and take it to one store where Government has control, which is not the case here.

To the millers in Uganda, they would come and say, “The store is full so we have cut the price.” The farmer has no right to go and inspect the store. They may decide to connive and say they have full stores so that you suffer and they cut the price. It is the same story that happens when they say they are going for maintenance and by coincidence, they all close. 

Therefore, such are areas that we need to address and see how best we can help our farmers and other people that are suffering to get better. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as a result of these battles of sugar, someone came to me and said that they would like to help us add value to and get juice out of the cane. I am going to experiment that so that our people stop kneeling to the millers to buy their goods.

6.31
MS JANEPHER NANTUME (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to work on the impediments that are making Ugandans poor.

Before I embark on the fisheries sector, it is my observation that in Uganda, the poor are the majority. They are almost 90 per cent. On the look of things in all sectors, you see the rich being favoured in most cases.

In the fisheries sector, just like the mover of the motion has said, we have seen the soldiers that were sent to the lake destroying people’s property.

In the destruction of property especially the boats that are not size 28 and below, we expect that the Government should have given these people time to make good boats that they are supposed to. 

In any case, when Government was disarming the Karimojong, they were at least compensated with cows. Why do you remove a boat from somebody and break it without providing any alternative? 

I am also looking at the nets that are illegal. It is upon Government to control and prevent the moving in of illegal nets to the country. Since Government is failing on that, then it would be upon her to devise means of helping the fishermen maybe by providing loans to them for buying acceptable nets; or giving the fishermen nets at subsidised prices.

Madam Speaker, it is so painful that Government is aware that all water bodies in Uganda are not the same in terms of depth. When you look at Lake Victoria, we know it is deep in most places but not as deep as some places on Lake Kyoga or Lake Albert. Why would Government come out with a standard that they want size 28 of the boat? That means that for people who are fishing in shallow water where such boats cannot go are left out of the fishing industry and they get poorer.

I would like to ask Government to balance for people who have deeper water and those that have shallow one. Let us have size 28 of boats for those with deep water and can afford and size 20 to 27 to those who are in water that is not so deep.

It is also still disappointing that a boat of size 28 is big to which a rich person can fix an engine. We all know that people have been pedalling to fish. Without allowing them to use boats of size 20 and 27 feet, they cannot fish. It is left only to the rich ones who are very few.

Since time is not on our side, look at the human rights of our people. People have died in the process of fighting illegal gears and left orphans and widows. Just get to know that their children will not get education, health facilities and other things. All this is making the percentage of poor people to increase.

The mover of the motion stated something and I would like to thank him for his research. It is very painful for some islands because to us, an island is a village where people stay. Soldiers come and say, “We have closed this village.” We had this in Kome and now they have threatened the same in Buvuma and Nakasongola where an island was closed.

Just imagine that they tell people in a whole village that, “There’s no work here so you must look for where to go.” People do not now have shelter and they look for where to go. 

There are also people who have not been involved in fishing but they are in their small businesses like restaurants and small bars but you are denying them chance to work. This is very unfair to the fisheries community.

Madam Speaker, it pains so much that when you find a saloon car carrying immature fish, you confiscate it, the engine or the motorcycle and take it to an unknown destination. There is no way I can follow up that kind of property that you have not taken to court. Getting it back will be a tag of war; it is at God’s mercy. You either bribe or fail to get it.

A person who put about seven million in buying a boat might have got a loan from somewhere. The person gets poor and poorer. Right now, despite the fact that you will hear from Government saying that factories have come up, let us do research and find out which people supply those factories. It is to the rich few who are favoured by the soldiers who are on the lake. The poor ones are becoming poor and poorer. 

They should not tell us that the factories are increasing so the work down there is moving. The methodology of work of the soldiers on the lake –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Abala, honourable Prime Minister, do you know that under the Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) there is no provision for the fishing industry? There are cows for the mainland, goats and beans. Despite the presidential directive in 2015, no one in the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) is taking interest in these people.

6.37
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I would also like to thank the mover of the motion because it was very clear. 

I am going to base my discussion on the Soroti Fruit Factory only. I just want to say that the spirit behind the establishment of this factory was to help the farmers. The Government of Uganda actually decided to zone this country and in Eastern Uganda, they included the following regions: Teso, Busoga, where you come from, Acholi and Lango. All of them were given citrus seedlings so that when Government eventually established a factory in Soroti, then, all of them would be supplying the factory with the fruits. 

First of all, I would like to thank Government for establishing that factory because if it is well managed and properly handled, then, it will actually address very many issues. 

However, there are very many serious disturbing issues that need to be addressed, if that factory is going to be of any benefit to the people of this country. One of them is the governance problem. 

Madam Speaker, I would like you to know that in terms of shareholding, the farmers – There are supposed to be seven members on a board; however, Teso Tropical Fruit Cooperative Union (TTFCU), for example, has only two representatives. Then, the other five are technical people who are based here in Kampala. Even when a decision is taken, it becomes a big problem for us to process their matter so that it can be understood. 

As we talk now, there are a lot of informalities involved in this matter. There are 59 cooperatives but up to now, there is no agreement or memorandum between the cooperative societies and the factory. This is where the big problem is. I would like someone to come and challenge me by producing that agreement. You can imagine up to now, people are operating on the level of informality, without agreements, and yet they say that they are managing factories. 

The worst problem is in the pricing. For example, the price of oranges in Soroti now in Teso is at Shs 400. In Kenya, they are sold at Shs 700 –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude. 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, the pricing is where the problem is. The cooperatives have suspended supply to the factory so it is not working. 

Last time, I talked to one of the Ministers of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives when he visited Soroti and he told me that he would sort out all the problems. However, I was there last Friday but as we talk now, the factory is actually not working. 

Madam Speaker, they say that there are no oranges, however, the Kenyans always come to the Arrow Square in Soroti Town, load them, take them and sell them in Kenya at the price of Shs 700; not forgetting that the factory that has been established only charges the locals Shs 400 when it buys the oranges from them. Even if you are the one, will you agree to sell your oranges at Shs 400? No! That is where the problem is. 

Allow me do some simple mathematics here such that we all know. In Teso, the estimated number of trees is 8.2 million. If each tree produces only 100 kilogrammes of oranges, that means, you will have 820,000 tonnes. If it is 50 kilogrammes, it will be 410 tonnes. If it is 20 kilogrammes, then, it amounts to 205,000 tonnes. 

The Soroti Fruit Factory’s capacity is only 30,000, which means we have about 170,000 tonnes untouched. The argument of the people there is that the factory has no capacity to produce oranges, yet the Kenyans are coming to collect oranges from the village at Shs 700 –(Member timed out.) 

6.43
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am one of the orange farmers in Teso and I am not just a small farmer because I have over 300 trees of oranges. Nevertheless, I have never sold them to Soroti Fruit factory. Why? It is because of the reasons that hon. Abala has stated. I grow all the five types of oranges such as Hamlin, Washington and so many others. Due to that challenge, I cannot sell my oranges to that citrus factory in Soroti.  

If the Government wanted to help the people of Teso, it would ensure that, that factory is only handled by a few commercial farmers, not just the subsistence farmers. This is because the inputs that the local farmers put into these citrus orange plantations are very high; the local people cannot afford. At one time, even at my level, I wanted to cut all the trees because of the pests that affected them. 

Madam Speaker, Government needs to go back to the drawing board and assess how that factory can be handled. The people of Teso should not be deceived. I hear people say that there is a factory in Teso every time but I know that it is not going to improve their economy. 

I always go back to the zoning issue. Zoning cannot help. It is because of zoning that we killed the cotton industry – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from my honourable colleague is on the quality of oranges. 

I also have special relationships with the people of Teso. Three weeks ago, when I was there, I was told that the management of the factory said that the species and types of oranges grown in Teso are not the right ones, and yet the seedlings were provided under the Operation Wealth Creation. 

However, they are making a U-turn saying that these are not the right type of seedlings. Isn’t that affecting the prices, let alone the income to be earned by the people of Teso? 

MR OKUPA: Thank you. I can give you a very good response to that. Madam Speaker, I have told you that there are five types of oranges and I grow all of them. Why is that propaganda there? That propaganda is there because the owners of the factories find it comfortable to import concentrates at the expense of the oranges. 

All the five types of oranges do very well in Teso. Therefore, they are not being honest and I have heard it. It is good that hon. Wadri has brought this matter here. We are being deceived and told that the people of Teso are not growing – what is the type? Let someone tell me the type of oranges that those people want because we have all the five types. Some of them were of course provided by NAADS, which I did not benefit from. I bought them from Serere Statistician that propagates these oranges and the seedlings. I also bought some of them from Kawanda and most people get them from there. 

Do you mean the factories in Kenya are different from the ones in Uganda? I supply to those guys in Busia, who take to the factories in Kenya. Why is it working in Kenya and not in Uganda? What type of factory is this? Is it hybrid or local breed? Let us not be deceived by this. The only thing is that they import the concentrates but not that we cannot grow the right type.

Madam Speaker, you have heard from Dr Baryomunsi. These are people who have been there since the Prime Minister came. You saw the type of oranges I have –(Member timed out.) 

6.48
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. 

I would like to think that possibly, our people are suffering because in the current situation, we are still not yet ready to take up the zoning aspect. Therefore, our people are being punished for not following the zoning that other people wanted. Possibly, that is why they are saying, “Do not sell your sugarcane but keep it within here”, so that they can milk them. 

It is very unfortunate that our Government cannot protect the poor people who are trying to survive. I would like to advise that Government finds ways of protecting the people. They are already poor and we should not continue milking them but we should look for ways of supporting them so that they can run away from that poverty. 

My sister from Buvuma alluded to the fact that the people at the fishing villages are suffering. Equally, I represent a community that deals with fishing. It is unfortunate that at some fishing villages, including those on Lake George, torture houses were created specifically to punish the fishermen. Some of them were tortured while others were killed, including those they perceived as having fish in their vehicles and taking to the markets. They would even follow people who have come from the markets to their homes to find out whether they had procured immature fish and then beat them.

Like my sister said, it is unfortunate that the people who bring in the fishing nets are not punished but they punish the ordinary persons, who have procured the nets. We would like to request the Government to find a way of providing these good nets to the fishermen in form of a loan. Like they have been providing planting materials to the farmers, why can’t they provide fishing nets to the fishermen?

Madam Speaker, our people would have probably thought about owning factories. However, you are aware that the cost of power in this country is very high. However much we say that we have power in excess, power tariffs have not reduced. In a way, the cost of production is increasing. Therefore, this makes it hard for our poor people to come up with initiatives to start their own factories to process the cane and get sugar out of it, so that they add value and sell it at a better price. If we could reduce the cost of power, the ease of doing business would go very high.

Another problem that we experienced at our lakes is that the army officers, who were put in charge of the lakes, ended up doing the business of selling boats. If you did not buy boats from them, they would find every reason to fault your boat. You would earn a beating. Some boats were destroyed even when they were of the right measurements. My prayer is that Government returns these –(Member timed out.) 

6.52
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the learned Attorney-General for the motion. I will limit my submission to sugarcane growing in Busoga.

There are still concerns from the people of Busoga about the entire concept of the East African Community with regard to the movement of goods and services. The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives was here yesterday and she made statements that were not accurate. As we speak, it is not true that sugar factories in Busoga are under repair. They are actually working. What is true is that the sugarcane growers are producing a lot of cane that cannot be absorbed by the sugar factories. That is why there are very many vehicles parked around these sugar factories. When these people attempted to export their sugarcane, they were arrested. However, the arrest came as a result of not cooperating with the customs officials. 

For the last two to three months, these people have been selling sugarcane to Kenya. The incident that hon. Kibalya mentioned yesterday was an isolated incident. If Government does not come out very fast to address the excess production, there is going to be a very big problem in Busoga with the sugarcane growers. 

Sugarcane growers are saying that in the meantime, they should be allowed to export their cane to Kenya. It is not true that people, who own factories in Kenya do not like our sugarcane. It is actually the factory owners who have been coming and engaging the people of Busoga to take their sugarcane there. Therefore, when we are discussing this matter, we should be discussing it in the context of the East African Community.

Finally, the Government should not make it very difficult for farmers and entrepreneurs in this country to export because it is in our interest. Some of these onerous requirements that they bring with regard to licences are going to make it extremely difficult for our people to export. If they do not export, there is going to be a very big problem. As we debate this motion, we should have it at the back of our minds that ever since we voted against zoning, it seems there is a deliberate policy to kill and stop the people of Busoga from sugarcane production. The issue of closing factories, which are not under repair and there is excessive production, which is not being absorbed yet –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today, I was trying to sort out the problem of one of the big sugarcane outgrowers who was trying to export to Kenya and the customs officers were bothering him. I telephoned the Commissioner General and said, “I want to know why you are not allowing these people to go? He said, “No, it is not us; the Kenyans require a phytosanitary certificate from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. If they have that, they will be able to move.”

6.56
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to partially differ from hon. Basalirwa’s submission. 

We must be very careful and find out if the owners of sugar factories and producers of the cane are not forming a curtail to lower the prices so that they buy cane literally for free. The same scenario is now happening with milk producers. The price of milk is literally going as low as Shs 300 and Shs 400, yet the market price has not changed. Therefore, we need to carry out more research as Parliament to find out whether the sugar factories are not forming a curtail to ensure that they do not buy cane for nothing. It can even be networked to operate with those custom officers so that people do not sell their cane outside the country. We need to carry out adequate research.

The same applies to the people who are complaining about the mango market. The last time we were in a budget committee meeting, the people who own the mango factory came after the President had opened it and we asked them, “Do you have a product?” I would like to even challenge the Prime Minister on whether that factory, which the President opened, has a product on the market. They set up a factory and they did not even know what they were going to do. They were not going to do Afia or Minute Maid or something like that but they had opened a factory and they were saying they wanted so many billions to test market a product. 

The way the Government is going about the whole planning sector is like they are re-inventing the wheel. These things are done everywhere. They should go and benchmark in country like Cambodia or even Vietnam that was in a war situation 20 years ago but because of proper planning, from production to processing to marketing boards – What happened to marketing boards? These are simple things. How do you produce and you are not sure of where you are going to sell? 

When you interact with the ministries of trade and agriculture and look for the connectivity, it is not there. They are not so sure about where Operation Wealth Creation is going to pump money into; is it oranges, fish or something else? How is trade going to connect with that? There is zero connectivity. 

I would like to challenge the Office of the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister is supposed to coordinate Government ministries; let him tell us the link between the various Government agencies and justify the so many billions that we are investing across the board. He does not have an answer. We have challenged the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to tell us how they are connecting all those things and they do not have an answer. He is here. He can challenge me if I am wrong. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, tell us the connectivity between Operation Wealth Creation, the ministry responsible for trade and commerce, and what you are investing in – research, innovation and Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) where you are putting all these monies. Where is the connectivity? Give us a timeline saying that by this year, this date – That is how countries plan. Go to China; that is how they have gone about it. They are so sure that by a certain date, they shall have a specific capacity and they shall market it in a certain way. When you ask any of these Government officers, they just give political and general answers. I beg to submit.

7.00
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Taking it from the point of the sugar industry, I had an interaction with the managers of Mayuge Sugar. 

Mayuge Sugar has two lines that crush the cane but for the last one year or so, the other line was stopped. At the moment, they can only crush 250 vehicles a day as opposed to around 600 vehicles in the waiting.

When I asked them why they cannot actually make the other line operational to crush people’s cane so that we can sort out this crisis, they told me that they do not have the money. I, however, think that this is a deliberate effort by these millers to frustrate our farmers so that they can price their sugarcane cheaply. That is very sad for this country.

There is also the issue of wealth creation - the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) in particular, because it is NAADS that procures the seeds, the animals and the birds that we have actually been distributing to our people in the name of alleviating poverty. Interestingly, when NAADS goes to procure, they procure the poorest quality. 

In Busoga sub-region, for example, they have been distributing coffee seedlings for the last so many years. However, when you go and do the audit on the ground in Busoga, you will be surprised to find that you will not see the plantations of coffee in this region. There are millions of coffee seedlings that have been distributed but they do not germinate. Is it a deliberate effort to impoverish the people of Busoga? Even the cocoa that they distribute, the pigs they give out, cannot grow. What is the problem? There is a big challenge.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Speaking about Operation Wealth Creation and the seeds that they give, some of us have even become hesitant to take the seeds. We took the beans and the maize seeds massively but they never germinated. I took them for two seasons but the seeds were not germinating until I said let me stop embarrassing myself and I rested. When he talks about the seeds that are not germinating and growing, it is the same elsewhere. Even the maize does not germinate many times. 

THE SPEAKER: I got some in-calf heifers which had no calves. There was no “in-calf” inside (Laughter)

MR NTENDE: Thank you for that good information. On the same point, Madam Speaker, in this country, they have frustrated – maybe it is a deliberate effort – the work of extension workers. The few that are there are not facilitated. 

7.04
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will commence with an obvious question, even if it is not the Prime Minister’s question time. 

What was the essence of signing this East African Community protocol that removed all restrictions and allowed free movement of labour, goods and services when it only works in Uganda? Kenyans and Tanzanians come in – By the way, I was surprised last week, when I was in Serere with my good friend, the honourable engineer Sabiti, and the fruit factory of Soroti is indeed a white elephant. I was shocked and surprised that they even import fruits and concentrates from Tanzania. 

These raw materials freely enter Uganda without any restrictions. However, when it comes to raw sugarcane being transported to Kenya, for example, you have to get all manner of certification, which is actually a serious impediment. 

All indices in Uganda, if you are to conduct a survey, and many have been conducted anyway, show that eastern Uganda is at the tail-end in almost everything - academic performance; poverty levels are highest in this particular region of the country. So, one is compelled to wonder and even have a fertile mind and ask: Is there a deliberate plan, policy or motive to impoverish that region? If you were to ask a fundamental question, you would ask: are we from the east diners or waiters? In fact, we are none of the two; we are waiting for others to dine and wine and then we pick the crumbs. Therefore, this motion is a very crucial one to address this serious challenge of inequitable distribution of resources. 

When we talk of Operation Wealth Creation, what we receive this side has virtually no impact. If you were to conduct a serious assessment on the performance of Operation Wealth Creation, you will realize that deliberately, some of the seed or seedlings –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: When we were in the NRM Central Executive Committee meeting, I was telling the members that when you are flying from the west, where you see mabati you are in the west and when you reach busisira (grass-thatched houses), you are in the east. (Laughter) You see the poverty levels from the types of housing. The mabati houses are there and once you come to grass-thatched houses, you know you have arrived in the east.

6.58
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and also want to add my voice to talk about the citrus fruit factory in Soroti. There are serious double standards. Whereas they do not want to operate the factory or buy oranges from our farmers, there are people coming from Kenya and carrying our oranges at a takeaway price.

We have the problem of the middleman. All our neighbouring countries protect their people. They make sure that their people are not exploited. It is only in this country where we see people coming from neighbouring countries and going to our gardens to exploit our farmers. In Kaberamaido, they go and even harvest our cassava. They buy everything from the gardens - oranges, maize and others. What are we going to do to protect our citizens? Is there nothing that can be done?

Secondly, we have a problem of feeding the people around the lake. My constituency has four subcounties that border Lake Kyoga. When it rains, it floods in those areas and when the sunshine comes out, the land bakes and you cannot dig it. The National Agricultural Advisory Services and Operation Wealth Creation are around our area but what they think about is dropping seedlings or whatever at the district headquarters. They never care about these people whose only survival is in the lake. There is no food for them. They go fishing and come with two or three fish and they have no food with which to eat the fish.

Madam Speaker, the famine at the lakeshores –(Member timed out)

7.10
MS NOELINE BASEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand in support of this timely motion, and I would like to thank the mover of the motion. 

The farmers in this country are suffering. I represent a district where the majority of my constituents are farmers. Last year, I presented in this House the challenges of tobacco farmers, who were not paid for up to eight months. Some have been paid half of what was due to them up to now. This season, the situation is even worse; the companies that are buying tobacco from the farmers have decided to lower the prices. They have lowered the grades for tobacco and the farmers are crying. 

One farmer called me, saying that he cultivated tobacco worth Shs 12 million that he earned last year but this year, it is valued at Shs 3 million. Some are going back with Shs 200,000 when they sell, yet they were expecting to get Shs 3 million to Shs 5 million. It is a very bad situation. The farmers have no protection and these companies are employing monopolistic tendencies. I pray that Government comes in with an intervention that protects the farmers from this exploitation.

My farmers used to grow maize and they were earning a living from it but at the moment, that is not possible because the prices of maize went down. The farmers have been depending on the sale of these crops for the education of their children. Actually, they are calling and running to us for school fees now. Universities are opening and farmers do not have income with which to pay school fees simply because of this exploitation by these companies. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.13
MS PROSSY AKAMPULIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for the motion. 

I would also like to thank the Prime Minister, on behalf of the people of Rubanda, because two or three months ago we went with an investor, who is going to put up a factory in Rubanda for mines in particular. However, what is disturbing our people is that when these investors come, they are not checked thoroughly to see whether what they are telling us is exactly what they are going to do. 

I will talk about the mines because that is what we have in Rubanda. In Rubanda, people have been stopped from doing casual work at the mines because we have an investor coming. However, the information we have is that the investor will take some time. What will happen to those who have been doing this work for all their life to get school fees and help their families?

We have an issue with the investors that come into the country. We have an investor who has been working with the people. After seeing that there were some regulations put in place, he stopped paying the workers. Our people are suffering. First of all, they have been working without pay for the last three or four months and now they have nowhere to go. The Government needs to look into this right from the start.

I was part of a delegation that went to India and Sri Lanka to see how they do these things, together with the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. In India, I remember we asked a question: “How do you deal with the local people?” I remember the statement they gave us was, “We let Government help their people. As the factories, we are not involved. We do not deal with the farmers directly. These farmers are given an opportunity to grow their crops so that they can earn a living. The price is set by Government so that the farmers are not frustrated.”

What happens here? Someone wakes up in the morning because maybe they have had an interest or other things and then they stop the people and they start crying. Yesterday, I was really hurt when the minister said that Ugandans are not suffering. I almost invited her to Rubanda to meet my local people – the ones who have been working in those mines. Come and see what they are going through. They can no longer pay school fees for their children because they have not been paid for the last three months and now they have stopped working.

Leaving that alone – (Member timed out)

7.16
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Rubanda): Madam Speaker, I will go straight to the mining sector. I highly support this motion because I can see the consequences of the impediments that have been pointed out. 

Where I come from, we have Nyamuriro Mines where we mine tungsten, otherwise called wolfram. This mine has been operating for the last 70 years and it has been processing wolfram up to 65 per cent. It is used in heat-resistant areas with sophisticated technology. He is the one who buys and uses it, particularly when manufacturing aircraft engine turbines. You normally need something that can resist heat and you combine tungsten with other alloys or metals in order to get the best product. That is where – (Member timed out.)- Madam Speaker, I have just started making my contribution -

Let me now be fast. At the beginning of this year, Government suddenly put a ban on the exportation of the already established market of this tungsten. Tungsten mining was employing 2,000 artisanal miners but since they cannot sell the stock they have, they have reduced the number of employees from 2,000 to 500. You can see the consequences.

In addition, the amount of money that used to go to the economy in that area per day was Shs 30 million, which was used for paying the artisans but now it has dropped to Shs 10 million. The taxes, particularly royalties to local governments, used to be Shs 60 million per annum but this year, we are going to get nothing. For the next 20 years, we may not achieve the technology for processing and using it. 

As a result of all this, the crime rate has gone up and people have no money to pay for school fees and hospital bills. The situation is really very bad. The youth who are engaged in that activity are abusing everybody in Government saying, “What are you doing for us; we are suffering and we cannot do a, b, c, d yet you come here driving vehicles and telling us that Government has banned this. Why don’t you remove that ban? Aren’t you Government?”

7.19
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion. 

On the issue of sugarcane, I think it is a deliberate move. All factories cannot close at the same time for cleanliness and repair. 
Most times, when these factories want to increase the price of sugar, they horde the sugar in order to create scarcity and increase the price. This is a deliberate move to cause a surplus and then they buy the sugarcane cheaply. I think this is the move. 

Madam Speaker, when hon. Kibalya was submitting yesterday, he said that when farmers attempted to export this sugarcane, the authorities in Kenya said they wanted clearance from Government. My appeal, therefore, is that Government clears these people so that they can sell this sugarcane outside.

On the issue of fishing, every government in every country controls fishing of immature fish. However, it should not go to the extent of beating up and torturing everyone; whether you have the right size or not, you are beaten. I also think this is a deliberate move. It is not an attempt to regulate fishing but an attempt to frustrate the fishermen.

Madam Speaker, water is their garden; that is where they get their food and money. I, therefore, think that the issue should be whether they are using the right gear; it should not just be clearing anyone. I would like to, therefore, appeal to Government to restrict this issue of fishing to people who are using wrong fishing gears.

On the issue of the fruit factories, this also affects West Nile. Some time back, Government came up with zoning regions and West Nile was looked at as one of the regions where fruits could be grown. However, as I talk, the seedlings were supplied sometime back and many of them are yielding but there are no fruit factories where the fruits can be sold. People come from Kampala to buy these fruits. Imagine a sack of oranges is being sold at Shs 10,000. This issue must also be looked into.

My sister from Bunyoro region talked about tobacco. The same situation she explained here is faced by the people in West Nile. In West Nile, people grow tobacco - (Member timed out.)

7.22
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to address myself to the industry of extractives. 

Madam Speaker, I happen to be part of that profession. When you study the environment of any of the extractives, during formation, a majority involve a lot of heat. That also goes for the formation of tungsten; I will say the “Three T’s”. When you go to areas where you find geological formation of those “three T’s”, they are not arable for agriculture; it is rock formation. Actually, where you find such minerals, you find rock granites in a distance of not more than four kilometres.

What happens to the population that harbours that area? Madam Speaker, one time, we went to Australia and we visited the Aborigines. Because of that area of theirs, coupled with heat and rock, they could not do any other activity. I do not want to say what happened to them. Their lives are a problem. I also do not want to say that the Ugandans who have been found in the areas with such richness should suffer at the expense of unstudied regulations. We should, therefore, commensurate and have an equilibrium when we are putting bans. Otherwise, what have you provided for them?

In the Ninth Parliament, you sent us to Rwanda to study that extractive industry. It is true we found that much of our iron ore was ending up in that country because our own teams here were doing little with regards to regulation. Madam Speaker, up today, we do not have the international certification that can allow us to sell our ore or minerals directly. I think it is deliberate.

When you put a ban, what have you put as the equilibrium to commensurate the guest? Have you developed the industry? The one who extracts is different from the processor. Have you brought the processor? Do you have institutes here that have skilled our people to work in those processing industries? If someone is trying to process what he or she has extracted to a level of 60 per cent, we can only regulate up to how much someone can export –(Member timed out)

7.25
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Niwagaba for helping us in a way I have not seen in the last eight years I have been in Parliament.

As economists, we look at strategies to fight poverty and we see Government’s approach to infrastructure. Yes, we need the electricity and roads. We even passed a loan request of Shs 1 trillion for construction of a big hospital. However, I think what hon. Niwagaba is doing today is requesting the Prime Minister to refocus the attention of the economists of this county to address the challenges that face the poor in the very activities in which they are engaged. Madam Speaker if we did that, we would stand tall and say we have done our part.

Every year, we pass the budget and we are now developing the National Development Plan III (NDP III), but I think this is a moment where we should refocus our energy. You can talk about sugar, fruits, minerals - Hon. Mbabazi, wait, do not celebrate; I have gold in my area and they brought a Chinese investor. Even the little we were getting using our basins is no longer there; there are no royalties and the gold is gone. God gave us gold but we are the poorest in that particular area.

The situation with tea is exactly the same as sugar; prices in the last four months have moved from Shs 650 to Shs 250. How do you survive? There are brokers in Mombasa. We only have one market. Government is not looking at alternative markets for the tea producers.

This is the time to rethink if the private sector led growth is the right strategy for Uganda. Should Government hand over its mandate to the open market or should we now request Government to take charge of the economy? Should we now not talk about a new formula for fighting poverty? 

This is the right time because soon the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic will release the indicative planning figures. I wish we get –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you. I wish we would get a forum bringing together the economists of Government and Members of Parliament because we come from all these constituencies and we know what is happening. Yesterday, I cried about our forests, people are selling their goats and cows; how do you fight poverty? Unless somebody comes up and asks, “In Teso, what do we need to do?” and then you listen to hon. Okupa, hon. Ogwang and they will tell you what you have to do -

We need that forum for us to re-strategise so that next year’s budget sees money going to address the bottlenecks that the poor meet in the very activities in which they are engaged in. We would have done very well. Thank you, hon. Niwagaba.

7.29
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, like many of my colleagues, I would like to thank hon. Niwagaba for this motion that I stand to support. 

Uganda is the number one fruit producing country in the world, given our suitability and abundant potential. However, probably because of one or two limitations, we may fall short. If we could harness all our potential, we would be the number one fruit producing country in the world. 

I thank hon. Niwagaba for proposing a stabilisation fund for the citrus sector intended for utilisation during bumper production. I hasten to add that sometimes in this country, the forces of supply and demand do not apply. More often than not, farmers are suppressed even with pricing. You can have underproduction but still you will be paid less. 

The fund can also be very instrumental in other ways; for instance, access to clean planting materials is a very big impediment to farmers at the moment, even knowledge on orchard management or maintenance. Our farmers lack knowledge including that on pests and disease management. Many of our oranges are affected by pests and diseases and if you go to citrus producing places in this country, it might be hard for you to find a multiplication centre for the citrus. Even centres for continued research for new citrus varieties are difficult to get and yet these are important milestones for any sustainable and meaningful production of citrus fruits.

It is because of this reason that I urge Government to promote fruit production through partnering with investors and outgrowers. I know that commercial estate type of production would act as a buffer production to the factory. If for one reason or another, farmers are unable to supply, then the farms would. I have no doubt in my mind whatsoever that at an opportune time –(Member timed out)

7.33
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. When you are at the border, you witness movement of vehicles in and out and many times, most of the vehicles that are going to Kenya are loaded with our produce like maize, oranges and even cattle. 

When it comes to cereals, the cereal houses are just across the border. They carry our maize and just deposit it less than a kilometre from the border like many other things. How I wish Government could move fast and ensure that we get silos so that at the time of bumper harvests, we are able to store our food and ensure that our farmers reap and get better benefits from the produce they realise.

Madam Speaker, Swaziland is a small country but its economy relies mainly on sugar. There is one big company called Royal Swaziland Sugar Corporation; it is the largest taxpayer in the country but it relies on sugar and many out growers. What happens there, Madam sugar-(Laughter)-

THE SPEAKER: Order! His mind is on serious things.

MR ANGURA: Royal Swaziland Sugar Corporation, the biggest crusher of sugarcane and the largest producer of sugarcane does not own the sugar that goes to that market. All the outgrowers and all the sugar that comes from the factory is managed by the association. The company simply provides the cost of crushing that sugar and those costs are deducted and the final payment is made to all outgrowers; the sugarcane company itself collects its share. Conflict and complaints about over production or supply are very minimal. How I wish that we could also consider that.

On the issue of fishing, Government came up with pre-shipment inspection of all products that are brought into this country and these include, among others, fishing nets. If this pre-shipment inspection is working, why can’t Government emphasise the quality and the size of nets before they come here, other than –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Angura’s submission has reminded me of the silos we had but they sold them. We had some in Kyazanga, Jinja. Where is the warehousing system working? We made a law here on warehousing but I do not hear about those warehouses.

7.36
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Niwagaba for this smart and brilliant motion. We are all Ugandans and agriculture contributes more than 79 per cent to poverty reduction in Uganda, according to research done between 2006 and 2013. However, there is still room for improvement in everything.

In your communication yesterday, Madam Speaker, you talked about avocado seedlings and that was it. We do not know where they are going to be grown. We do not know which type of soils favour avocado growing. If we get them and scatter them all over the country, there will be no market. I will have ten acres in Rukungiri and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister will have 50 acres in Kabale, but it will not make any difference and attract people to come and buy them.

During the rainy season, there is too much food in Uganda. Whoever comes to our country says Uganda is a hospitable country. Even if you do not have a garden, you can go somewhere during the rainy season and get food to prepare for more than ten members of your family. However, all that food is wasted during that season and that is over. People sweat and suffer when they are planting. However, during the harvest, their produce all goes to waste and they remain in poverty, to the extent that they even fail to get money from the produce to buy exercise books, pencils and pens for their children. In many districts and regions, it is a waste and then we always say that we have fertile soils.

Look at the Operation Wealth Creation programme. When we think of something and copy it from somewhere, we simply bring it here wholesale. People were transporting cassava stems from here and taking them as far as Kisoro to be given to people to plant, as if people in Kisoro, Rukungiri or Ntungamo districts do not have cassava stems. Those ones will not yield properly in those soils. 

Where are the extension workers and what are they doing? If we work on those ones –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the record, yesterday I said I was only there in that farm for one day. However, I am sending the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, together with the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to spend more time there and get more information, come back and report here about that avocado. I simply saw a good thing but I will send the committees so that they get better information.
 
7.39
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The avocado that Mexico exports to North America is called the Hass avocado. I also visited that farm in Mayuge. 

Uganda was known for being an agricultural country and agriculture flourished in this country because the cooperative system was working. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this Government killed the cooperative system. This Government has not helped farmers in Uganda. The other time, they were crying about maize. They produce a lot of maize and the Government came up in this House and said they were going to buy the maize, but you did not help the farmers. Hon. Angura has told us that the trucks that carry all this produce are parked in Mbale and they take it across, and they have got silos. The Swedish people helped us to build silos but they were sold. 

Government has also not helped farmers who are growing sugarcane. I was in Busoga about two months ago and we visited all these sugar factories. What Government wanted was zoning but the people of Busoga said they would not do zoning; they would not depend on Madhvani. I went to Kamuli Sugar Works and Mayuge and people said they do not want zoning. They were producing sugarcane and doing very well. I think there must be a cartel that has been going around frustrating the farmers in Busoga.

We have the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. Governments world over have got ministries of trade that help to find markets for the people to sell their produce. It is the work of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to help the people find market to sell their products. However, this Government is not helping the people at all. So, what can we talk about?

Uganda is no longer producing or selling what we were proud of because we have killed the agricultural sector. Even coffee is not there. We have now put in place Operation Wealth Creation. You can see the seedlings they give out which cannot even germinate. You can even see the poor cows. They brought these cows and they get only bulls. Those are the ones they are giving to the people. Now, how are the farmers going to benefit? Nothing at all!

You talk about a middle income economy. We are deceiving ourselves. We are forgetting agriculture and now looking at oil. This oil will disappear within 30 years and you can even see the oil curse around – (Member timed out)

7.42
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As people try to earn a living, there are those rich people who exploit them by offering low prices for their crops. For those involved in the mining sector, they also offer low prices for their minerals. In Karamoja, there is mining of marble in Amudat and Moroto districts. Companies like Tororo Cement Limited, which are engaged in mining, offer very low prices for the minerals, as low as Shs 150,000 for a truck.

Madam Speaker, this is a very heavy mineral; it is actually a rock that people have to break manually. Because of that, most of these miners develop chest pains while others hurt their legs and hands. Much of their money goes for treatment and little is left for the families.

The people of Karamoja are deprived of the benefits that come with mining. Tororo Cement Company ferries this mineral in its raw form all the way from Amudat and Moroto to Tororo, where their factory is. In the process, they even destroy the roads. Our people have been denied jobs. The warriors have reformed from cattle rustling but now they have no jobs to occupy them.

Madam Speaker, having a factory there would help to address that problem. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has been talking about a factory to be established in Karamoja Sub-region but to date, the factory has not yet been set up. I call upon the ministry - and Government for that matter - to establish that factory so that the roads are saved. 

Right now, we have a tarmac road from Moroto to Nakapiripirit. This Parliament processed a loan for the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road but I am worried that these roads will get destroyed because those lorries are very heavy. During the rainy season, those trucks never give way for fear of slipping off the road.

I call upon Government to set up that factory for us –(Interruption)

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, hon. Nauwat, for giving way. As a Member of Parliament representing the people of Tororo County where Tororo Cement Industry is located, first of all I would like to appreciate the support you are giving in getting the raw materials from there. However, we are also discussing with the investors and plans are underway to put up a mini factory in Karamoja. You will benefit from that factory when it is established. Thank you.

MS NAUWAT: Madam Speaker, we are waiting for Government to set up that factory for us and also save the roads. I thank you.

7.46
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on the issue of farmers getting permits first before they supply sugarcane. At the end of my submission, I would like to make two requests.

My people are stuck with sugarcane in the gardens. When they are issued a permit of one week and yet one truck can take four days to get offloaded, by the time this farmer gets two trucks, the permit is already expired. As a result, people are suffering. I have a list of over 50 people who want permits. I have almost become an officer of the factory. Those who are not getting the permits warn me that they will revenge in the 2021 elections, yet as a Member of Parliament I cannot do much. The factories say the sugarcane is beyond their absorption capacity. 

Madam Speaker, my request is: Now that these people are stuck with the sugarcane, yet they got loans to use these gardens, let us abolish this system that requires somebody to first get a permit before he or she can supply sugarcane. This is happening because there are even middlemen at the gates. If a truck costs Shs 100,000, the middleman will offer Shs 80,000. That is how our farmers are suffering.

Secondly, the Government should take over this responsibility. They have to meet with the owners of the factories and take away all this sugarcane and then during the next planting season, the farmers decide whether to go on with sugarcane or another crop. For the farmers to be stuck with this sugarcane when they spent their energy and money is unfair. 

Madam Speaker, my request is that Government takes away all this sugarcane through whatever arrangement they will put in place, as long as the sugar cane has been cleared away by the factories. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, the issue of permits is really difficult. I think I have five kilogrammes of letters, not only from Kamuli but also from Bugweri. They are all writing to me every day saying, “Help us get permits”. It is a very serious issue.

7.49
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and thank hon. Niwagaba for his timely motion.

We have all raised brilliant ideas. The challenge we have is that when such ideas are raised, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will always tell you that whatever you have raised is not budgeted for. The NDP II is coming to an end and it was approved by Parliament. All ministries and departments aligned their budgets to NDP and the Public Investment Plan. 

I would like to tell Members that this is an eye opener for us. I have actually seen what is being contributed in NDP III. Let it be our responsibility, as Members of Parliament, to refocus NDP III since it is coming here for approval, so that we change the planning of Government. Something has been done in infrastructure, electricity, roads, water and everything but can we now focus on plans that can improve the betterment of our people by increasing their incomes? That can only be done if we fine-tune NDP III since you need a certificate of compliance in respect to NDP. 

Unless that is done, Madam Speaker, it will become very difficult. We shall come to Parliament, raise issues and Government will say it is not in their plan. In NDP III, let us consolidate all our ideas. During approval, we should present our inputs so that when it comes to budgeting, it is then aligned to NDP III. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, most of the submissions are proposals; they are suggestions. I do not know whether the Prime Minister wants to say anything –

7.51
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Niwagaba for having moved this motion, which has brought cohesion in the House. Indeed, the issues which were raised affect all of us. 

The motion has also generated quite a lot of contributions but some of them require close examination. I will give one or two examples. There has been an attempt to indicate that Government is marginalising specific areas and a lot of points were made about the east and particularly Busoga. 

Madam Speaker, obviously, there is no policy to marginalise any part of the country. I would like that to be clear so that when colleagues are contributing, they do not hammer on this point. I do not want to quote names because there is no need to.

Secondly, there has also been a lot of talk about the East African Community. In fact, my brother, hon. Nambeshe, if I may say his name, asked what we were doing in the community because we went and signed but we are just being battered left, right and centre. I would like to inform my brother, hon. Nambeshe, and colleagues here that if any country has benefitted from being a member of the East African Community, in my view Uganda has been a great beneficiary.

If you look at the trade figures, you will clearly see that Uganda’s trade balance with our regional neighbours is significantly in favour of Uganda. I do agree that there are a number of areas, which are not moving well. It is, however, our duty as leaders, to ensure that we remove the rough edges and the practices which do not respect the agreements of the East African Community. I am confident we are going to remove them.

There is the issue of sugarcane and sugar production and export that has been raised. I think this is a matter which needs close examination so that the distortion and problems can be ironed out. 

An issue was raised on Government’s ban on mining. It is true that President Museveni announced the ban on export of raw materials in terms of minerals and iron ore, in particular. The reason was very simple - that the prices being given to our people were peanuts compared to if we had added value. That is one of the reasons there has been encouragement of factories to add value to our minerals. Wolfram has been quoted –(Interruption)

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Mr Prime Minister. I appreciate the efforts you are going to take to ensure that you streamline the sugar industry. However, we are talking of sugar cane which is drying up in the gardens. We need some immediate interventions before you come up with a long-term plan. 

DR RUGUNDA: Hon. Waira, I was just asking, “What is happening?” Fortunately, my brother, hon. Michael Werikhe, the Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, said we are doing everything possible to allow farmers to have their sugarcane exported so that their energies are not wasted at all. 

Many comments have been about the oranges and the fruit factory in Soroti. That factory is beginning to work. There may be early challenges with new factories, but Government will do all that is possible to support that factory so that it can be successful and indeed help farmers to sell their produce and generate money for our country. From the point I was making, I was saying that all we want is for value to be added so that Uganda gets maximum prices.

There has been a lot of debate in this House on fishing gear. I do not know if hon. Ouma is here, but many people have been raising this matter.  My conclusion on this point is that while there have been some activities that could be questioned or may be inappropriate, the net result has been an increase of mature fish being sold and reopening of fish factories which had closed a long time ago. At the end of the day, you and I and the people of Uganda are beneficiaries from the measures that have been taken to have tighter control on not using wrong gear-

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, does that involve ejecting people from their villages, burning their boats, confiscating their engines, confiscating vehicles which are in Nakasongola for three years and killing them? How does that help the economy? Is that Government policy, honourable Prime Minister?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this cannot be permitted. Loss of life cannot - We cannot sacrifice the lives of Ugandans. Indeed, those are the rough and wrong measures that need to be attended to so that while we are fishing, we do not lose lives nor burn people’s property. Therefore, we need tighter control.

His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, has had national or zonal tours; around 18 zones of Uganda have been covered and his theme was fighting against poverty. His theme was exactly the same point that my brother, hon. Niwagaba, has risen in his motion. However, his theme was not condemning different areas as it has been in today’s contribution. If we remove those condemnations of Government and the like, the rest of the motion and the points being made by hon. Niwagaba are okay.

The final comment is on poverty itself. Ndugu Dr Baryomunsi and I have been looking at figures on poverty - people living below the poverty line in East Africa. East Africa has six countries and out of the six countries, Uganda is the second in having the least number of people living below the poverty line. It is true - as hon. Nambeshe is pulling my leg that these are relative – that there are countries that are not doing extremely well but we have to still compare and see. From that point of view, therefore, Uganda is not doing badly as hon. Nambeshe suggested.

The final -(Interjection)- We do not have time. We will take the clarification outside in the lobby. In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I agree with the general thrust of the motion moved by hon. Niwagaba. I do not agree with the assertions that certain sections of the country are being marginalised because that cannot be a Government policy. If there are distortions and some form of marginalisation, we should quickly bring them out so that we deal with them because we want the country to move together. If there are any distortions and we tolerate them, we would be creating trouble for generations to come.

We will support the motion with this view and Government will do whatever we can to take into account the many good views that have been expressed. It is true I may have concentrated on hon. Nambeshe’s views and forgotten very many good views and suggestions that have been made, but Government will address them. We will work with hon. Niwagaba as and where necessary to cause the implementation of the many good points that have been raised. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the motion be adopted.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.
 
THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable members. I hope the Government will benefit from this debate and use the information and proposals to improve our livelihood. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00.p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 8.03.p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 August 2019 at 2.00.p.m) 

