

Tuesday 9 August 2016

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the Vice-President, members of the Cabinet, members of the Opposition, honourable members of the House, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I hope that in the last few weeks, Members have been inducted into their committee work and are now ready for the next phase of activities.

Honourable members, last week I attended the Annual Meeting of the Speakers of the Pan-African Parliament. We have been called upon to account for the ratification of the Malabo Protocol, which has to do with changing of the status of the Pan-African Parliament from advisory to legislative. The heads of state agreed in 2014 that the status of the Pan-African Parliament should change but as of now, only Mali and Sierra Leone have ratified the protocol and deposited it.

This brings to mind the situation on the Government side where Section 4 of the Ratification of the Treaties Act requires that all treaties ratified by Cabinet should be laid before Parliament. I recall only the East African Community Treaty was brought here and in the recent past, the protocols on defence and security of the East African Community; there are no other treaties that have been laid before the House. I, therefore, would like to draw your attention, Leader of Government Business, to that anomaly and I hope that it can be done.

Secondly, Section 4 of the Ratification of Treaties Act requires the Minister of Foreign Affairs to be the depository of all the treaties of Uganda. I do not know whether this is being done. The ministry is required, under section 6 of the Act, in consultation with the Attorney-General, to make rules to give effect to that Act. I would like to know if that has been done and if it has not, maybe that is the reason as to why the treaties are not being laid here.

I would also like to know if the Malabo Protocol has been ratified by Cabinet and if so, why it has not been laid before the House. The interesting thing is that it is the Government that signs the treaties but they say that it is Parliament which is called upon to account for their implementation or failure. When we go to meetings, they ask us and we do not know what to say. I hope the Prime Minister will be able to handle this issue of the Ratification of Treaties Act. Thank you. 

There were a few Members who had one or two issues to raise. We shall use just ten minutes.

2.55
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. 

On Wednesday, October 2015, a Ugandan citizen called Katushabe Betty was kidnapped by police from her home in Bwebajja. She was brought to a car bond called Pine. She was tortured the whole afternoon and in the evening, she succumbed to her injuries.

On 18 December 2015, the DPP wrote a letter directing the state attorney of Buganda Road Court to jointly charge the former Kampala Central Division commander, Aaron Baguma, and the bond owner with murder. How did the police respond? In reference to the police press release of 4 February 2016, signed by the Inspector General of Police (IGP), Mr Aaron Baguma was promoted from assistant superintendent of police to superintendent of police. On 21 July 2016, the DPP ordered the Director CID to produce Mr Aaron Baguma in Buganda Road Chief Magistrate’s Court. How did the police respond? They sent him for a senior police commandant staff training course. 

Madam Speaker, I look at this as a huge tragedy in our criminal justice system because it now appears like there are people who are above the law. This becomes a matter of national importance because Betty Katushabe may not be one of your sisters, cousins, aunts or daughters but she deserved the right to live. 

Madam Speaker, I have three brief requests:
1. 	That Mr Aaron Baguma, with immediate effect and without further delay, is produced in court.
2. 	That the promotion by the IGP be rescinded until Mr Aaron Baguma is cleared.
3. 	That his name be dropped from the list of distinguished police officers that are lined up or have been signed up for the senior command police training.

Madam Speaker, I thought this is critical for this nation because the country is looking at Parliament to provide leadership in this critical matter. We cannot have somebody that is supposed to appear for a pending case in both the police and the criminal courts being promoted and going about with his – (Member timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Internal Affairs and the Attorney-General, please work out an answer to that query while we listen to another issue. Thank you, hon. Katusabe.

3.01
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national interest. It is a matter about strikes in public universities. However, since the Minister of Education has a statement for us in Parliament, I would rather wait and bring up my issue after that statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will “see you” when the Minister is on the Floor.

3.02
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Madam Speaker, the matter on which I rise is in relation to what most of you know – those of you who have been following the press. In the Sunday Vision of 7 August 2016 and in the subsequent publications of Monday, 8th as well as of today, it was reported that Government is losing billions of shillings through a gold scam. This scam involves a private company called African Gold Refineries, Ministry of Finance officials and Uganda Revenue Authority. 

This company is reported to have applied for a licence to construct a gold refinery and export gold. Within the agreement, the company promised that this investment was going to earn Uganda $2 billion per year. It was also reported that 300 Ugandans would benefit from training from this project. To date, it is reported that African Gold Refineries has already earned over Shs 282.6 billion from the transactions and dealings in gold here in Uganda and out of that, Government was expected to earn over Shs 84 billion in taxes, royalties and other benefits. 

However, the report clearly said that no such money has been realised in Government coffers. 

The report also says that Ministry of Finance officials are responsible for awarding and granting exemptions to this company. I think that it is prudent that the Ministry of Finance comes forward and explains to us how this big loss occurred, which I am sure is of national concern.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Imagine, the application for an exemption was written on 23rd and on 24 April 2014 it was approved and indeed granted. It was made on the same day and granted!

What makes this stink is that the minister, who is supposed to be here, hon. Matia Kasaija, is nowhere and yet he knows that these matters implicate him. He knows very well that these meetings took place in the boardroom of the Ministry of Finance. There is collusion to this –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ssekikubo is going personal by naming hon. Matia Kasaija as the Minister of Finance and yet there is a Minister of Finance in the House who probably might have been delegated by hon. Matia Kasaija. Therefore, are we proceeding well by allowing hon. Ssekikubo to personalize the matter? 

The Minister was doing this as a minister and not as Mr Matia Kasaija. He was working as the Minister of Finance not as a Member of Parliament for Buyaga. If we have a Minister of Finance in this House, that minister is supposed to give a response as Minister of Finance because hon. Matia Kasaija was acting as Minister of Finance.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance of this country is called Matia Kasaija. (Applause)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling that has intercepted the minister from getting away with this.

Madam Speaker, I know very soon we are going to receive a statement about lecturers and non-teaching staff striking over their arrears and salaries to the tune of Shs 78 billion from six public universities. However, imagine a company getting away with Shs 84 billion, tax free. They have earned Shs 882 billion! If you went to Mubende, there are gold mines just as in Namayingo and Karamoja and people are getting money from them free of charge.

THE SPEAKER:  This is not a debate, Members. At least we have understood the issues. We shall ask the minister to explain so that we know who granted the licence, gave the exemption and why. The Minister will answer.

3.09
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to bring it to the attention of this House that very many Ugandans are being illegally detained in the Democratic Republic of Congo and most of them without trial. A case in point is Mr Sam Mugumya who was a national youth leader in Uganda. He was arrested in October 2014. We got information through the spokesperson of UPDF that he was detained in Congo at a military detention centre called Ndoro in Kinshasa. Since then, he has never been told why he was arrested and never charged. We were informed that he is seriously sick. 

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has not come out to give us a report on what they are doing to secure his release, if he has no case. Secondly, we have been waiting to see whether there is any help that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has rendered so that the relatives and lawyers can access him. We have not seen that happening. Consequently, I would pray –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. This country has missions abroad. One of the cardinal roles of missions is to take care of Ugandans who are in their area of accreditation.

We were told in this House some time back that one Samuel Mugumya had been arrested. The UPDF informed Uganda and not the mission in Kinshasa. Can we ask the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come out and inform the whole country why Ugandans are being incarcerated, whether they are given consular service, and whether the missions have brought issues of those Ugandans incarcerated to the attention of the Minister of Internal Affairs and the governments where they are accredited? This is happening all over the world. We are told that Ugandans were incarcerated in Abu Dhabi-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you should ask a formal question indicating the countries where you suspect Ugandans to be incarcerated so that the minister can give you a structured answer. We are talking about a man who is in Goma; please, conclude.

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My prayer is that the Ministry for Foreign Affairs gives us a report on what they are doing about it. Secondly, if the Government of Congo has continuously humiliated Ugandans, then a protest note should be sent –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, hon. Mwijukye, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the Minister of Foreign Affairs could also help and tell us with which countries we have reciprocal enforcement of justice - treaties signed with them - and whether Mr Mugumya Samuel can be extradited for trial in Uganda.

Recently, Kofi Olomide committed an offence in Nairobi and he was tried and sentenced to 18 months imprisonment in Congo. So, can the minister advise us if there is a possibility of having not only Sam Mugumya, but all Ugandans incarcerated in other countries - Do we have a reciprocal arrangement where they can be brought, tried and they serve their sentences in a country where they eat food similar to what they have grown up eating? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, again I would advise that you formalise that question so that the minister can answer in a structured way. You said you would like Government to help find out where this man is. Attorney-General, do you have anything to say about the issue of the DPP, the police and Baguma? 

3.15
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and members. Regarding the issue raised by the Member, just like you, we heard of this through the papers. Yesterday, the police spokesperson denied again in the press that this person was going for extra training. Madam Speaker, we undertake to present concrete facts next week. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am still dealing with the gold. In the absence of the Minister of Finance, who is sitting in for him in this session?

3.16
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We will prepare some facts and come here with a statement on that issue on Thursday. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Foreign Affairs should come and update us on the issue of Sam Mugumya who has been in prison in Congo for the last two years. The other one will be answered when the first lady comes to handle the issue of the universities. For others, if you are interested, please formalise your questions so that they are answered in a structured way. 

Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Namungolo Primary School in Nakasongola. They are represented by hon. Wanzala Noah Mutebi and hon. Margaret Komuhangi. 

I would like to alter the Order Paper. I will allow the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to make a statement. I would also like to move item No. 6 forward - it is very short business - before we go to the other issues under item No. 3.

3.18
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, the matter of privileges of Members of Parliament takes precedence. This morning as I was entering the precincts of Parliament, I found the entire place surrounded by armed men. Even as we entered in the afternoon, some men carrying guns were again within the precincts of Parliament. I do not know whether as honourable members we are secure with guns around. Also, who is supposed to enter Parliament? 

Secondly, on the issue which the Attorney-General has responded to, he has given himself time. However, I thought it should be the Speaker to direct on the timeframe within which the Attorney-General must respond on the issue involving suspects, who are now being promoted and going for training and undermining the criminal justice system. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the ministers answer in a poor fashion, you complain. I would like to give the Attorney-General time to get all the facts and come back here to give us proper answers.

Honourable members, I do not want to frighten you but I think you know that Parliament has always been a target of terrorism. I do not know whether there is additional security but I know that we have always been a target of terrorism and that is why we have guns here. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 63 OF THE CONSTITUTION TO PRESCRIBE THE NUMBER OF CONSTITUENCIES IN UGANDA

3.20
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 63 of the Constitution to prescribe the number of constituencies in Uganda. I move this motion under Article 63 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, section 11 of the Electoral Commission Act Cap 140, and rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda: 

“WHEREAS Article 63 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to prescribe the number of constituencies for the purposes of election of Members of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS under the Parliament Elections Interim Provisions Act, Cap 141, Parliament prescribed 214 constituencies in Uganda for purposes of election of Members of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS under Article 63 (1) of the Constitution of Uganda, Uganda is divided into 296 constituencies as for now; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved and prescribed by Parliament that the number of constituencies in Uganda shall be 264.” 

I beg to move. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I am constrained to raise this issue, which touches not only the fundamental principles of the rule of law, particularly the independence of the Judiciary, but also our Rules of Procedure, especially the rule on sub judice. 

This morning, in my capacity as the Shadow Attorney-General, I received communication from a law firm called Candia & D.W. Oundo Company Advocates addressed to you. It concerns the subject matter of this very motion. The communication raises a pertinent issue – that the motion that the minister has just read and is presenting before this Parliament is a subject of Constitutional Petition No. 26 of 2016 between a one Andrew Tumusiime and the Attorney-General. I have a copy of the petition, which has been served on me, together with the letter. 

Madam Speaker, if you have not received them, I would like to lay them on the Table for your knowledge and information. I thought it would be prudent that Parliament recognises particularly the role of the Judiciary in dispute resolution, and we let this matter first to be resolved by that arm of Government without us being seen to undermine the Judiciary.

I beg to lay on the Table a copy of Constitutional Petition No. 26 of 2016 and a forwarding letter written by the law firm. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a lot of respect for the separation of powers. However, unless I am served with an injunction issued against me and this House, I will not allow anyone to interfere with the work of Parliament. (Applause) This is because it would mean that anyone who does not want us to work will go to court and file a suit and say, “We have filed a suit, so do not work”. 

If you have an injunction, serve it. I was in my office yesterday and I have been there this morning but I have not seen that letter you have talked about; I have not seen any injunction. Let the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs proceed.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker –(Mr Ssekikubo rose_)- I am the one speaking; are you raising up on a point of procedure, a point of order or what? (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: This matter is very touching because it involves some of our Members. Madam Speaker and Members who were here in the Ninth Parliament, you remember that in the course of our matter that was before the Supreme Court, an attempt was made on this Floor to change the Constitution to provide that a political party can expel a Member of Parliament and that Member loses his or her seat. That was the matter before the courts of law. We were here in this House attempting to amend the constitutional provision-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, please go in sequence; that constitutional amendment came long after the Supreme Court had taken a decision. After failing in the Supreme Court, what the Government was trying to do was to come with a new amendment. Therefore, it is not the same situation. I am very well informed on that issue. (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, over time the number of constituencies in this country has altered and the constitutional command is that these constituencies ought to be prescribed. I must say that the last time the prescription took place was in 2004 –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, our procedure requires that when a matter of that importance is being presented in the House, we must have copies of the matter on the iPads or hard copies. We are at a loss because you know the way Gen. Kahonda – I mean “Kahinda” – (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR ANYWARACH: Hon. Otafiire normally presents his issues in such a way that he will also import things which are not part of what he has prepared. Therefore, it should be paramount that we should have hard copies because you know we are also still waiting for the iPads. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is brief; for now, just listen. It is really brief.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, for emphasis, my name is Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire (Laughter) –[Members: “Not Kahonda”]- That one will speak for himself. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, this is an important matter. I must admit that there has been a process of Parliament creating counties and ipso facto by Constitution, these counties become constituencies, but the same Parliament did not prescribe the constituencies. I must admit that on my part, and my predecessors, there was an oversight. However, as you know in Parliament there are shadow ministers; if we did not see it, why didn’t they see it? (Laughter) - Hon. Katuntu was one of them –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I happened to have been the Shadow Attorney-General for five years. You have to look in the Hansard; when Parliament was creating these counties, we warned you and we are on record. The problem is that you do not listen. Even when you are given proper professional opinion, you act with impunity. I warned you that what you were doing was unconstitutional, but you did not listen. Is hon. Kahinda in order to allege that we did not warn them when we actually did and we are on the Hansard?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you warned them and it is on the Hansard, he is out of order. (Applause)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I do not quite recall –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, when that motion was moved in Parliament here, I was around and what the honourable former Shadow Attorney-General said is actually true. It is unfair for hon. Kahinda Otafiire to run away from his duties and taint the image of our shadow government as if it is the one which is responsible for his mistakes. Therefore, would it not be procedurally right for the honourable member, before he proceeds, to apologise for what he said and extract it from the Hansard?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you come here for your business, you do not have to call for support from the shadow Cabinet. Please, withdraw what you have said and proceed with the application. (Applause)

MAJ. GEN (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope you listened to what I said. (Laughter) If you heard properly, I said there was an omission on our part. I accepted responsibility and said there was omission on our part. I shared that responsibility with my colleagues who helped me with this work in the Opposition. Government is unanimous; the Opposition and the Government side are all Government and Parliament. However, if it offends the Opposition, I withdraw. 

Madam Speaker, over time, these lapses took place and we are duty-bound by the command of the Constitution to make sure that we prescribe the constituencies as we have them today. I beg to move.

3.34
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion. What we are required to do is something we ought to have done but as stated by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, we inadvertently did not do it. It is a command under Article 63 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Therefore, we are trying to validate what has actually transpired and what is transpiring. 

It is not the first time that this Parliament, or even other parliaments that subscribe to the Commonwealth parliamentary practice, undertakes retrospective actions when public interest so requires. The most important thing is for this House to weigh what we are about to do against public interest. Definitely, public interest would require that for the past parliaments which were not prescribed under the Constitution, the laws they made be upheld.

It is true that it is not a clean way of doing things, but here we are. There is nothing under the law that prohibits retrospective legislation. The only article I know about is Article 92 of the Constitution. In that article, for Uganda retrospective legislation is only prohibited in respect of court judgments as they affect parties. Otherwise, parliaments the world over, when public interest requires, do make laws that go backwards.

I stated, and I would like to repeat, that we could have done it better. However, since the situation must be rectified, under the principle of parliamentary sovereignty we have no alternative but to validate what transpired. The consequence of not doing what we are supposed to do would be that everything that was done by the past parliaments, which were not prescribed under the Constitution, would be null and void.  Would we want that? Public interest would definitely not allow that. Not only that, but some of us who are seated here will not be here. It does not only reflect on us who are here but it also goes down to the voters who gave us their votes. 

Therefore, much as we admit that it is not a neat way, we would like to say that it is a necessary way to handle the matter so that we validate what was done inaccurately. For the same reasons, honourable members, I beg that you support the motion so that we tread a proper constitutional route –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I just need clarification from the Attorney-General in respect of his last statement. He said that if we do not do it the way he would like us to do it, ugly though it is, whatever was done by the previous parliaments would be invalidated. What would be your interpretation of Article 94 (3) of the Constitution be? It states: “The presence or the participation of the person not entitled to be present or to participate in the proceedings of Parliament shall not, by itself, invalidate those proceedings”? 

MR RUKUTANA:  Thank you very much. Definitely, reading that clause you will note that it is totally different from the situation I am referring to. It would not be a mere absence of Members who are not supposed to be there; it would be the failure to comply with a mandatory provision or command of the Constitution. Therefore, the two are different.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you allow the Member to second the motion?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, for that matter, I hereby second the motion and I appeal to Members to support it overwhelmingly so that we get it out of the way. (Applause)

3.40 
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I happen to be an advocate and I am also from one of those constituencies that were divided into two. To me, it is just change of names because the location is the same. The trading centres have not moved and the voters have remained the same. Therefore, as an advocate, I would like to second the motion moved by the minister for two simple reasons.

First of all, what options do we have? There are precedents on retrospective legislation. One of the precedents, which I cannot recall now, states that if the intention of the legislator is clearly to make a retrospective legislation, it can pass. I would like to give an example and I would like my colleagues to advise me why they did not stand up to oppose it at that time. In 2006, we passed the Parliamentary Pensions Act. However, it was our intention that the Act would start working from 2001 - five years before the Act came into force. At that time, we did not get any preliminary objections from anyone. (Laughter) 

You know, lawyers can be interesting; if you do not have facts, you give your opinion; if you do not have an opinion and facts, then you just continue arguing until the judge says it is time for lunch. (Laughter) Therefore, in the circumstance, who will suffer irreparable damage if this motion passes? Who will cry foul and will have sleepless nights if this motion passes? 

I think it is in the interest of this House that we be at peace with ourselves and mind other serious business. I pray this motion passes and we proceed to transact other business. In any case, power belongs to the people and they decided to elect those of us who are here. We cannot risk moving retrospectively again to say we should have fresh elections for 76 constituencies. We need that money for health centres and other activities. Therefore, I beg to support the motion. Thank you.

3.43
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As Parliament, we are faced with a very difficult situation. Whichever way we proceed, we injure ourselves. 

With the reasons given here, if we do not approve this motion for example, it is our colleagues with whom we have already started fraternising and building team work with who will suffer. As the chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation, I would like to say that in the last one week, I have invested time to build teamwork to start our work. There are people in my team who think if they passed the ball to some other member of the team, they would score very well. They are the ones who may be affected by this motion. Definitely, on that basis, I support this motion.

Madam Speaker, I would like to be on record on where we injure ourselves. There are things that ought to have been done by Parliament and somebody does them outside and brings them to Parliament for approval. It may not be this one only; money may be picked from the Treasury and used and then a Bill is brought here for approval. Something may happen outside -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are discussing the fate of 76 colleagues. That is our discussion.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, for the record, I would like to make it clear that when it is Parliament to pass something, let it be so and not any other person outside doing things and then they bring it here for approval. Otherwise, we risk being a rubberstamp Parliament. Thank you very much.

3.45
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. One of the most difficult decisions to make is one where you are also party to the matter at hand. The motivation to protect self-interest usually overrides even the national interest.

I would like to thank the mover and the seconder of this motion for admitting that they did not do their work. I hold a different view because there are correspondences and some of them are from Cabinet. You are aware that creation of counties was a shortcut because we were never mandated to create constituencies. Therefore, the correspondences, which the two of you are aware of, say that the only way you can do it is by creating counties.

Madam Speaker, in the previous Parliament, you kept telling this Government to bring all the necessary legislation and amendments to do with elections early enough. They chose to come at the eleventh hour. You paint an image of this Parliament as an institution that is not serious. You knew you wanted to create constituencies, but you waited until it was one week to nomination and you came here to create constituencies. Now, less than a year later, you come here to admit you made mistakes as if you did not know.

Therefore, as we move to pass this motion, you should make an undertaking that you will never come back here to do shoddy work. I was in this Parliament; anything that would bring me back, I would certainly support for selfish interest. However, you should stop blackmailing Parliament and then –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, hon. Ssemujju, for giving way. I would like to provide information to my colleague that Article 63(5) of the Constitution says, “Subject to clause (1) of this Article, the commission shall review the division of Uganda into constituencies within twelve months after the publication of results of a census of the population of Uganda and may as a result re-demarcate the constituencies.”

The census was done in 2014, but the results were published in April 2016. Therefore, the only option which was available at the time when the motion came was to create counties because the results of the census had not been published by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Dr Chris Baryomunsi. Of course, you know how many times this census was postponed. I looked at the results of the last elections; you came here by polling more than 100,000 votes but we have colleagues who got 3,000 votes in a constituency of less than 10,000 voters. All these things just make us look extremely selfish. We have an opportunity to demarcate constituencies following the constitutional guidelines. Do not come here, hon. Otafiire, to say you are sorry you did not do this because of an oversight and you wish Katuntu was doing your work.

My appeal to Government through you, Madam Speaker, is that we organise ourselves properly and early enough before we go for elections. Stop mob justice in Parliament and then you come back later saying that there was an oversight. Did you want us to do your work? Were you paid to go and sleep and wake up at the eleventh hour and come here to say “Sorry, we made a mistake”? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

3.51
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the first business the learned Attorney-General is transacting in this House. My brother, let me caution you because I have been here for quite a long time; the office you hold is a professional one. Your predecessors have been legal engineers; they have not been lawyers in the true sense and that is why we are having problems like this. If they were true professionals, they would have advised Government otherwise. However, they do politics in the law. The respect you will earn in this House, especially like your immediate predecessor, is from being professional and then you will not have some of these problems.

Just imagine today, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has not even given the background to this motion. The truth is, there is a case in court challenging the legality of some of our colleagues seated in this chamber and now they run here to present a motion without reference to where the problem is. 

Let us look at the ugly side of this motion; the people to vote for this motion are the very people who are being contested in the courts. That is the ugly side of this motion. This motion presupposes that some of our colleagues are here illegally and those who are here illegally are the ones voting for the motion. 

Let me tell you one thing, I actually support this motion and I can put that on the record; I do support the motion. (Applause) However, Madam Speaker, the people on the Front Bench should do their work professionally and in the interest of this country. Sometimes when I see what hon. Ssemujju refers to as “mob justice”, I am at pains and I feel like crying because something wrong is happening and you hear people talking - it is painful! 

When we advise you, we are here as national leaders and colleagues and above all, as professionals. When we say that we do things the correct way, it is not because we hate you but that is our role as the Opposition, to make sure that you do things the correct way and we will not have this problem. Madam Speaker, from today onwards, may we have an undertaking, especially from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General, that we shall not have legal engineering in those offices.

Lastly, in the Ninth Parliament, I had to take a very painful decision of contesting the opinion of the Attorney-General in court. Why? It is because the Attorney-General had submitted that he is the one who could advise us here in Parliament and that his advice was binding. So whenever we would do anything that is not in the interest of the Executive, the Attorney-General would find a pen and sign off what we did as being illegal including the – (Member timed out.) 

3.55
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion basing on legal considerations. 

Article 63 (1) does not give a timeframe within which Parliament is supposed to prescribe the constituencies. Legally and in parliamentary terms, the word “prescribe” means to ordain or confer claim of ownership. Therefore, in my humble opinion and judgement, the minister concerned is doing this within the required timeframe. That is why section 11 of the Election Commission Act does not, in applying Article 63, state when to prescribe the constituencies.

In my humble opinion, therefore, we are within the required timeframe and I pray that we overwhelmingly support this motion.

3.57
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker. To err is human and to say sorry is divine. The Deputy Attorney-General, as seconder of the motion and indeed also the mover, has said that there was an error of omission. Therefore, I would like to implore my colleagues in Parliament from both sides to agree that it is within their mandate to make such a resolution retrospectively. 

Madam Speaker, without wasting more time, we should put the question under rule 72 of our Rules of Procedure that this debate be closed and we proceed to voting on this motion.   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do approve the motion as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: May I request all the Members to remain seated because we have other work to do.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a point of procedure. I can see that people are happy but they do not know what they have passed. (Laughter) By the way, you do not know what you have passed.
 
The procedural issue that I am raising is: What are these constituencies that you have passed? It is not a matter of saying that you have finished but you must read and understand them before you pass them. Madam Speaker should help us here because it is not just a matter of jumping. What are the constituencies that you have just approved retrospectively? 

THE SPEAKER: For the record, the constituencies are those which were created at the end of 2015 together with the municipalities – the 76 constituencies. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Otafiire has just presented his motion and now he is leaving when the Minister of Education and Sports –

THE SPEAKER: No, please, hon. Otafiire; really – (Laughter) - He should come back. Honourable members, the work of this House is for all of us and if you finish your business and run away, then it is not fair. You stay and support the Minister of Education and Sports and the other ministers. (Laughter)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF PAYMENT OF SALARIES FOR STAFF OF PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES

4.01
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Janet Kataaha Museveni):  I thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement on the status of salary payments in public universities. All public universities have paid their salaries up to the end of June 2016.

Arrears

Government has made a commitment to pay all arrears for the non-teaching staff arising out of non-inclusion in the salary enhancement for the financial year 2015/2016, which had been paid to their teaching staff counterparts. These arrears will be paid out in the second quarter of the financial year 2016/2017 in line with a resolution reached during a meeting with the non-teaching staff held on Monday, 8 August 2016.

A Single Spine Salary Structure

In a series of meetings held with representatives of the non-teaching staff on the 5, 6 and 8 August 2015, it emerged that the salary structure is not uniform across public universities and cadres. It was, therefore, recommended that tripartite technical consultations between the Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Education and Sports, and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are held to agree on how to harmonise the salary scales across all public universities, taking into consideration the issue of weights and academic qualifications. It was, therefore, agreed that the three ministries be given time to consult all the stakeholders and provide a firm position before the beginning of the second quarter of financial year 2016/2017.

Start-up Wage for the New Universities

Madam Speaker, as you may recall, Government operationalised three new public universities namely, Lira, Soroti and Kabale, effective July 2016, as part of Government’s commitment to increase access to higher education and training.

Due to financial constraints, the start-up wage of these universities had initially been curved out of the enhancement package of Shs 78.5 billion for the existing public universities. This caused some discontent among both teaching and non-teaching staff in those institutions. 

In the meeting held on 8 August 2016, it was agreed that Government shall avail separate funding for these new universities within financial year 2016/2017.

Salaries for July 2016

Madam Speaker, Government has already released funds for wages for the first quarter for financial year 2016/2017 to all the public universities. These funds include the component of enhancement of salaries for both teaching and non-teaching staff. Accounting officers in these universities have been advised to pay the salaries for the month of July as consultations among the ministries of public service, education and sports, and finance and public universities continue.

Government is committed to improving equitable access, quality, relevant skills, training and research through various interventions at all our universities. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.06
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to hon. Janet Kataaha Museveni, whose statement is very brief, and there are about three issues that I would like to ask the minister to clarify. 

One, the honourable minister is a member of the Cabinet and the President, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta, during the 2016 general elections campaigns, said very clearly to the masses of Uganda that it is going to be his preoccupation to see to it that Uganda attains middle-income status by 2020. The countries that have attained this level of development the President promised, for example Japan, China and the US, have invested in education and skills development. This statement does not tell us how prepared Government is to invest in education so that we are able to attain a middle-income status by 2020 -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the question was not about a middle-income status.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I am driving my point home. Salaries of teachers are very key for any education system to succeed. I happen to be a member of the Committee on National Economy and we have been borrowing money for things that do not matter for this country –(Interjections)- I do not want to mention them now. Madam Speaker, my question is: why isn’t Government determined to make sure that teachers, who work morning to evening –(Interruption)

MR MUHEIRWE: Is it in order for the Member holding the Floor to refer to the teaching staff and yet the paper is talking about non-teaching staff?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us focus on the question which the minister came to answer. You will deal with other things during the budget session, which is soon coming. Please, conclude.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We borrowed money here for stabilising the exchange rate, and I would like to think that the teaching staff and non-teaching staff in any education system cannot be separated because they feed into each other –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I have had the chance to speak to some of the representatives of the non-teaching staff that attended the meeting that the honourable minister is referring to. The information I would like to provide is that there is no agreement between them and the ministry. 

Two, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development confessed, in the same meeting, that as for the 2016/2017 budget, Government cannot do anything regarding the request of the non-teaching staff.

I actually believe that it would be prudent to have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development come with a statement regarding the request of non-teaching staff in public universities. This is because the minister was very blunt and he said that Government cannot get that money within the current financial year. Thank you very much.

MR NZOGHU: I am concluding, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Your four minutes are up.

4.12
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had a point to raise in national interest but when I found out that the minister was scheduled to present a statement, I decided to come in after her. 

First of all, I would like to thank the minister for bringing this statement. However, in this statement the minister is trying to answer the question about the ongoing strike but still remains silent about the strike; is it stopping because this statement has come and now Government has a commitment to pay? Are we going to see the public universities open? I think this statement needed to come out clearly on that, and that was my point.

Relating to what one of the Members was stating here and from the statements that came out in the media, the political leadership seems to want to help out the non-teaching staff and yet the technical staff seem to be adamant about the payment. I think that also needs to be clarified, so that we know that as leaders we are speaking the same language with the technical staff. Thank you.

4.13
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought that the minister would have given us clear timelines, given the fact that students are not learning. It is almost like there is a crisis in the country and I do not think we can afford to take it in a laissez faire way. We probably need to be given timelines that we should be looking to, which would in turn give those people hope to pick up their tools and begin work.

Madam Speaker, my second concern is about the three new universities that were supposed to be operationalised, one of which is Soroti University. Of course, you know that I represent Soroti District. I would like to get clarification from the minister on the statement, “before the beginning of the second quarter”. Can we have a conclusive word on the timing because the people of Soroti have been waiting for this university? They expected it to start but it has not started. The communication is still, as far as I know, not very clear to them. 

Would you like to give us a timeline and not a general timeline saying, “beginning of the next quarter”? Within this financial year, when exactly do you think this will work out because I know that the budget has already been passed? It does not give us serious hope as a people. Thank you.

4.15
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the minister for giving us this brief. However, I am a bit perturbed with the way the statement has come out. In bullet No. 2 about arrears, the minister mentioned that the Government made a commitment to pay arrears of non-teaching staff during the financial year 2015/2016. The minister went ahead and said that in March, it emerged that the salary structure was not uniform across all public universities and cadres.

Madam Speaker, I find it very disturbing if this is coming up as an emerging issue and yet the issue of injustice as far as payment in Uganda is concerned is not a new thing. Many Members have stood on this Floor and said that we need a salary commission to address this problem. Even as a Committee on Public Service and Local Government in the previous Parliament, we invited the Ministry of Education and discussed this issue concerning the non-teaching staff. I am now surprised that the minister is saying it is an emerging issue. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have a problem here. Article 83(1)(g) says, “A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament-”

THE SPEAKER: What section are you reading? Where are you?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Article 83(1), paragraph (g) says, “A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament- (g) if that person leaves the political party for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament to join another party or to remain in Parliament as an independent member.”

Madam Speaker, my colleague who is speaking is a member of UPC and she is seated on this side. I see hon. Betty Amongi, who is also a member of UPC and she was elected in Oyam. I have discovered that some UPC members are sitting on this side and I can see hon. Betty Amongi sitting that side. The point of order I am raising is this: is hon. Amongi in order to sit on the wrong side? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is the Speaker’s responsibility to ensure that all Members are seated; so I have allowed her to sit on that side. (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Santa Alum for giving way. The information I would like to give to honourable members is that public universities are on strike because of the inequality in pay. You will find that the non-teaching staff at Makerere University are being paid differently from those in Gulu University or any other public university yet they have the same qualifications. We need to harmonise their pay. Why is it that this inequality exists in public universities? Thank you.

4.20
MR ANDREW AJA BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as we are happy that we got new public universities in our places, like Kabale University, indeed it is serious because there are no studies going on at the moment since both teaching and non-teaching staff are on strike. 

One big issue that I would like the Ministry of Education to handle with the Ministry of Public Service is these new universities. Nobody is going to receive the money that is going to be sent to these new universities as salaries because there are no people on the payroll. Government has not yet included anyone on the Public Service payroll. Therefore, we need to move quickly to make sure that both teaching and non-teaching staff are put on the payroll so that when you send these monies, they are received. 

That is the biggest hurdle for Kabale University; they need to be on the payroll so that they know that Government is with them. As for now, they are still considering themselves as not being paid by Government because they are not yet on the payroll. Thank you.

4.21
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I salute the Minister of Education and Sports for this initiative of the single spine salary structure. This is because it ensures a uniform salary structure for all categories of workers. The challenge that we have been grappling with is huge remuneration discrepancies amongst workers. I pray that it is rolled out to other sectors or ministries.

However, I take issue with the response that was made by the line Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when he was tasked to explain the whereabouts of the arrears. He said that he cut the funds that were meant for them in order to pay for the three universities that have just been mentioned in the statement. In my view, this is budgetary indiscipline and ministries should desist from this kind of indiscipline. 

This statement falls short of mentioning the additional funds or a supplementary budget that will provide for the aforementioned second quarter funds that will be paid as arrears to the non-teaching staff. In my opinion, these ministries should be tasked to exhibit a high level of budgetary discipline. They should also mention where the source of funds for this second quarter, which is being pledged, will come from. (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Nambeshe, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that under the Budget Act, and indeed even before a motion is brought for the creation of a public university, there is always the issue of financial implications. Government has always assured this Parliament that funds are readily available to operationalise the new universities. 

Therefore, the surprise that you are expressing is the same that all of us that were seated in this House also expressed. This is because assurances were given that funds were available to operationalise these new universities but they have now turned around and apologised for cutting Shs 78.5 billion from their funds to cater for the three new universities. 

The information to you and to the Minister of Education and Sports is that this matter was addressed during the creation of the new universities; therefore, it should not be an excuse for spending Shs 75.8 billion to cater for the new universities.

THE SPEAKER: Let me remind Members to please mention their names and constituencies for the Hansard. 

4.24
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me a chance to speak. I would like to first thank the Minister of Education and Sports because she has at least given us a paper to begin with. The other day, we had a report from the Minister of Internal Affairs, which really lost the case. I would like to thank you, hon. Janet Museveni, for presenting this paper. 

Madam Speaker, while I appreciate this, as a Parliament there are a lot of things that we are trying to legalise retrospectively. Even when warnings are there, we continue making mistakes. Hon. Janet Museveni is new in the ministry but the other ministers have been there and the Committee of Education warned. Until when shall we continue lamenting in this Parliament when there are procedurally laid down issues for us to follow and have Government work on?  

We have one Government. The Minister of Education and Sports and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sit in the same Cabinet. Why are there discrepancies in agreeing on what to do for Ugandans? 

I have also witnessed the issue which hon. Aja mentioned. I finished paying school fees for some students in Kabale University and those who are doing internship –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have half a minute to conclude. 

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Those doing internship are not working because they have not been enrolled in the Government structure. Therefore, my appeal to the Minister of Education and Sports, who has started realigning the ministry, is to make sure that these mistakes are addressed at this level and not brought to the Speaker and the Floor of Parliament.

4.27
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Madam Speaker, I would also like to add my voice and thank the Minister of Education and Sports for the presentation. Unfortunately, the paper does not give us a way forward. 

There are two issues here: salary and strikes. Right now, non-teaching staff in all public universities are on strike. I expected the minister to come here and give us a plan that she has put in place to ensure that these workers go back to work. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should also clearly inform us on when they are going to pay these arrears. To date, the staff are still seated. 

Madam Speaker, you will also note that the universities will remain closed unless these issues are handled. Therefore, we call upon the minister to give us a work plan on how she is going to handle this matter. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two papers on education, so I will ask hon. Edward Makmot and hon. Thomas Tayebwa to speak. The others will speak on the second paper. Please, use two minutes. 

4.29
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to be brief. I would like to add my voice to the issue of arrears and inequity in payments. 

I just want to clearly say that this is a matter that I previously litigated in Canada. In Canada they have the Pay Equity Act that constantly reviews issues of payment- whether people are being paid equally based on their experience or qualifications, among others. This issue should not only come to this House when there is a strike. Rather, it should be continuously dealt with. Unless there is a structure in place similar to what Canada has - the Pay Equity Act - I think we are going to continue having ministers coming here and dealing with the same problem. 

The other issue that is envisaged here is that of a minimum wage. At the end of the day, we need to seriously think about this and the relevant ministry should come out to address this issue. We also need a tribunal to deal with these issues so that Parliament does not have to sit and handle tribunal matters. We should deal with bigger issues. Thank you. That is my submission.

4.31
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was privileged to have attended a meeting where the President promised Makerere University professors a salary increment. During that time, I was the chairman of the finance committee of Makerere University. 

Madam Speaker, this came about because of the brain drain we were getting in the country when we nearly lost all our professors of mass communication and technology. Our argument to the President was simple- it was because they were being paid little money. He asked us for the best way to rescue the situation and we explained it to him. He then said that he was going to increase their salary. 

However, the President did not know that we were running a single spine salary structure. When we went back to Makerere University, the administrative staff or non-teaching staff also came up in arms and complained. A professor who is at M3, for example, was at the same salary scale with a director who is also at M3. They claimed to be on the same structure and at the same level so we could not increase some staff salaries and leave out others. They complained and the President also came and said, “No, we are also going to sort out your issues as non-teaching staff” and indeed, he came in and they worked on that increment. 

The progress in terms of negotiations between Government and the non-teaching staff is going on well and I would not want it to be spoilt here in Parliament. As we talk, the associations of non-teaching staff in various universities are holding their general assemblies –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude so that the minister is aware of what is happening.

MR TAYEBWA: They are meeting to discuss the resolutions they reached with Government yesterday. If we come here and condemn, we would be telling them that as Parliament, we are not satisfied with what they negotiated with Government yesterday and yet the people I spoke to were positive. They do not mind about what we are discussing here as long as they know that Government is committed to fulfilling whatever they discussed. 

I would, therefore, like to urge Members to support Government on what it resolved with the non-teaching staff yesterday so that they know that Parliament is supporting what Government put up. Otherwise, we might bring up voices that will spoil whatever good was achieved yesterday. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.34
MAJ. (RTD) DAVID GUMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The two-page statement is extremely simplified for us - simple English with facts. The non-teaching staff of public universities are on strike and paragraph two simply states the agreement between the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ugandans who are on strike. In my view, paragraph two needs no debate. 

In paragraph three, it says that the non-uniformity of salaries will be cured and the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are set to discuss. Paragraph four answers what hon. Aja was complaining about. 

Therefore, my view is that, honourable members, we need patience. (Interjections) Honourable members must have the indulgence to agree with the minister’s statement and pass it without much ado. That is my view. So, I call for your support to pass it without any alteration. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the chair of the Committee on Education.

4.37
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the minister for the statement. Much as it is brief, it entails all that is required. 

I would also like to applaud the minister for the fact that Government has made a commitment to pay the arrears in the second quarter. However, I would like to request that it comes to pass as has been stated. This is because some of the monies that have been paid off have been curved out of the Shs 78.5 billion. 

I would also like to appreciate the fact that there was a discovery that there were imbalances in the structure. Since this has been discovered, I pray that the tripartite technical teams that are going to sit expedite the process so that what has been put up between the ministries of education, public service and finance results in harmony. I pray that the process is expedited so that these people continue getting what is required.

However, much as there is a very good initiative to pay the new universities, we are aware that the Shs 78.5 billion was curved out of funds meant for the other existing universities. I would like –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: A minute for the Chairperson of the Education Committee.

MS GALIWANGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The recovery of the monies that have already been curved out should be noted and this money put back so that other universities do not suffer. In addition, the consultations that are ongoing between the three ministries should endeavour to ensure that the process goes on and there is no breakage. 

To the honourable minister, I pray that the issue is sorted out once and for all and in good time, so that we do not get strikes over and over again. That is my prayer. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Minister of Finance to give us commitments on these issues before the Minister of Education comes back. 

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues to thank the Minister of Education and Sports for the statement. I have two points to make before she comes to respond to a few other issues. 

One, we do agree with the statement that she has made, that the arrears for the non-teaching staff of Shs 28.5 billion will be paid in the second quarter in October. It is simply one month and a half from now. The people who attended the meeting yesterday agreed to that fact and I am happy, listening to hon. Tayebwa, that they are actually now discussing what we agreed on yesterday. 

The second issue relate to the one raised by hon. Aja about Kabale University. The delay is not on Government side; it is actually on the side of the university itself. They are sorting out issues to do with the payroll and as soon as they are sorted out –(Interruption) 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much for giving way. You have mentioned figures but you have not mentioned the number of people who are affected by this. It is very important for us to hear from you about the money and for how many people. 

Secondly, where is the money going to come from? You need to also talk about the issue of the gap - the variation between those that are highest and lowest paid. These are important things that we shall use as undertakings and assurances when we gauge what you should have implemented at the appropriate time. Can you please tell us?

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, we have information from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that every 28th of the month, all public servants are paid. We are talking about arrears and he has never given a reason as to why this came about so that we can get an assurance that this is not going to be a recurrent problem.

We are talking about these arrears being paid but will this continue? What was the problem and how is it going to be sorted out? I think that clarification will help a lot.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who are requesting for a commitment from the minister. We would like to know the source. I remember when we passed the Public Finance Management Act we agreed that during every budgeting process we must know what we need to do in that particular year. This is the first quarter; this money was known about but was not budgeted for. What activity are you going to suppress and supplement? Is this a good budgeting process? 

We changed the law for the benefit of this country and stated that the money we collect should be budgeted for properly. I know that according to the law, all the sectors that budgeted and appropriated have received money. They have committed suppliers and have to pay them. Won’t it affect this process? What are the implications? We need to know them.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much –(Interjections)– The Speaker has given me two minutes, please allow me to finish. Thank you. The issue of Kabale is being sorted out and as soon that is done - (Interruption)

MR BARYAYANGA: I come from Kabale Municipality and I represent the people who are really suffering. I thought that it is the Ministry of Public Service that would go to the university and interview non-teaching and teaching staff to see whether they qualify to be on the payroll. This has not yet happened. For someone to be on the Government payroll, you must know whether they qualify or not. Otherwise, we are going to have a scenario of ghost teachers and ghost workers in the university because you do not know who is on the payroll and who is not. I would like you to clarify whether it is the university’s problem or that of the Ministry of Public Service.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, hon. Baryayanga. The issue you are raising, I can confirm to you, is being sorted out. We are in touch with the chairperson of the council, hon. Manzi Tumubweine, and as you know I also have some interest in that university. Therefore, we are following it up and we shall continue doing so. It will be sorted -(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Honourable minister, as a Minister of Finance, you know that we debated the budget; where are you going to get money for a supplementary? Can you clarify to the House where you are going to get money to pay the arrears and the salary increment? Yesterday, I saw the non-teaching staff spitting fire. This is just a document. Where are you going to get that money? Also, clarify on the issue of the supplementary.

CAPT. MUKULA: Honourable Minister of Education, I am trying to help you out so that you do not come here again. One, the accounting officers in these various universities are not serious. There is a possibility, and I could be 70 per cent correct, that money is budgeted for and sent but there is a diversion made. There is also a poor attitude towards non-teaching staff. They say, “We shall pay these people next time”. That could be the problem. So we need to check it out as well.

MR BAHATI: The second last issue is the one raised by the Shadow Minister for Finance, hon. Akol, regarding arrears. The arrears we are referring to for non-teaching staff came about as a result of an increment for teaching staff. When we increased the salaries for teaching staff, we were also required to raise salaries for the non-teaching staff. We agreed to enhance their salaries as a result of an increment for the teaching staff. That created an obligation for the arrears that we are talking about of Shs 28.5 billion.

Madam Speaker, in the interest of this House, it cannot be possible to answer the question asked by hon. Fungaroo, that I provide a list of all the non-teaching staff that we are going to pay arrears to. Maybe I have to produce a list but it cannot be now. However, the amount of money is Shs 28.5 billion, which we are going to work out. 

Some people are asking, if we do not have the money in the budget, where will we get it from? Colleagues, you will remember that we provided here that Government can spend up to three per cent of the approved budget in supplementaries and come and inform the House if there are emergencies and conditions that we must fulfil. Therefore, there is nothing that we will do that is not within the law. We are not going to break the law to pay the non-teaching staff; we will pay them and we will do it according to the law.

It is not true that we do not care about non-teaching staff. We have been working with them. We agreed with them and we committed ourselves to increase their salaries. We have done that. We also committed ourselves to pay them the arrears in this financial year and we are going to do it in the next quarter. We value the contribution that the teaching and the non-teaching staff are making. 

Madam Speaker, my last point is about what hon. Nzoghu said, that he appreciates our interest in having Uganda achieve a middle-income status by 2020. Thank you very much for that interest. I request that you give us space next week on the Order Paper, Madam Speaker, to discuss this issue so that everybody is part of this momentum and vision and so that we can bring hon. Nzoghu on board. Thank you very much for the support you are giving us in that direction.

4.52
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Janet Kataaha Museveni): Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify on a few of the questions because hon. Bahati has already clarified on many of them and hon. Tayebwa helped on some others.

Going back to hon. Nzoghu, he asked if Government is prepared every time it takes on or opens new universities, why do we have a problem like this. I would like to say that it is indeed because Government is prepared to promote education in the country that it is trying to give increments in salaries. This does not mean that people were working without salaries. They were working and being paid salaries but Government is trying to promote our staff in these universities by making an effort to give them an increment so that education can be promoted.

The second question was about why I am not addressing the strike. We had a commitment yesterday in our last meeting with the non-teaching staff of these universities and they requested for a commitment letter. That commitment letter was supposed to get to them today so that they can then do their part. That is why, as hon. Tayebwa said, the assembly is going on right now so that they can conclude this strike, and I believe that they will conclude it because they got the letter today. I am hoping -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Minister of Education and Sports, for giving way. The three new public universities -Lira, Soroti and Kabale - became effective in July 2016 and the start-up wage that was used for these universities is the money that had been meant for salary enhancement. Can the minister explain to this Parliament where the money to continue financing these three universities will come from? 

The universities became effective and there was no money, so you encroached on the money for the enhancement. This was a start-up wage but you will have to continue –(Interjections)- That is what the statement says, hon. Bahati. Please, allow the minister to explain where the money to run these universities will come from, now that in order to sustain them you are just encroaching on money meant for other things. 

MS MUSEVENI: Madam Speaker, I have a list of these universities and all of them have received their first quarter funds that were advanced, including Soroti, Lira and Kabale. The problem comes in with a university like Kabale, which had salary arrears of about five months. When it became a public university, it is assumed that Government would now cover all the debts that the university had, but the money they received in their first quarter could not balance the debts they had. Therefore, they have problems even up to now. However, the universities -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow the minister to complete? We have two other statements. Are you informing the minister?

MR AGABA: Yes. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the minister for giving way. I would like to provide some information that will maybe help to explain the current situation.

It is true that in trying to provide education in different regions, the Government has taken on universities that were formerly either community universities or totally private universities. Kabale University is one of them and others include Mountains of the Moon University, Muni University in West Nile, Soroti University and others –(Mr Okupa rose_)– I am on the Floor and I am familiar with the foundation of Soroti University. I think better than anybody else -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like to give correct information about Soroti University. Government did not take it up from an old school; it is a new establishment. I come from there. You may have some little knowledge about Soroti but I have 100 per cent knowledge about Teso.

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for the information except  that it is not different from the information I am giving. Some of the universities have been taken on by Government from a purely private orientation or community setting. Some, like Soroti University, started from zero and they are constructing afresh. Therefore, the input of Government in terms of finances into Soroti University, which is being constructed from zero, is different from the Government financial input into Mountains of the Moon University, which is being taken on from where it was.

Where is the contention? Just like Kabale and others, these private universities are not being given to Government because the communities would like to give them to Government. In actual sense, the private owners have failed to manage them. They have five to 10 months’ salary arrears and other internal failures. As such, they offer them to Government to help to manage them.

We may barrage the Government on its spending in the universities and whether they will find the money, but I thought we needed a good understanding that Government is also picking them up in a crippled stage and is taking them on to save the face of Government –(Mr Ssekikubo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, please let us finish this matter.

MR SSEKIKUBO: The issue is that Shs 78.5 billion was budgeted for and now the three universities have been operationalised, encroaching on this Shs 78.5 billion. Where will the money be obtained from to enable the running of the old universities plus the new ones? That is the question that the honourable minister is requested to answer.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. The funding gap that we have committed to give to the universities will be got through a supplementary.

MS MUSEVENI: About salary scales that are not harmonised, somebody also tried to answer that. However, this comes from the fact that some of these universities, as you have heard, were privately owned and they had their own scales for salaries. Now when you find a warden in Makerere paid a different amount of money from the one in Kabale. 

The non-teaching staff have problems and they want their salaries to be harmonised. As such, we would like to have that harmonised. It is a process that has to be taken on by the three ministries - education, finance and public service - as I said in my statement. We will try to harmonise the salary scales so that any person at the same level in any university can go to any other university and be paid the same amount of salary. 

Regarding Kabale University, I believe I have really answered the question.

Hon. Ssekikubo was asking about when the strike is going to end. I have also answered that; I hope the strike will end on Thursday so that universities can open up for students to go back to school. That is the word I have heard from them and since Government answered all their queries, I am hoping that they will also do their part. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OPERATION OF BRIDGE INTERNATIONAL ACADEMIES IN UGANDA

5.04
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Janet Kataaha Museveni): Madam Speaker, I submit to Parliament a statement on the operations of the Uganda Bridge International Academies. This is in response to a question asked under Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament by hon. Rwabushaija Namubiru, who is a Workers’ Representative. 

Indeed, our ministry found that most of the submissions about the schools by hon. Rwabushaija Namubiru were true and deserved attention. The schools started in 2013 and are located at 63 sites, out of which only one was licensed by Kumi Municipal Council. The schools’ legal status was not established except for the one at the Kumi Municipal Council site. The schools never underwent the criteria for registering and licensing international schools.

My ministry has, however, been closely monitoring the schools prior to the time the matter was raised here in Parliament. It was found out that the infrastructure of the schools is still in a bad shape and yet the interim period required for the schools to have permanent structures expired. There were also reports about teachers without professional training; non-conformity to the Uganda curriculum and curriculum delivery methods; the instructional materials used could not promote teacher-pupil interaction; and worst of all, the report showed poor hygiene and sanitation, which put the lives and safety of the school children in danger.

In an attempt to act on the poor conditions of the schools, the ministry consulted the local governments. The ministry was informed of the efforts made by the respective local governments in executing their mandate under the Second Schedule, Part 2 and Part 4 of the Local Governments Act, 1997. It spells out the functions which district councils and lower local governments are responsible for, among which nursery and primary education fall.

The ministry was aware that only Kumi Municipal Council had initiated the licensing process and, therefore, wished to monitor the standards in the interim period. However, upon receiving technical inspection reports about many sites from ministry staff, the National Curriculum Development Centre and area school inspectors, the ministry has decided to enforce Section 36(4) of the Education (Pre-Primary, Primary and Post-Primary) Act, 2008 and close all the school sites under the management of Uganda Bridge International Academies, particularly because of the danger from poor hygiene and sanitation on the lives and safety of the innocent children.

However, given that this is the middle of the term, it would disrupt the children already enrolled at these schools. It was, therefore, agreed that the schools remain open until the end of this term. Thereafter, the schools will be closed until the ministry is satisfied that they have put in place what is required to operate a school as per the ministry’s guidelines – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is giving a statement. Why don’t you wait until she finishes?

MS MUSEVENI: The Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) and town clerks of the respective districts hosting Uganda Bridge International Academies have been advised to lend support to parents as they arrange for the transfer of the pupils that will be affected to existing neighbouring Universal Primary Education (UPE) schools.

The ministry will continue to strengthen inspection of schools and collaborations between the local governments and the centre in view of lifting the education standards in the country. You can follow this through the annexes, which are attached to this statement. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Before I ask hon. Rwabushaija whether she has any supplementary question, join me in welcoming the pupils and teachers of Mustard Seed Day Care, Nursery and Primary School, Nakaseke. They are represented by hon. Luttamaguzi and hon. Najjuma. They are a bit short but they are somewhere there. Please, stand up from wherever you are. You are welcome. (Applause)

5.10
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Madam Speaker, allow me to appreciate the submission by the Minister of Education and Sports, hon. Janet Kataaha Museveni. I appreciate that something has been done and I would like to commend her for the steps so far taken in addressing the issues that I raised regarding the said schools. 

However, this is an eye opener. There could be many other schools, which masquerade. Many times, when we hear the word “international”, then we think that they are above our level as Ugandans. My prayer is that the Ministry of Education and Sports, and particularly the department of inspectorate, should monitor these schools. The problems are glaring and the issues that are being raised are very pertinent. If we are not careful, we are bound to compromise with the quality standards in our schools.

I also pray that we all strive to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education in order to promote life-long learning opportunities for the children of Uganda.  I pray that we follow what is enshrined in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), particularly goal No. 4, which is pertinent as far as maintaining the quality of education in Uganda is concerned. I thank the minister once again.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the last Parliament, we had a comprehensive debate here on a motion brought by hon. Kabahenda on the quality of schools, infrastructure and standards. It was very comprehensive and we made some resolutions. Members should take an interest in that Hansard. 

5.12
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this report. As I was entering the House, I met people who were lobbying me to come and reject this report. That is very unfortunate because if a minister comes to Parliament to say these schools are substandard, there is no sanitation, the buildings have no lightening arrestors and conductors and yet we have people in Parliament lobbying for us to reject the statement, I think we may need to find means of dealing with such phenomena in the rules. (Applause)

For heaven’s sake, any Government cannot be out of its senses to close schools. There must be a reason. Just ask yourselves, why only that one. We know of some schools that are under trees but Government does not hurry to close them; why these others?

Members should also know that the international director for these schools came to visit the schools in Uganda. He was arrested and ended up at a police station for funny activities with our young children, before he fled and went back to United Kingdom. I, therefore, urge that this report by the Minister of Education and Sports, hon. Janet Museveni, be supported by Members of this House if we are to set standards. (Applause)

The only question that I need answered is: why these changes now? I made a statement in the media when the Minister for Education and Sports was appointed. I said, “Now, we will see changes in education.” We can now see schools being closed, the issues of teacher’s arrears - These are problems we have been talking about in and out during the last Parliament. We hope with the First Lady in that ministry, she will mop up all these areas we have been speaking about.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, when someone is in the kitchen preparing food, people in the sitting room should be courteous to wait for the food being prepared. I am very confident that the Minister of Education and Sports in this country sits in Cabinet, and that is the kitchen of Uganda politics, and she is also First Lady for your information. (Laughter) Therefore, I stand on behalf of the people of Aruu to support these initiatives and urge the minister to stand firm as we roll out in other areas to see that the education sector in this country improves once and for all. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.15
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As Parliament, we are very grateful to hon. Rwabushaija because she has raised this issue and indeed, the Minister of Education and Sports has acted.

However, we should try our level best to strengthen various departments in the Ministry of Education and Sports, especially, the inspectorate. Madam Speaker, a school that registered in 2004, 2013, 2014 and has 63 school branches in various parts of this country clearly means that nobody was inspecting.

The issue is not about the hygiene or the buildings, but even the content - what was being given to our children. These schools come up and start teaching our children western lifestyles like homosexuality. I think we should go deep and find out what was being taught in these schools that were mushrooming –(Interruption)

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you very much. There is a general weakness of the monitoring systems in the Ministry of Education and Sports. Members of Parliament have seen that His Excellency is being over worked. Recently, we saw the President in Nakawuka Health Centre III. Such things should not be done by the President. Supervision should be done by the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) and some other Government officials but not the President. 

Therefore, the Ministry of Education and Sports should strengthen their monitoring systems so that we do not see the President on the scene every time doing such kinds of things like he did in Nakawuka Health Centre III. Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, given the fact that they are saying that it is only the Kumi school which was registered, I request the Minister of Education and Sports to go and find out the syllabus which that school is using, so that we can know. We may find that the syllabus does not tally with our cultural norms.

Finally, what has been done by the Ministry of Education and Sports should be the yardstick that should apply even to other schools. We have heard about many Madarasa schools being closed. The moment they reach there and they find that they have some inadequacies and lack a, b, c, d, there and then Madarasa schools are closed. Why are we shifting goalposts? If the facilities were inadequate, why didn’t we close as we did to Madarasa schools? We do not want to send a message that when it comes to some schools, then you do it automatically and close but when it comes to other schools, you give them ample time to prepare and make other arrangements. Madam Speaker, thank you very much.

5.20
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and thank hon. Rwabushaija for initiating the process. I would like to thank the minister for the efforts she has so far put in this sector because we have really seen her work and handle the issues firmly.

We welcome the idea of closing these schools. Madam Speaker, there are very many schools out there and some of their proprietors are taking Ugandans for granted. They think that as long as they come and say they have put up a school, they are doing Ugandans a favour and kids will come, whether there are facilities or not, and pay school fees. These people are taking advantage of these kids. This is welcome action that some schools should be closed. I would like to also thank you for being a mother and for not closing the schools midterm because then, the children would have faced problems.

The main problem is inspection. People will draw allowances and claim they are going for inspection and yet they go and sit with the district officials at their desks and write reports. Honourable minister, when these reports come, you should send other people to crosscheck them because that is where the problems have been. You think you have inspection reports when people have just sat at their desks and manufactured them.

I would like to say that there is hope and we can see light at the end of the tunnel. We believe we will see improvement in the education sector. Thank you.

5.23
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the President for appointing hon. Kataaha to this key ministry. It is a very sensitive ministry and with this appointment, Members, you will see how we will transform this country. We are yet to see great improvement in education. 

On the issue of school inspection, I would like to say that according to the minister’s information, the key reason they proposed to close the schools was because of hygiene and sanitation, among others.

I would like to beg that the inspectorate department of Ministry of Education and Sports, especially at district and county levels, even sub-counties, be given transport. Some education and health inspectors are there but without motorcycles. If we give the health and education inspectors transport and facilitation, with the minister and dedicated staff we are going to see an improvement. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.24
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Rwabushaija for bringing this issue before the House. 

As a Member of Parliament from Kumi, I have been taken aback because I was not aware of the existence of this school in my district. Perhaps, it is on paper but in actual sense, it is still at preparation stages waiting to start its operations. Therefore, this can only point to the fact that maybe these schools have not been doing the right thing. 

Honourable minister, I also would like to acknowledge that you have started on the right footing. I know that with the type of woman you are, you would not want to let this ministry stay the way it is. We would like to commend your efforts thus far. However, I would like to use this as a challenge. Whereas we are using this as an eye opener, I know that there are many private schools, which have very good performance and quality standards of education. However, there are also those which are operating in sham environments and they even have no playgrounds. 

Madam Speaker, many of our private schools in Uganda do not operate within a real school or learning setting for an average pupil. I was, however, perturbed a little bit when I went to Ethiopia and I saw that most of the teachers aspire to teach in public schools and most of the children want to go to public schools because the quality is very good.

Therefore, I would to draw the attention of the minister to the disparity between the private schools, where we send our children as Members of Parliament and the affluent society of Uganda, and the UPE schools. The disparity is so big that it requires more attention and real work. I wanted to use this as an opportunity, Madam Minister, to challenge you so that by the time you leave that office, Uganda will have transformed so that private schools become secondary and people do not aspire to take their children to them.

I also know many schools where inspection is very poor and the amount of money parents pay is enormous. All these happen as if there is no inspection or as if there is no department responsible for that investigation.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for making reference to the other older report we had before this House. It is now a policy matter. I know that the Mama that we have there will take up these recommendations to make the quality of education admirable for our children and will put our country on a better footing. 

Uganda, as we know, is a model in terms of introducing universal education at O’Level and primary level. Therefore, we should go another step in transforming these public schools to model schools, compared to private schools that we mostly like to take our children to. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.28
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Madam Speaker, I would also like to add my voice in thanking the Minister of Education and Sports for the report. I would like to appreciate the fact that she did it in record time. We have always asked questions here and the answers do not come for years. This is a credit to hon. Janet Museveni.

Madam Speaker, I have had a chance to go ahead of the report and there is the issue of children being handled by suspicious people who come in the name of international funders. Parents have already been conned of money. In this report, it says that for early child development, children are paying Shs 130,000 and Shs 150,000 for uniform and meals. They also pay Shs 85,000 and Shs 160,000 for primary level.

Madam Speaker, I have a home in Tororo and just around Rubongi, we have one of these schools. When this school started, they promised free education for the children. I would like to inform the Minister of Education and Sports that the inspectorate sections of our districts are very lowly funded. Even when they go to the UPE schools, they wait until the UPE funds have gone to schools and they go and tell the headmasters, “How do I go back? Get me something.”

I know that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development now sends money directly to the schools. If the headmasters do not want that inspection, they give the inspector “something” and the inspector writes what they think favours the headmaster. You have a lot of work to do to unearth this. When these schools came in the name of international schools, this became an area where the inspectors are able to do whatever they want. 

Madam Speaker, our children are not learning using the curriculum of Uganda. As we plan to move them to UPE, they are just going to begin from square one. This report was done in July 2016. I think we should hurry up and identify those places, which are doing badly, and begin the process of moving the children to better schools. I thank you.

5.31
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. We are going to learn very many lessons from this but as Ugandans, we need to do a lot and it should not be only for the Ministry of Education and Sports but also for the other ministries.

Honourable minister, I would like to inform you that there are many schools that do not measure up to the standard required by the Ministry of Education and Sports. There are some schools that are established in people’s houses and you find that classes are in people’s bedrooms and bathrooms. 

Our pupils continue going to such schools because they initially charge low rates, and parents like that because they believe they are poor. I would like to tell the minister that the operation that you have begun, “operation hakuna muchezo”, should go as far as people’s homes to find out which schools have been established there.

Secondly, we have had a problem with inspectors of schools. These inspectors are informed on notice about the minister going to their areas and then they prepare themselves. This time round, I request the minister to make impromptu visits when the headmasters and members of the boards of governors are not aware. You will find out very many things that you do not know.

Lastly, I do not know who gave licences to the proprietors of these schools. If you find out that somebody does not meet the standards, why can’t we revoke such a licence so that we enforce discipline in some of these people who come to introduce other cultures, which do not conform to the cultures of Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.33
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Islands, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I come from the islands and this discussion is an eye opener. We are talking about inspectors; as a teacher, I normally have a term called “coca cola inspection”. Coca Cola inspection means that the inspector informs the headmaster that he or she is coming to their school next week and they should therefore prepare their teachers. The inspector comes but only drinks soda and goes away without finding out whether there are lesson plans and schemes of work. 

The issue of mushrooming private schools is an issue that the minister should take up. I request the minister to forget about staying in Kampala because her work must be at the districts so that she can find out what is taking place. Very many Government schools have been closed and these mushrooming private schools are taking over. As my colleague has asked, who is licensing these schools? Sometimes, you find a private school with a boarding section and a papyrus reed separates the girls from the boys. What happens in these schools is something that should be investigated. I call upon the ministry and also other people concerned to act. 

For some of these, it is not an issue of funding but it is people who are no longer patriotic to their country. However much you give money, you still find people licensing schools and yet the syllabus they use is not the syllabus that we use. So we should all take inspection seriously and find out what is taking place. I thank you very much.

5.35
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): I thank you, Madam Speaker. For the new Members who have not been to Agago District, Agago is in the far north, at the eastern part of Acholi bordering Karamoja and Lango. That is why I sometimes look like a Karimojong or Sudanese -(Laughter)- because the district borders Karamoja and Sudan.

Madam Speaker, I really want to start by giving credit where it is due. From the two statements that we have received this late afternoon from the Minister of Education and Sports, as a Member of Parliament who has been here for over 10 years I have never seen such serious action that the Minister of Education and Sports has taken, and she really must be appreciated for that. I wish all ministers could do this. 

Madam Speaker, the reason you hear MPs crying foul sometimes and talking as if they want to cut off their heads is because we talk and we do not see action taken. However, I am very glad that the Minister of Education and Sports was able to produce a statement within the shortest period of time on the Floor of Parliament - something which has not been happening at all. Ministers keep dodging statements. When you bring a question before the House, some minister will ask for another week or month and at the end of the day, you just give up.

I remember bringing a statement in the Ninth Parliament similar to what my sister has just brought. I would like to thank her very much for this. Honourable minister, I would like to pledge that we will support you. (Applause) Whatever Parliament prescribes, we will walk together as Members of Parliament, as Government, because I know all of us are Government. I am also a Member of Parliament and, therefore, part of Government. 

We must all ensure that what is required to be done for the country is done correctly because a lot has been mentioned. We have a lot of impunity going on by inspectors of schools. We also have lack of resources within the inspectorate itself. That is why you see them always tempted –(Member timed out.)

5.38
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice in thanking the honourable minister, Mama, for her report and commitment to dealing with this vice. I am very happy; the Ministry of Education and Sports has been having a lot of problems and I am very convinced that some of the vices that we have been suffering from within this sector are going to be cured. 

I rise because some of the schools, which are being stopped under the Bridge International Academies, are within my jurisdiction. I had not known about this school before but when I went to inspect this school, I noticed that the sanitation measures were extremely poor. 

Madam Speaker, there are some questions we have to ask ourselves; why is it that some of these schools which are international, which we believe to be of high standards, are able to exploit our procedures? I found this very disturbing. We have procedures for licensing and for registration, but within a short period of time a school of this nature is registered and licensed.

Honourable minister, Mama, we are requesting this Government to come up with an aggressive policy to establish the standardisation of international schools in this country. It appears that international schools dictate on the Ministry of Education and Sports and use their own curricula –(Interruption)

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. We are looking at only the curriculum but we also need to look at criminality. You do not know which curriculum they use to teach these students. You are talking about an international curriculum but which international curriculum? We need to bring these people to book. We need to know what they were teaching. These are over 10,000 students for heaven’s sake! These are 60 schools and the whole country is surrounded. These are Ugandans. 

We need to look at the criminality in it. Which teachers do they have? Where are these students going to go anyway? Much as we are saying that they are going to have good recommendations, this should not be the only procedure because we do not know what they were taught. Where will they go? Which classes will they start from?

MR SSEMULI: Thank you for the information. Mama, hon. Kataaha, it is high time Uganda came up with priorities. We should not have any school coming up with curricula, some of which we do not even understand. We should not have a school with less than two workers. I find it very interesting -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Forgive my ignorance, but is this school in the category of schools like Rainbow International and Kabira International or they just use the word “international”? - Okay, they just use the word.

5.43
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to my colleagues and thank the minister for the statement and also applaud hon. Rwabushaija for whistleblowing. This is going to help us discover a number of things that we may not have known. 

We have a problem because when we hear the word “international”, we imagine that the school is big and they have magic that will transform our children. If this international school or organisation was able to spread so fast within a very short time, it means they had ill intentions; maybe, some of the intentions were about trafficking our children, child abuse and other ill motives.

How could this come about? Honourable minister, the problem may come from not having schools in certain parishes. Because there are no schools, these people come and exploit that gap and put up their shoddy structures. The parents think that it is an advantage that their children have access to a nearby school but the motives are bad. I would like to appeal to you to fill this gap by finding out how many schools are in each district, parish or sub county.

Honourable minister, I also want to talk about how you are going to boost inspection. This came up because of the weak inspection that we have. In my district, for example, I have very few inspections and because of that, they cannot complete the work on their desk. Some go to the mountains, others go to other places and to make it worse, they do not have transport. I would really appeal and add my voice to others who are suggesting that we need to have motorcycles in each subcounty or in every constituency to quicken the inspection work, so that good work is done. 

On that note, therefore, we would like to add that more research be done because these are not the only schools that are in existence. Many of our children are falling prey to such people who come as philanthropists when they are not; they have their own intentions. I want to pledge that as a Committee on Education and Sports, we are going to support you. We want to work together so that we do on-spot visits and discover many of these other vices.

5.46
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Madam Speaker, I join the rest in thanking the honourable Minister of Education and Sports for the report. I also applaud hon. Rwabushaija for raising the issue before her.

In the statement made by the honourable minister, she mentioned closing the schools after this term has ended. However, I felt that I should have also heard about action being taken against the proprietors of these schools for going beyond their licensed mandate. I am also sure there is someone somewhere there who did not play his or her role in oversight or monitoring. This is because for you to be licensed in one school in Kumi and yet you have over 60 branches and nobody has mentioned it until hon. Rwabushaija comes to mention it in Parliament, then there could be accomplices in this kind of deal.

I would also think that we should interest ourselves in those who could be bending the rules to allow some of these people to operate illegally. Also, like others have said, we should focus much attention on funding and facilitation of inspections. Unfortunately, I remember in 2013 when this school was licensed, we increased the budget of inspection at district level. I was a member of the Committee on Education then. Therefore, I wonder why these schools could mushroom even when there was some bit of additional funding. Therefore, we encourage the inspection of schools -(Member timed out.)

5.49
MR ROBERT NTENDE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Janet Kataaha for the report. 

I come from a district with  three constituencies and in each of them there is an inspector plus a head of the inspectorate called a district inspection officer. I am very aware that the inspectorate at the district has a budget. However, Madam Speaker, the cancer that is eating up our education system is corruption. Most of these so-called inspectors at the district, who are in charge of the counties and others, derive their income from the head teachers and directors of these schools. Instead of doing due diligence in inspecting, they simply make money out of these schools. I would request the honourable members to help the Ministry of Education and Sports to come up with a national inspectorate authority with a separate vote, so that it can go to the ground and ensure quality education.

There is also the challenge of the curriculum in the Ministry of Education and Sports today. You will hear the ministry talking about teaching Kiswahili in primary schools but– (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You may use half a minute to conclude.

MR NTENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You hear that there is the teaching of local languages like in my place, Busoga, but where are the teachers who teach this new curriculum trained from? It is a challenge. Therefore, I would request the Minister of Education and Sports to work tirelessly to ensure that we improve this sector. Thank you.

5.52
MS MARY BABIRYE (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I am a teacher and a proprietor of schools. I know what it takes to construct a good school. Further investigation should be made as to why schools are popping up all over the country. Apart from looking at them mushrooming everywhere, there must be an intention. Before we construct a school, we must know why. 

We have suggested that these schools are going to be closed at the end of this term. What arrangements have we made to accommodate our children in these schools? I think arrangements must be made for the nearby schools to accommodate them so that these children are not just left like that.

Honourable minister, another big problem in our schools is that many schools qualify because they have facilities but the problem is that they do not have boarding facilities. Our children are sleeping anywhere and that is a threat. The security of our children must be considered. Let day schools remain day schools and boarding schools also remain boarding schools.

Lastly, I request you, honourable minister, to tell the inspectors of schools that they should not only inspect primary schools but they are required also to visit secondary schools. For the many years I have been teaching –(Member timed out.)

5.54
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the questions we should ask ourselves is why there are very many schools coming up in this country. It is because our population is growing very fast. You will find very many children at home and the Government primary schools cannot take all these children. Therefore, there are very many schools that have come up.

When you look at the conditions and the quality of education that our children are getting, you will keep asking yourself questions - “Is this the right education?” The education they are getting is half-baked. So, private schools have come up everywhere. As I speak, it is the private schools that are producing better results than the Government schools. When I went to school, it was the Government schools that were doing very well but today, it is schools like Greenhill, Kampala Parents, Lohana Academy and many others. What about our traditional primary schools? Look at Bat Valley; look at its conditions. Look at Fairway Primary School, Boma and North Road in Mbale; the conditions are terrible. However, look at those private schools that have come up; they are performing even much better.

Now we have rushed – it is fine because I do not condone the bad conditions in schools like poor toilets and so forth. However, go and look at our Government schools; the conditions are terrible and yet this Government has been here for the last 30 years. Children have been studying in terrible conditions –(Member timed out.)

5.56
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka County South, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a teacher and I also want to add my voice to that of other colleagues who have commended the minister for the commitment to provide quality education in this country. 

I would like to provide information to the honourable minister to the effect that in this country, there is a new breed of people that I would refer to as conmen, who are responsible for the mushrooming of most of these schools. What they do is move from village to village and from home to home, promising that the schools where they are taking these children provide bursaries and free education, and they move them from one region to another. 

Interest should be taken when schools are opening and you will see that children are being moved left and right. These people are the ones responsible for the marketing of these schools under the disguise of providing free education and bursaries. When the children reach school, after one or two months the parents are asked to pay. I request the minister to investigate how these schools rapidly get the children that they teach.

Finally, the minister has given us reasons for the proposed closure of these schools. I want to request her to use the very reasons they have advanced for closing some of the international schools and other schools to also be extended to some of our public schools. This is because some of them are also in a very poor state to the extent that –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, use only half a minute.

MR KISA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The truth is that there are also public primary schools that have no toilets. (Interruption) I will take your information.

THE SPEAKER: With your half a minute? Let us have hon. Arinda. How do you donate your time when it is half a minute? (Laughter)

5.59
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for this statement, which is an eye opener to all of us. This is what is happening in the countryside; we have very many schools without sports amenities and those with very poor structures. Some of them are located in boys’ quarters and poor sanitation is the order of the day, even in UPE schools. I am happy that this statement has come to the Floor of Parliament. 

I think we also need to put the inspectors of schools in our districts to task because they are facilitated with fuel. I am very aware of this since I have been a civil servant; I know that these inspectors have fuel but they do not carry out the inspections, Madam Speaker. We, therefore, need to make sure that they perform their duties. 

We normally welcome visitors from abroad and take them to the worst schools in the region. When they get there, they take pictures of children studying under trees, which they take back home.  Therefore, by putting up such structures, they think they have done us a big service when actually they have not. 

Madam Speaker, I would think that closing would not be very fair. As the schools are already in second term and it is almost ending, and they have one year to complete, my submission would be that we allow them to improve their structures. Those who will have improved -(Member timed out.) 

6.01
MR FREDERICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): I would like to thank the honourable minister for raising very serious issues and having them discussed. I think this House should appreciate that the honourable minister has ably handled the issues that have been raised. However, I would also like to raise a few issues that are slightly different from what has been discussed. 

Recently, there have been many accidents involving our children returning from school tours. A bus of Madera school was involved in an accident as it was moving at night. We also had an accident that occurred on Hoima Road involving students, who were moving at night. Therefore, I would like the minister to also look into that issue. 

I have a challenge in my constituency where enrolment in primary one starts with a high number. I paid a visit to a school recently and I was told that primary one enrols 200 pupils and yet in primary seven today they have only 50 pupils. Therefore, the rate of pupils getting pregnant and dropping out is alarming. 

As much as the inspectors are expected to move around and work with the head teachers and ensure that they sensitise both the children and parents so that their children stay in school, we have a big problem because coordination is lacking. This coming year, I expect to register not more than 100 students in primary seven in my constituency. I would also like the honourable minister -(Member timed out.)

6.03
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): I would like to thank the minister for the clear statement. Madam Speaker, I do not want to waste a lot of time. I have few key issues to raise here. 

When I read the report, what comes to mind is that there was abandonment of duties by different officers of Government right from the ministry to the local government, yet the Local Government Act clearly states the role of the local council. Unfortunately, when you look around, people are operating without licences and that is where the problem is. 

It also appears as if the officials in the ministry colluded with Mr Andrew White. How on earth can you have a licence and yet the proper procedures were not followed? This is where the dilemma is. 

Madam Speaker, the minister had proposed that we leave these schools to complete the term and thereafter close them. However, I would even propose that we actually close them now. We must also empower the inspectors and facilitate them. (Interruption) This is a maiden speech, Madam Speaker -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow him to speak. This is his maiden speech. 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I want to say this for the record; conmen have conned Ugandans of their money and people -(Member timed out.) 

6.05
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I really commend the Minister of Education and Sports for the work well done so far. We also commend hon. Rwabushaija for having brought up this issue. You can see that everyone has a concern about education. 

I just have two to three points. The first one is about the recruitment of teaching staff. We should not only look at the structures, the hygiene and the children’s welfare but we should also look at the teaching staff. Emphasis should be put on recruitment; many of these teachers, who are in private schools, are not really qualified to do the job. 

We should also probably improve the quality of the Government schools. The Government has endeavoured to put up structures but parents end up taking their children and paying school fees to private schools, which have wooden structures, thereby leaving the Government structures empty. In the end, the private schools have too many pupils in a class. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should also look at the standard number of children in a particular class because private schools are overwhelmed with the numbers. We have been pushing the inspectorate and the Ministry of Education and Sports to carry out inspections. However, I think as Members of Parliament, we can also monitor the schools. Let us all go- (Member timed out.)

6.08
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am the proprietor of private schools called Answered Prayers. However, we have a challenge in legalising our schools because of corruption in our country. We are trying to blame Bridge International for not legalising but there is a very big challenge. You can have everything on the ground, including the structures, but inspectors need money. In order to call an environmental officer for assessment, you need money. I run a school in Kyegegwa and I faced the same problem. The subcounty chief, who is supposed to endorse me, requested for Shs 90,000. I asked why he requested for money that is not receipted and he claimed it was for facilitation. 

Therefore, you are going to blame us but it might cost one even more than Shs 5 million to register a school when you have everything in place. This is because we are competing with District Education Offices (DEOs) and inspectors who have private schools. Therefore, they do not want you to put up certain schools in their locality. 

Secondly, according to the report, one of the Bridge International Schools was licensed by Kumi Municipality. I just wish the minister could clarify this. In my opinion, I think it is not the work of Kumi Municipality to license; it is the work of the Ministry of Education and Sports. How did they do that? Now they are – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have two other papers; Members will speak on the others. Those who have not spoken on this will speak on the land and the disaster issues.

6.10
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Janet Kataaha Museveni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank many of my colleagues who gave very kind comments about our work; I appreciate that very much. I will answer a few questions before giving answers to categories because many people kept talking about the same issues. So, I will just respond to the categories that many talked about.

Let me start with the issue on the inspection of schools. I must admit that we have a problem. As a ministry, we really need to find a way to do inspection in schools in our country so that we can be able to even talk about the schools that are educating our children in the country. 

Some of you talked about the infrastructure in some of the schools, which is very poor and which therefore makes room for private schools to continue to mushroom around the country. I have an urge to ask you, Madam Speaker, to allow me another slot at some stage so that I can have an opportunity to unpack the budget of our ministry for you, Members of Parliament, -(Applause)- so that you understand it and what that money does at the ministry. 

This used to concern me when I had nothing to do with the Ministry of Education and Sports; I would severally ask questions. However, now that I am there, I would like all Members of Parliament and even the public to know the budget of the Ministry of Education and Sports. Members and the general public need to know how this budget is distributed to the many institutions of education in the country and what remains with the ministry to do the work that it is supposed to do annually. 

That is one of the problems why we do not bridge the gap in the many subcounties, which do not have secondary schools, in the many parishes that do not have primary schools and yet we would like to do that. We will have to plan better to use our very little budget that remains at the centre after we have - (Interjections)– Please, let me finish because there is so much that people asked. 

Somebody talked about the curricula of these international schools. It is true that schools like this one we are talking about in particular, certainly follow a foreign curriculum that has nothing to do with the Uganda Government curriculum. That is our concern too. However, we have many private schools that are using different curricula but at least if they have a process where our children can go through institutions of higher learning, that would not be worrying. Otherwise, when you have a curriculum that ends somewhere and you do not know where the students would go after that school, it is worrying. That is one of the reasons we thought these schools should be closed.

There was a comment on the performance of Government schools vis-à-vis private schools. The performance in some of the Government schools has indeed been affected because these schools are not inspected. I actually believe that if we do aggressive inspection of all schools, the performance of Government schools should get better.

On the licensing of pre-primary schools, this is done by local governments. It is primary schools that are licensed by the Ministry of Education and Sports. For this one school that they are talking about, I must say that I have to confirm as to who licensed that school because it is said to have been licensed by Kumi Municipality. It must have been a pre-primary school at that time. Schools expand and if it did so and it became a primary school, it was not licensed by anybody and that I reported. So, I must confirm that.

What I needed to also say is to ask you, Members of Parliament, to also play your own role according to the mandate you have to monitor some of the Government programmes in your own constituencies. If you work with us, like hon. Rwabushaija did, inform us about the schools in your constituencies, this is how Government is supposed to work. It does not matter whether you are a member of the Opposition, as long as you are doing your work as a Member of Parliament and working with us as a Government, we will serve your people. That is why we are all here. 

I would like to applaud hon. Rwabushaija, for what she did for the children of Uganda. I honestly would like to appeal to more of you to help us, to let us all do what we can to promote education in our country –(Mr Olanya rose_)- Madam Speaker, I am done. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Minister of Education and Sports. I would like to begin by thanking you for responding to matters of national concern, first from hon. Katusabe, the MP for Bukonzo West, who brought in the issue of the salaries, and then from hon. Rwabushaija who brought in the issue of international schools. You can count on us for support. If you need time on the Order Paper, just let me know and we shall facilitate.

However, I have one request, honourable minister. Can you please protect the land of the schools, the tertiary institutions, the universities? This is the land that everybody wants to take. So, our plea is, please, endeavour to have the land of the schools protected. Please, protect it. Thank you very much.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of procedure I am raising arises out of this report because it is giving wrong information. In Kalungu District, where I come from, there is nothing like a school called Uganda Bridge International Academies. The purported school is not in Kalungu. Would it be procedurally okay for us to get wrong information on this Floor of Parliament? I am talking as a person with experience in education.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we shall ask the Committee on Education to examine that issue further. 

Hon. Ojora, what is bothering you?

MR OKIN OJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to pre-empt the presentation and discussion on the next item. When you look at our Rules of Procedure, Rule 44(2) clearly states, “Statements made by ministers may be debated provided that such debate shall not exceed one hour.” However, in the last discussion, we debated for almost two hours. That is why I want to pre-empt this one so that we are mindful of what we have set as Parliament, as we plan to debate it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, maybe you came late, but there were two statements from the same ministry and each of them took an hour.
 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PAYMENT FOR GROUNDED EARTHMOVERS IN BUDUDA DISTRICT

6.21
THE MINISTER FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. During the Prime Minister’s Question Time in Parliament on Wednesday, 20 July 2016, hon. Atkins Katusabe, Member of Parliament Bukonzo County West, raised an issue on the continued Government payment of Shs 2 million per day for two grounded earthmovers in Bududa that were used to extract the 2010 landslide victims and yet this exercise ended six years ago. I hereby present a report to that effect.

As you are aware, the Mt. Elgon subregion, which covers the districts of Bududa, Manafwa, Mbale, Sironko, Bulambuli, Kapchorwa, Kween and Bukwo has had devastating landslide disasters, which have claimed lives and also caused damage to property and infrastructure. The district most affected by landslide disasters in the subregion was Bududa.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, it will be recalled that on 1 March 2010 about 350 people perished in a landslide in Nametsi village, Bulucheke Subcounty. More landslides reoccurred in the same subregion in the year 2012, which affected over 4,000 people requiring massive evacuation and resettlement.

As part of the response to the Bududa disaster, Government, through the Ministry of Defence, hired excavation equipment (backhoe and bulldozer). The second equipment was property of Government under the Ministry of Defence. The two machines were used in the excavation of dead bodies buried by the huge landslides. However, given the emergency nature of the intervention, funds were not readily available to effect payments to the provider of the equipment, M/s BCR General Ltd, at that time. Due to delays in payment for the services, the service provider, M/s BCR General Ltd, sued Government in the year 2012 for non-payment of the accumulated costs, failure to return the equipment and interest accrued amounting to Shs 5,440,155,762. 

Madam Speaker, the Commercial Division of the High Court of Uganda at Kampala advised the two parties to negotiate an out-of-court settlement. On the basis of this arrangement, the Attorney-General convened a meeting involving the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Works and Transport and the Office of the Prime Minister to resolve the matter. The committee, coordinated by the office of the Solicitor-General, reached a consensus that negotiations would be cheaper than continuing with the court case. Negotiations were then held with the service provider, M/s BCR General Ltd, which led to the reduction of the claim cost from the Shs 5,440,155,762 to Shs 2,365,996,148 as compensation.

The Ministry of Defence, on the advice of other stakeholders –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question that was raised by hon. Katusabe was very clear, but the honourable Minister, in his response, is reading figures that Members cannot see. I do not know whether this is the statement that he is reading or whether he has a different one. Is it, therefore, procedurally right and is it in order for him to continue reading a statement that is outrageous and not in the hands of the Members?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question was whether Government would continue to pay Shs 2 million per day for the earthmovers. He has answered that question, notwithstanding the absence of the money – But that is what you wanted. Hon. Katusabe, you are the one who asked the question. What did you ask? Do you have a supplementary, very quickly?

MR NAMBESHE: I have an objection to what is being stated that they are not paying. 

THE SPEAKER: You have other information?

MR NAMBESHE: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe, first wait. Let us allow hon. Katusabe, because he is the one who asked the question. If he has a supplementary, he can ask it very quickly and then we come to you.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for creating time. Probably, as a preamble and correction for the Hansard record, my name is Atkins Katusabe, Member of Parliament for Bukonzo County West. 

My question is what features or is reflected in the preamble and I want to just consider that. I will entirely depend upon your judgment, Madam Speaker, because he is yet to make his conclusion. However, in paragraph 4.0, he says it is not true that Government continues to pay any cost for the equipment; the service provider was fully compensated and the equipment reverted to Government. 

This is quite serious; I would like to encourage the minister to explore the possibility that in the event that further audit is sanctioned on this item, the minister would be able to find time and own up to the responsibility because we have evidence. We have dug out that, and I know that my colleagues that come from Bududa area will be in a position to give deeper information on this. Thank you.

6.25
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With all due respect to the honourable Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, the statement he has just given us is full of falsehood. 

In his concluding point 4.0, as stated by hon. Katusabe the minister says it is not true that Government continues to pay any costs. We have a whole police post in Nametsi Village. For your information, this 2010 landslide did not occur in the subcounty that is mentioned here. The subcounty in question is Bukalasi Subcounty. The one mentioned here is where the landslide of 2012 occurred and claimed over 10 people. Otherwise, in this one of Nametsi, over 350 died and only 103 bodies were exhumed. The rest have remained missing. 

The equipment in question was light equipment from China and failed to perform the functions which they were anticipated to discharge. As we talk, that equipment is being guarded by a whole police post. When you talk of the police, they are paid from the Consolidated Fund at the expense of the taxpayer. Therefore, six years down the road - Even during the electioneering period when the police required reinforcement, the ones in Nametsi could not be retrieved to perform any other work outside. They continued to be paid to guard an otherwise defunct set of equipment. 

Some two of the working tractors were dismantled and parts taken away by a team of soldiers that purportedly had been dispatched from the military academy at Lugazi. The equipment was dismantled and the parts airlifted because there is no access road to that place. To get them out would require a huge sum of money at the expense of the taxpayer.

For him also to mention that the 2012 landslides were equally attended to by the same equipment for excavation of the dead is not true. It took Bududa 10 days to hire tractors from Bugembe to come and do the excavation. In 10 days you would not expect any potential survivor and that was the appalling situation that we had. As we talk, this equipment is guarded. We have even lost a life because someone was shot by trigger-happy policemen who thought the young man had gone maybe to pick something from the equipment -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Nambeshe, to whom is the Shs 2 million paid every day and who pays it?

MR NAMBESHE: The Government of Uganda pays these policemen to guard the equipment. This other allegation that Shs 2 million is released purportedly for fuel requires some more investigation. The truth of the matter is that funds are paid purportedly for fuel for the equipment to continue searching for the missing bodies. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: For six years? 

6.34
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was shocked when I saw the statement about the money that Government is paying to M/s BCR General Ltd. After the 2010 landslide, as my colleague has said, this equipment was airlifted to this place and I wonder why Government even had to retain it because it is of no value to the people of Bududa as I speak. The equipment is lying in Nametsi Village. If this equipment was functional, honourable minister, I would like to know whether inspection was done before Government paid off this money, because this equipment has been in Bududa for six years. 

In 2010, after the landslides occurred, the Government promised to construct a road up to Nametsi where the landslides occurred. If this equipment was functional, why can’t it be used to construct that road to Nametsi where people are growing onions, maize and so on? Our local government is not aware of the functionality of this equipment. My colleague was the LC V of Bududa and has first-hand information; they would have used it. This is wastage of Government resources to buy dead equipment yet our people have never been resettled.

Honourable minister, the budget committee sat on Tuesday, 3 May 2016 and re-allocated Shs 8 billion, which was meant to resettle our people in the Elgon zone, claiming that the money was not consumed. We have been following it up with my colleagues from Bududa. In fact, we thought the minister was going to say something about the money for resettlement but they are here giving Shs 2 billion for dead equipment lying in Nametsi yet our people have not been resettled. (Member timed out)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the minister made a statement and clarified on the payment issue that was raised by the honourable member. However, the area Member of Parliament says no, that is not true. My point of procedure is whether it would be okay to send this issue to the Auditor-General so that he looks at it as a special audit so that this House is informed of the truth. It is not right for us to debate when some people say this is the right thing and the other one is wrong and we continue with the debate without real facts. 

We have committed ourselves to zero tolerance towards corruption and we must be seen doing it and Parliament should take a lead. So, could it be okay for a committee or the Auditor-General to take up this matter? I seek your clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am equally confused because on the one hand they said they were hiring the machines, then the machines now belong to the Government. Let us receive just two supplementary questions before we see how to move.

6.38
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really feel that it would be procedurally right to find out the director of this company called M/s BCR General Ltd.

Secondly, we also need to know who approved this type of machines to be used in that particular area. (Interruption)

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The director of this company is Mr Baguma Rusoke. Thank you.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, as a civil engineer, I have further information for the honourable member and the House. The director of M/s BCR, for your information, passed on. Mr Baguma died in a motor accident but I think a new director is now on board. Thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for that information. We need to further know which people sat and approved this company.

Thirdly, we need clarification from the honourable minister whether the machines that are there will really accomplish the work. This has taken more than six years! 

Finally, we need to investigate this matter seriously as stated by the honourable minister because this is how we normally play with the taxpayers’ money. I am very confident that there are some people who connived to eat this money and they are here and are keeping quiet. There is a sign of connivance in this very important exercise. Thank you.

6.41
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three things to raise. Hon. Migadde talked about Baguma Rusoke but the one I know is the late Baguma Crescent. I do not know whether he is the one that honourable Waluswaka is talking about. It should be made clear for record purposes.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the minister should specify how much money has been paid and the period for which that money was paid. 

Thirdly, they are talking about compensating and also reverting these assets to Government. If Government knew that they had the capacity to purchase this equipment, why did they go into hiring? I recall that we passed money here specifically for that. Can the minister tell us, of that money we passed here, how much he spent?

6.43
MR GODFREY WATENGA (Independent, Lutseshe County, Bududa): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to inform you that yesterday I was on the ground where the machines are lying. The minister has made a statement on the return of the machines, but when I looked at the machines yesterday, given the condition in which they are in, they cannot be worth the money we want to use to transport them back to Kampala. The machines are in a sorry state. Sincerely, they are scrap. Most of the valuable parts have been taken. 

Even yesterday, farmers were lamenting and telling us that we should inform the Government to go and remove the machines from their land so that they can cultivate the land. If not, they asked to be given permission to destroy the machines themselves because they are of no value to them.

A further piece of information to this House is that the people of Nametsi Village have even gone back and occupied the same area where the landslides occurred in 2010. In fact, I was with the reporters from NTV and they recorded all the information. People are already settled there. As a follow-up to hon. Nambeshe’s question, I do not know how the Government is planning for these people. Sincerely, we are going to see another scuffle and we are going to lose even more than 350 people. Thank you.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure. This is a report presented by the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees but from the way Members are commenting, it appears the report itself is also a disaster. (Laughter) 

The point of procedure I am raising is that this is a very serious matter because this report has arisen from a question, which was raised during the Prime Minister’s Question Time. The ministry was given three weeks to prepare this report. The question was raised on the 20th of July and today is the 9th of August. 

Madam Speaker, unless the minister is telling me or the House that even if he does not have technocrats in his ministry, he does not have the ability to prepare a report that can be presented to an institution like Parliament. Even if he does not have anybody at all, he can prepare a better report to present to Parliament. Is it really procedurally right for us to debate a report, which obviously is a disaster? (Laughter) 

We have no basis because when we debate a motion, the report must have some substance on which we add or deduct something. However, here we are discussing a disaster and adding more disaster to disaster. (Laughter) 

In fact, we have been told that in the area where the machines are, if we have rains or kind of El Niño, we are going to have the worst disaster happening in that area. I thought the minister would have used this opportunity to even alert Parliament that we ought to do something to avoid or pre-empt that kind of thing for us to prepare.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would move that this report be withdrawn and the minister be given time to come with a well-researched document. (Applause) We cannot comfortably appear to be legitimising a statement, which does not deserve to be legitimised. We have no basis for any kind of debate. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in terms of time and efficiency, already all the contributions are raising issues about the content and veracity of this report. There was a proposal by the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development that we send this matter for forensic audit. Do we really need to debate again and decide? Why don’t we just send it for audit? Honourable member, can you move that motion formally?

MR ONEK: Thank you very much, colleagues, for your observations. Definitely this event took place when I was not yet in that ministry. However, as I take responsibility as a minister, I fully agree with my colleague’s proposal that a special audit –(Interruption)

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, we got some statements from the Minister of Education and Sports and they were authenticated with a signature. However, from what the minister presented, first of all he was reading things, some of which were not in the report, but also it is not signed and so he cannot own it. He has just said that these things happened when he was not yet a minister there. 

The clarification I am, therefore, seeking is: Is it because he was not yet a minister in that office that he is not owning up to the report he is giving us, yet he is presenting things which are different from what we have in the report? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Is it a requirement that the minister signs the statement? I do not think it is a requirement.

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, I fully agree with anxiety that has arisen because of conflicting information about this subject. I also agree with hon. Bahati that maybe a special audit be carried out so that we know, because monies from Government do not just disappear without records. 

Records are there in finance on who has been paid what and for what purpose. Records on the negotiations, which the ministry made with the owner of this company, must be there. This research should be done properly so that correct information comes out and then you can be satisfied with the report. Otherwise, I do not see us going further. However, one thing I am sure of is that we are not paying any Shs 2 million per day; there are no such monies in my department.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that a special audit be instituted by the Auditor-General.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON RE-DEMARCATING THE BORDER BETWEEN SOUTH SUDAN AND UGANDA

6.51
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. On 20 July 2016, hon. Tom Alero, Member of Parliament West Moyo County, Moyo District, asked the Prime Minister to update Parliament on the progress of re-demarcating the border between South Sudan and Uganda at Kajo-Keji and Moyo. The Prime Minister requested that I prepare a response and present it to the House in respect to the question raised by the honourable member.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the length of the Uganda–South Sudan border is 470 kilometres. This boundary is defined in the Anglo-Belgium agreements of 1913, 1914 and 1926. The need to re-demarcate the border was necessitated by a long outstanding tension build-up and land wrangles between the South Sudanese and their Ugandan counterparts living along the common border, and where at times lives were lost, in the Moyo-Kajo- Keji conflict of September 2014.

To solve the problem, prior to the 2014 incident President Yoweri Museveni and President Salva Kiir, on 24 November 2009, met at Moyo to discuss the border tension. They called on the district authorities in Moyo and Kajo-Keji to resolve the dispute locally and amicably.

In September 2014, fighting broke out between South Sudanese and Ugandans in Moyo District. This happened after Ugandan local government officials visited a disputed area and they were allegedly detained by armed Sudanese men. This triggered a wave of demonstrations and violence in both countries. Thereafter, the two countries agreed to form a joint technical committee to re-demarcate the border to avoid further tensions. 

The Progress 

1. 	A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on border delimitation and demarcation was signed between Uganda and South Sudan in Juba, South Sudan, on 9 December 2014.

2. 	Each country has commissioned an 18-member joint technical committee to implement the border reaffirmation exercise.

3. 	The joint technical committee commenced sensitisation of border communities in February 2016 in the areas of Moyo, Kajo-Keji, Lamwo, Kitgum Pogee Boma, Majwi County and Majwi areas. 

Madam Speaker, what remains to be done includes the following tasks: 
1. 	Generate the border coordinates from the Anglo-Belgium 1913, 1914 and 1926 agreements; 

2. 	Reaffirm and demarcate the common border on the ground using modern survey technics like Global Positioning Systems (GPS), among others; 

3. 	Witness the borderline with conspicuous border pillars spaced at 300 metres apart; 

4. 	Compile and sign the border protocol; and 

5. 	Sensitise communities along the common border.

The challenges are: 

1. 	Sourcing for funding to acquire the equipment and effect the border reaffirmation exercise;

2. 	Effectively and jointly sensitizing the border communities. Sometimes on our side we are ready but the other side is not ready to conduct the exercise;

3. 	A conducive environment to implement the border reaffirmation exercise, where we are aware that there is political instability on the other side; and

4. 	Capacity building of the technical personnel to ensure that both countries are at par on border demarcation skills. Madam Speaker, on our side, we have the skills but the other side still lacks the technical people in surveying and mapping and other technical aspects.

As a way forward, Government, through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, will: 

1. 	Expedite the sourcing of funds for the border reaffirmation exercise;

2. 	Jointly address the issues raised by the communities along the common border, in particular to ease tension between Moyo and Kajo-Keji, by organising and facilitating reconciliation and peace conferences, among others;

3. 	Start the demarcation exercise with the flashpoints in the short-term before embarking onto the entire borderline in the medium and long-term;

4. 	Acquire appropriate equipment and tools to facilitate demarcation of the common border; 

5. 	Continue with the sensitisation of the local border communities; and

6. 	It is necessary to de-mine some parts of the border before the border demarcation exercise begins, which we are preparing to do. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That is the update from the border situation. 

6.58
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the good statement, especially on sensitising people at the border.

Madam Speaker, my district borders South Sudan. The way our counterparts in South Sudan behave is quite unique. Sometimes, they carry their signpost and enter deep inside Uganda. In Amuru District last year, for example, they carried their signpost and entered almost two kilometres into Uganda and planted it until our military chased them away.

Madam Speaker, the behaviour of our counterparts is very unbecoming. As Ugandans, we need to be very hard on them. I also think that we need to demarcate the borders not only in Moyo and Arua but we should extend it to Amuru, Lamwo – in fact all the districts that border South Sudan. This is because if they continue behaving this way, they may attract Ugandans to also be rude to them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.59
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am so grateful to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for having presented to this House precise information about the border between Uganda and South Sudan.

Kitgum is one of the districts, which border South Sudan at Orom Subcounty in some place called Lokom. In Lokom, as we talk, there is a border market which is supposed to be opened by 2017/2018. However, there is already a struggle between Uganda and South Sudan because the Sudanese come to Uganda and raid at will. We have right now lost over 265 animals, which were raided by the South Sudanese. They have a tendency of cutting trees in Uganda and when a Ugandan goes past those trees, they say they are already in South Sudan and yet that is still Ugandan land.

I request the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to quickly and fully support the re-demarcation of the border between South Sudan and Uganda, so that the lives of Ugandans are secured, especially us who live in areas that border South Sudan. Personally, if it were possible, I would wish it to be immediate. Thank you.

7.02
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for presenting a good paper.

This question of re-demarcating our boundaries with our neighbouring countries is very important. In June, we had a problem in Kanungu, our district which borders Congo. It is not only the areas that border South Sudan, but we need this to be done throughout the country.

Madam Speaker, as I talk, our lake has been affected because Congo has shifted their boundary here. One day, they put their signpost here and we just kept watching. In June, the people in Butogota, Nyakinoni and Kayonza subcounties were attacked and their crops were cut down by the Congolese who came into our land. When we met as the security committee, our hands were tied. There are now indications that these people have been living there for a very long time. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the minister takes up the matter not only with the South Sudan border but also with the whole country such that we really gazette our area as Uganda. Thank you.

7.04
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Madam Speaker. South Sudan is a new country. There is civil strife there with leaders fighting for power. The technical capacity, which the minister is talking about, may not be assembled quickly so that we start the demarcation of the boundaries. 

However, our communities are being terrorised by indisciplined security officers plus the population itself and yet we have to become a middle income country by 2020. This cannot continue. The best that can now be done is for the security forces - the army and the police - to guard our borders jealously and not allow anymore infiltration by marauding forces – (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I appreciate what the minister is saying. However, you recall when there was a crisis in September 2014, you dispatched the Opposition and I led that delegation. Now, there are some complexities that we should take note of.

First, although this land belongs to Uganda, it was created out of the war between Southern Sudan and Northern Sudan; Uganda left space for free movement of Southern Sudanese to wage their struggles. This is known and the elders too know it. Unfortunately, the people who have now settled there are Sudanese and so these are now the indigenous people in that area. That is the complexity of the problem. Therefore, when you demarcate – 

I thank God that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development used the word “reaffirmation”. The borders are known, but the Sudanese are refusing to surrender the land because they are already settled there. What we can only do is to reaffirm the border. The problem we will now have will be how to remove the Sudanese who are already fully settled as the indigenous people of that area. We have to move them out of Ugandan land and that is where we are going to have a problem.  I just thought this information would help you plan. God bless you.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Well, if they are from South Sudan, they have an option. Under the international laws, they can opt to apply to become citizens of Uganda and live peacefully or cross the border and go back to their country. 

However, my position, Madam Speaker, is that the community should not continue to be terrorised. People must settle because they are in their country. The security forces should properly guard our border and territorial integrity and our people must live in peace because we are in peace. That should be the position.  I thank you.

7.08
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Between 2014 and 2015, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure sought clarification from the then Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development about this same matter because it remained a matter that involved life and death. Some people were killed and others injured, which led to the emergence of tension in the area. 

As the committee, we asked the then minister to show cause as to why he would not reflect money for doing this work in the budgets for the financial years 2015/2016 and 2016/2017. I am now shocked, Madam Speaker, because as a committee, we asked him to reflect the money to do this exercise in that budget. 

At this point, I would, therefore, want to ask the minister two things based on No. 3 of the way forward. To start the demarcation exercise is a good proposal but when does it start? Secondly, acquiring appropriate equipment and tools to facilitate the demarcation of the common border is a good proposal, but when are you planning to acquire the equipment? 

Those are some of the issues, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I thank you, hon. Nzoghu, for giving way. Just from institutional memory, I recall that in the last Parliament, there was a comprehensive motion or proposal to borrow funds from an international organisation to demarcate all the borders of Uganda and the districts. I do not know if we can get this extensive debate from the Office of the Clerk because it took over two hours and some concrete resolutions were arrived at, especially when there was conflict in Katakwi District. Everyone spoke of similar conflicts in their constituencies and so we came out with a comprehensive solution at that time and we talked of some big money in billions of dollars.

I am now seeking information, or is it giving information; if we could get that from institutional memory and see where that comprehensive debate ended, it would be good because it looks like we are doing the same thing over and over again. I thank you.

MR NZOGHU: As I conclude, I would like to say clearly that this matter is not new and Parliament has looked at it before. The Committee on Physical Infrastructure has looked at it and also the Office of the Leader of the Opposition interested itself in this matter. It would, therefore, be fair for the honourable minister to interest herself on how far the then minister handled this matter.

In South Sudan, there is tension and if there is any attempt to go and demarcate right now, it could bring some serious international border questions –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: I was reluctant to rise, Madam Speaker, but apparently, this Parliament is giving a huge task to the minister. As you can appreciate, this is a geopolitical question not only for South Sudan but the entire country except the southwest. 

The minister was here sympathising with the South Sudanese and yet I know that Government is grappling with Ugandans who had stayed in Tanzania for more than 50 years before they were forced out. Recently, on Lake Albert, three of our police officers were kidnapped and killed by the Congolese over territorial claims. Their bodies and speedboats were taken to Goma. 

Apparently, everybody wants to press Uganda and I really do not know why. Uganda has been generous to most of these people. You can imagine the history of South Sudan. Uganda allowed the South Sudanese to use that territory for their clandestine operational activities but now they have come to claim it. It is the same case with Congo and Kenya over Migingo. 

This situation would require a summit of the leaders of the Great Lakes Region to see how they can put this question to rest. Short of that, we shall be raising it and telling the minister, but what can she do now if it is now a question that would cause war? The 1995 Constitution, to which you were party, Madam Speaker, clearly outlined the boundaries of Uganda and yet there was no district then. What has happened since then? My question is:  can’t this matter be addressed at the summit level of the heads of state and they tell the respective countries how we shall live together? 

Apparently, we give with good hands but we are paid in a different way. Uganda is much smaller than South Sudan. We gave them the leverage to be called South Sudan as a sovereign state but they are now using that to terrorise our people. I think something must be brought to their attention. That is why I agree with hon. Butime that it is the duty of the UPDF to protect our boundaries and sovereignty and yet you will find the UPDF in the Central African Republic and Somalia doing other people’s work and ours is being neglected. It is high time that Government turned to its own people other than pretending to be good international diplomats and peacekeepers.

7.15
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember in 2014, I was part of the Opposition team that went up to the West Nile region. From that time until now, it seems we have not prioritised; when we sometimes make resolutions here in Parliament, they remain on paper and are not implemented. 

This does not only put Uganda in a bad situation, it is even worse for the South Sudanese because they have to run to Uganda. There is an influx of South Sudanese in Uganda and with the conflict, I am sure that they are not comfortable in Uganda. I know the South Sudanese have a big camp in Adjumani. Some of them have moved out of the camps and settled in Gulu, Moyo and Arua and for them to live comfortably, there should be harmony and the border conflicts put to rest.  

I would like to thank the minister and also say that it is a very big thing. However, even a journey of 1,000 kilometres starts with one step. Perhaps this is the first step that the minister is taking but if you keep moving like some people who have closed their eyes on this matter, then we shall not make headway.

The Minister for Local Government suggested deploying the UPDF and the police at the borders. This is possible but the borders may be too large for that sort of deployment. We perhaps need to prioritise and ensure the army and the police do the right thing and not move about guarding homes, which they should not be doing. Why do I say so? I remember visiting Dr Kizza Besigye and I found very many police officers; why do we waste taxpayer’s money to guard one home? Sometimes the UPDF is deployed where they are not supposed to be deployed. I think that our commanders should do their work well. 

Also, corruption should be reduced. I cannot say that corruption shall easily be done away with completely because it seems corruption is a big problem for us; we do not care about the much-needed services to our people but we care about what goes into our pockets. This is very unfortunate; we should care about our people. 

We have the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. If the border crisis becomes too big for us, we have 12 countries involved in this conference and perhaps this matter should be taken up seriously by the conference. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite the minister, I would like to say that this work is not new. Your predecessor had been instructed by this House to carry out the demarcation of the border. I think it is now getting very serious. You remember during the ID registration exercise, our elected leaders from Moyo were grabbed and caned by the South Sudanese. The members of the committee that I sent there were also grabbed and detained for some time. The situation is very serious. 

Honourable minister, can we borrow money for you to carry out this exercise since your predecessor seems not to have moved? It is going to continue; one day you will find them in Gulu with their signpost.

7.20
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I did not touch on all the border points because the question was specific. However, to generally update Members, my predecessor and Government had already started work broadly on this matter. There is a programme called the Northern Corridor Summit, which is composed of all the countries within the Great Lakes Region and IGAD. That is the framework within which the Tanzania issue was concluded. 

We found part of Tanzania occupied by Ugandans and they evicted them. Currently, the Ugandans that were evicted from there are internally displaced persons in Uganda because during the reaffirmation of the border, parts of the Ugandan side that were presumed Ugandan and where Ugandans were settled, fell on the other side. They had to be evicted and we are handling their situation.

Last week, we were in Kasese for the DRC-Uganda border question and it involved defence, security and foreign affairs. The survey started from the Arua side going into that side, coming up to Lake Albert where the police officers were killed. The funds for that activity are available.

With this particular one, we have initial funds to kick-start the programme. The problem we have is that first, you are aware of the political scenario on the other side. Secondly, we have the technical staff this side of ours with an inter-ministerial committee composed of local government, foreign affairs, defence and the police among the 18-member team. However, whenever they go for a border meeting, the other side comes with generals and politicians and each time they come with a different team and yet it supposed to be a joint technical committee. That is the challenge. 

My ministry has recommended that probably, the top political leaders should first discuss the framework within which the African Union can help the other side to come up with a technical team, whether it is constituted by the African Union or the East African Community, so that they have their team and our team can begin to work. That is the challenge.  

I agree with most of the issues raised, especially that we should extend the border reaffirmation exercise beyond and tackle Kitgum and Amuru. Yesterday, I was in Nwoya and already, I found a lot of complaints in Nwoya; the South Sudanese are settling on public land and displacing Ugandans who are settled within those areas. It is a serious issue –(Interruption) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Why do we seem to be softer? Why do we concede when the South Sudanese come and displace Ugandans? In Tanzania, Ugandans who stayed across for over 50 or 70 years were evicted.

My input is: why don’t you agree and say that if a boundary finds a certain community there, the option is up to them to either pull back to the country they originally are from or stay where they are. This is because countries are going to push out citizens in order to create room for land and grab it under the guise of a disputed boundary. Why don’t you have this in place since we are all in East Africa? Where members are found, let them stay and it should be up to them to stay or move to where they want to move to.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask those who are at the border area that if there are non-Ugandans coming across the border, whether South Sudanese or Congolese, you should report to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. We shall send trucks and collect them from there and take them to refugee camps. Therefore, help us to identify them because they have been coming through porous borders where there are no boundaries.

MR GUTUMOI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My experience is that when talking about borders and refugees, for instance the Acholi in South Sudan and the Acholi in northern Uganda, it is very difficult to differentiate them. Now when you go to Madi where there is a problem, the Madi of South Sudan and the Madi of Uganda cannot be differentiated. In Congo, the Alur of Congo and those of Uganda - You will not understand this context. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are talking about administrative boundaries and not human settlement boundaries. It is true we have Acholi in South Sudan and those in Uganda. However, the demarcation between South Sudan and Uganda is very clear. Is the honourable member in order to confuse the House that the presence of Acholi in South Sudan and the presence of Acholi in Uganda will make the border demarcation very difficult? 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members; we share a border with Kenya and we have never had a quarrel with them and yet we have the Samia of Kenya and the Samia of Uganda.

MR ONEK: I think we know our citizens and the visitors, whether they speak the same language or not. It is very clear and we know the difference. Therefore, let our department know about the visitors who come and are not part of us, so that we can collect them and take them where they should be kept.

Secondly, I would like to briefly give you information, in support of my colleague’s idea that our army, the UPDF, must take care of our borders jealously. We had a similar scenario in Lamwo where the South Sudanese took the border demarcation and went 11 kilometres inside. We agreed with the RDC and the division commander and made sure that we chased them away. This time we used GPS. We chased them until they crossed to their territory. We went back and re-established our border and to-date, they are not in our territory. 

If you can do the same with other districts to make sure that we position our troops at our border, there will be no war. They already have war, I do not think they will come to fight us.

MS AMONGI: On the issue of why we handle others with soft gloves, I think probably Ugandans are welcoming. However, there are also issues that we need to handle within our own communities, especially sensitisation. This is because in most of the cases around northern Uganda, these people come with a lot of money to supposedly buy land. Under the land law, a foreigner cannot buy land; they can only be leased land. In the incident where I was involved yesterday, I had to guide the district land board on the matter and they will either transfer their interest into leasehold or they will handle it some other way. 

Foreigners cannot own land as freehold. Therefore, it is majorly those who supposedly selling land to them - I think even within Kampala, there are many people who have sold their houses to the South Sudanese and they hold freehold titles and yet it is not supposed to be the case.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, this matter requires a multi-pronged approach. The major cause of the border conflict in most circumstances is contestation of the border points. That is why the issue of reaffirmation through re-surveying is being prioritised in the Northern Corridor Summit and the African Union is supporting this both technically and financially. However, I agree with hon. Tom Butime that it is important to look at the security aspect while we continue with the issue of surveys. 

I have noted all the concerns of the Members – the Member for Kitgum on the market – and those that require that I make a follow-up on the issues raised, I will do that. Thank you.

On the issue of funds, like I stated earlier, the ceiling for each ministry will not allow for a one-off budget. For this, we have a budget line for the survey of that area. We are just waiting for the technical team from the other side and then we shall kick-start the process and put the budget within the context. We have also been promised funding from the African Union basket for the border re-demarcation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

7.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Section 6(3) of the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act, 2013 mandates the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to lay before Parliament the model Production Sharing Agreement (PSA) or any other model agreement following Cabinet’s approval.

On 23 September 2015, Cabinet convened and approved the following key features of the same new model production sharing agreement, which include: 

(i) 	Government’s total take comprising of royalties, state participation, signature bonuses, production share and corporate income tax (that is the one paid by the licensee from its share of production);

(ii) 	Payment of the production bonus by the licensee, the use of R-factor (that is ratio of cumulative net revenues received by the licensee to cumulative capital expenditure incurred by the licensee for a given project in the fiscal year regime);

(iii)	Emplacement of the fiscal regime for gas which includes cost recovery caps, production bonuses and profit share;

(iv) 	The exclusion of matters of environment, health and safety from stabilisation or re-negotiations in case of a change in laws;

(v) 	The alignment of other key provisions like assignments, accountability and audit - 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I heard the clerk read the item on the Order Paper and it was “Laying of papers”, and I do not have a hearing problem. The minister is reading the ministerial policy statement and has gone to the second page. 

Can we be advised whether the minister is presenting a ministerial statement, which the rules require that we should have a copy, or he is laying papers?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I recall that when we made those laws, we asked them to come and lay them on the Table and not to read the policy statement. Please, lay the documents on the Table and make sure that they are available in the House. (Laughter)

MR LOKERIS: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I only wanted to mention the features that are included.

THE SPEAKER: No, you can cause a debate here, which will cause you problems. (Laughter)

MR LOKERIS: This one is the Production Sharing Agreement for Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production. I beg to lay.

All these that I have here are regulations on local content, on production, on health –(Interjection)- The title is “Regulation on production in the area of downstream”. This one is, “Agreement model for production sharing agreement”. This is the one that covers all these regulations. I beg to lay. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. The documents are now available to the House for scrutiny and perusal. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

7.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the proposal to borrow US $14,300,000 from the OPEC Fund for International Development to support the vocational education project phase II. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I send that to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. Can we go to item No.5 before we go to item No.4(c)?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AMEND THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT TO INCREASE THE MEMBERSHIP OF STANDING COMMITTEES

7.39
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Clement Ongalo-Obote): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament to amend the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to increase the membership of standing committees. I move this motion under Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and Rules 47 and 149 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda - (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I rise strongly on a question of procedure. Before Parliament was sent on recess, concerns were raised that the Rules of Procedure we have are of the Ninth Parliament. Therefore, this Parliament tasked the chairperson and the committee to expeditiously work on the Rules of Procedure so that a report is brought for the proper guidance of this very House. 

We had an opportunity, we went on recess and we looked forward to looking at the rules in their entirety. However, when the chairperson of that committee, who was tasked by this House to expedite the review of the rules, is now the mover of this motion, picking out - 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, he is actually complying with the instructions of the House. He is seeking to have a proper committee with the right numbers to do the work you want. Hon. Ongalo-Obote, please proceed. 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your profoundly wise ruling. 

“WHEREAS Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to appoint committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions;

AND WHEREAS Rule 145 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament empowers Parliament to have standing committees and sectoral committees as provided for under Part XXIV of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament;

AWARE that Rule 149 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament requires that standing committees other than the Business Committee, Budget Committee, Appointments Committee and sectoral committees are to consist of not less than 15 Members and not more than 30 Members;

FURTHER AWARE that if rule 149 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament is enforced in its current state, 17 Members of Parliament will not be designated on standing committees and the expected Members to represent the newly created districts will not participate in standing committees for the entire duration of the Tenth Parliament; 

NOTING that unless Rule 149 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament is amended by increasing the membership of standing committees from 30 Members, 17 current Members of Parliament will not serve on any standing committee, thereby limiting their participation in the parliamentary business before such committees;

APPRECIATING that all Members of Parliament are equally entitled to serve on parliamentary committees and to represent the views of their constituents on such committees, failure of which disfranchises the people they represent; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:

1. 	Rule 149 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament is amended by increasing the maximum membership of standing committees from 30 to 35 Members so that the rule now reads:

‘New Rule 149 

Membership of Standing Committees 

Subject to these rules, each standing committee, apart from the Business Committee, Budget Committee and the Appointments Committee, shall consist of not less than 15 and not more than 35 members selected in accordance with these rules.”

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by various Members, including Cabinet ministers. Justify and then we shall move on. 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Madam Speaker, in the law of torts, there is something called res ipsa loquitur; it means, “The thing speaks for itself”. This motion, therefore, speaks for itself. 

We need this motion because it is a constitutional requirement that all Members of Parliament serve in committees. Currently, the standing committees of Parliament are 12; if they are to have a maximum of 30 members per committee, we will only be able to accommodate 360 Members. Without the ministers, we will then have denied 17 Members of Parliament their right to belong to committees. 

Moreover, we have 23 new districts, which we approved in the Ninth Parliament. By the close of the Tenth Parliament, we shall have 23 more Members than we have now, including, I am proud to say, the Woman Member of Parliament for Kalaki District, who will need to belong somewhere. It, therefore, becomes imperative that we amend these rules so that we do not disenfranchise voters who send able Members to this House to give contributions both at committee and plenary level. 

Therefore, my humble appeal to this House and to my colleagues is that we amend this rule so that we do not deny Government the benefit of the special experience, which Members bring to these committees. I thank you all very much. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Is there any objection? Let us have the seconders. They will all use one minute each. 

7.48
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion as proposed by the chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the grounds that he has stated. However, for emphasis, we have to acknowledge the fact that committees are the main vehicle through which Parliament transacts its work. Therefore, if we exclude any Member from such an opportunity, then we are being unfair.

Secondly, the presiding Speaker a few days ago proposed that the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline should consider amending Article 90 so that we can cater for everybody. Even these 17 Members represent Ugandans and some of them represent very big constituencies. Therefore, it is my considered view that what the chairperson has moved should be supported by everybody. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whereas I support the spirit of the motion, I seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee on why he has created exceptions for some committees, for instance the Budget Committee. I would appreciate the exception for the Business Committee, but I would like to know why he particularly created an exception for it not to exceed the number. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.50
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the mover of the motion. I support it. I do not think that there is anything exceptional about excluding the Business Committee, the Appointments Committee and the other. Even if we were to say that we move it to 40 per cent, because Parliament is still growing - we are going to probably reach 500 or even 600 Members - we will be coming back to amend rules again and again. 

I have a substantive issue to raise, which I would like to convey through the chairperson to the person responsible, that is, the Leader of the Opposition and the Government Chief Whip. I would like to commend the Government Chief Whip and the Leader of Government Business this side for trying to abide by the affirmative principle of 40 per cent in the leadership. As chairperson of UWOPA, I have been doing analysis as part of my duty and I think that in terms of leadership, they have done commendably well in allocating –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, use half a minute to summarise your submission.

MS AMODING: For UWOPA’s sake, the issue that is still pending is the membership. I notice with sadness that on many committees, we have quite minimal representation of women - even less than 15 per cent. Women are concentrated in committees which are presumed to be the simple ones - health, sports, gender, among others. However, committees like finance, national economy and all the others, are not being taken care of.

It is the prerogative of the people who allocate these people on these committees to allocate Members based on that principle; it does not matter which committee the person applies for. I would like to appeal to you that as you do this for those 17 Members that have not been allocated, let us try to balance and have these Members well represented.

Madam Speaker, we are also interested in having these processes of amending the rules expedited because we have substantive issues which affect our representation in this House, in this Tenth Parliament. I, therefore, would like to appeal to the chairperson that when you are ready to expedite the process, inform us because we have issues that we are waiting to recommend for amendment. Thank you.

7.52
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a submission under Rule 52 of our Rules of Procedure, which provides for the amendment to motions. It clearly says, “When any motion is under consideration in the House or in the Committee of the whole House, an amendment may be proposed to the motion if it is relevant to the motion.” This amendment excludes the leadership of the committee and yet by express and necessary implication, they are Members of that particular committee or committees which they lead.

I, therefore, propose this late amendment: “Subject to these rules, each standing committee, apart from the Business Committee, Budget Committee and Appointments Committee, shall consist of not less than 15 and not more than 35 Members as shall be designated and/or selected in accordance with these rules.” That component of designation carries or covers the leadership because they are not selected but are designated –(Member timed out)

7.54
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I substantially have no problem with this amendment. However, we are going to have a situation where we are going to sit here again to amend the rules. This is because where you state figures – for instance we may have new MPs in the next three weeks - these figures will be defective. I suggest that we bring an amendment where we only state the minimum requirement and then we could leave the rest open.

You have seen the problem; some people are even talking of lifting the presidential age limit. They have been caught up by these things. We probably can just prescribe the minimum number of Members in the committee and we will leave the maximum to the discretion of the Speaker, so that tomorrow we do not come here to spend 30 minutes at 7.00 p.m., at a time we should be home with our families, as a result of making mistakes on figures. Let the law be blind and then the implementation - There is actually nothing controversial there.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, what is there to stop a committee from taking 100 Members and others getting nothing? If you knew how much work goes into these committees, hon. Otto –

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, our rules state that in a situation where it is not expressly provided for, the Commonwealth practice gives a lot of powers to the Speaker. I want a situation where we have a minimum requirement but the Speaker, who chairs the whole House, will at any one moment have the discretion to determine the maximum. Otherwise, we are going to keep on amending again and again as hon. Amoding said because Parliament is even expanding in the next three weeks and these figures would be wrong.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to appeal to you to have the minimum and the maximum. We have had situations where everybody wants to go to a particular committee and not to any other. The Speaker then has to beg for understanding. Let us have the minimum and the maximum. We can continue amending; the House is always there.

7.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion. I agree with you that the experience we have in this House is that when there is a call for Members to apply for committees, there is over subscription for some of the committees. If we do not put an upper limit in terms of numbers, it can be a challenge on how you can persuade Members to leave the committee of their choice and go to one of the committees which are considered unpopular.

I think that from the motion, the committee has considered even the Members of Parliament who are about to join this House. That is how I understood this motion. Therefore, I would like to agree with your guidance that we keep the numbers. In any case, after the new Members have come, I do not think that there will be other new Members until the end of the term.

Secondly, there has been criticism that this Parliament is big but I would like to give statistical information that at independence, this Parliament had 82 Members of Parliament and the population of Uganda was estimated at 7.24 million Ugandans. Now when you look at the Constitution, representation is based on population quarter. When you do a simple computation, at independence, each Member of Parliament represented 88,000 Ugandans. With the current numbers in Parliament of about 427 Members and a population of 38 million, each Member of Parliament is representing about 89, 000 Ugandans. 

Therefore, in terms of representation, the situation is still the same when you compare it at independence and today, if you just compute. I just wanted to give that information. In terms of Member of Parliament per population represented, it remains the same when you compare independence and today. It is, therefore, in order for people to get represented. Since our rules require that all backbench Members of Parliament should belong to a committee, I definitely support this motion that we vary the numbers to accommodate everybody in the House. I thank you.

7.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Clement Ongalo-Obote): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been asked why I have excluded some committees from this amendment. First of all, the amendment I am seeking is only to be able to integrate the 17 Members who have still failed to be integrated into committees because we have reached our limit. 

This amendment, however, is going to enable the committee to begin its work. Now, even though the committee has been accused of dragging its feet; I wonder how it could have brought an amendment to a House that was on recess. When this rule is amended and the committees become operational, then they will begin appearing before the committee and we will work on the amendments to the rules that will bring up the rules of the Tenth Parliament. We cannot do that until all the committees become operational. That is what this rule seeks to do today- to operationalise all the 13 standing committees of this House by ensuring that the 17 Members who have not yet been allocated to committees because of maximum numbers can now be allocated.

As for creating a minimum rather than maximum, I leave that to when we have amended these rules to allow the committee to begin its work of seriously looking at a comprehensive amendment. We can then be able to look at that. However, for the moment, the amendment we seek is only to enable us do this, and that was my term of reference. How do I fit in the 17 excess Members? That is what I am seeking to do now. I am not seeking to amend the Rules of Procedure of the Ninth Parliament to bring them up-to-date with the Tenth Parliament. I will do that after this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ongalo, did you vacate your position?

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: I vacated to receive clarification. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are amending Rule 149. What I want you to explain to the House is the logic behind creating an exception for the Budget Committee. I appreciate the exception for the Appointments committee and the Business Committee, but I do not understand the reason behind excluding the Budget Committee and limiting the number to less than 30. Why don’t we treat it like other committees? 

The clause itself says that the chairpersons of other committees shall only be ex officio. Why don’t we open up the Budget Committee and treat it like other committees?

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member is holding a copy of the Rules of Procedure in his hands. He will notice that I am not the one who has created that exception; it is in there. Please, help this committee integrate these 17 Members so that we can comprehensively begin questioning why some of these things are the way they are. However, for the moment, it is not up to me and not in my mandate to explain why these committees are excluded. 

In any case, the Business Committee is not really a normal committee of Parliament; it is not exclusive. It is not a committee by itself because you are there because you are a chairperson or vice-chairperson or for a certain reason. Please, allow us to do this and then we will explain that with time. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Just for the comfort of hon. Kenneth Lubogo, the Budget Committee comprises the chairpersons, the vice-chairpersons - Maybe you can look at Rule 161; party whips based on representation in the House to designate those 30 Members and that is specific. If you want to change it, you will have to wait until the committee is constituted. However, those are the rules as of now. The others are designated by virtue of their office. You are either a chairperson or you are not. If you are a chairperson then you belong to the Business Committee. However, if you want to change, do it later.

8.08
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka South County, Kyegegwa): Madam Speaker, I stand here to move a motion under Rule 15 of the Rules of Procedure:

“WHEREAS a motion has been moved to amend Rule 149 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to increase the membership of the standing committees;

AND WHEREAS Rule 60 of the Rules of Procedure requires that such a motion shall be introduced upon giving notice of not less than five days and that such a motion shall be referred to the standing Committee of Rules, Privileges and Discipline before further proceedings can commence;

NOTING that it is imperative that Parliament expeditiously constitutes committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions;

FURTHER NOTING that the process of constituting committees has not been finalised because a number of Members of Parliament do not have space on standing committees, because of the restrictions imposed or posed under Rule 149;

NOW, THEREFORE, I move under Rule 15 to have Rule 60 of the Rules of Procedure suspended to enable the House constitute and dispose of a motion moved to amend Rule 149, and as a result facilitate the finalisation of the constitution of the committees by the whips.” I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is it seconded? It is seconded. Justify your motion.

MR KAFUUZI:  For purposes of justification, the motion moved by the chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges requires that a notice of five days is given. 

Knowing that we are just coming out of recess and we need to constitute these committees and start business, giving five days’ notice and then referring the matter to the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges as required under Rule 60 will prolong the whole process and our 17 colleagues will remain wavering around. That is why I think it is necessary to suspend the requirement imposed by Rule 60 and move forward. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to confirm that under Rule 15, I gave my consent to this motion. Therefore, the question is that Rule 60(1) be suspended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The question is that the motion moved by the chairperson of the rules committee be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

LAYING OF PAPERS

8.11
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibale): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 for the following local governments: 

i) 	Ngora District Local Government
ii) 	Kabarole District Local Government
iii) 	Ibanda District Local Government 
iv) 	Hoima District Local Government 
v) 	Bududa District Local Government 
vi) 	Kyenjojo District Local Government
vii) 	Adjumani District Local Government
viii) 	Alebtong District Local Government 
ix) 	Nakasongola District Local Government
x) 	Rubirizi District Local Government 
xi) 	Mayuge District Local Government 
xii) 	Awei Subcounty
xiii) 	Baitambogwe Subcounty 
xiv) 	Kigumba Subcounty
xv) 	Mpungu Subcounty
xvi) 	Twemba Subcounty
xvii) 	Kirujubu Division	
xviii) 	Birembo Subcounty	
xix) 	Kwapa Subcounty
xx) 	Nyangahya Division
xxi) 	Masindi Port Subcounty
xxii) 	Maliba Subcounty	
xxiii) 	Rukiri Subcounty	
xxiv) 	Kigaraale Subcounty	
xxv) 	Nyanga Subcounty
xxvi) 	Kalungu Subcounty
xxvii) 	Malongo Subcounty
xxviii) 	Kigandalo Subcounty
xxix) 	Jagusi Subcounty
xxx) 	Buwaaya Subcounty
xxxi) 	Kakoro Subcounty
xxxii) 	South Division – Fort portal Municipal Council
xxxiii) 	Waibuga Subcounty 
xxxiv) 	Bugaaki Subcounty
xxxv) 	Kabarole District Local Government

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all these are submitted to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and expeditious report back.

Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much. All the items on the Order Paper have been completed. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 8.13 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 August 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
