Tuesday, 27 August 2013

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I want to start by thanking the Members of Parliament and staff who joined us in the Rotary Cancer Run on Sunday to assist in the drive to construct an ultra-modern cancer ward at Nsambya Hospital. 

I also want to take this opportunity to inform you that our colleague, hon. Hamson Obua, was involved in an accident on Saturday evening. He is hospitalised but I think he is stable. He was coming from Tororo where he had gone to support hon. Ogwang who had an introduction. I congratulate hon. Ogwang on his introduction. 

I want to remind the members and the chairpersons of the sectoral committees to expedite the work on the ministerial policy statements on the Budget for the Financial Year 2013/2014. So far, only the ICT committee is ready. I do commend them and I want to urge all the other committees to hasten their work so that we try to bridge the deficit. Our hands are tied by the Budget Act; we are required to have completed handling ministerial policy statements by now. So, after this item, I will invite the chairpersons to give a status update on their readiness for presentation to the House so that we can determine how to proceed.

Since we are behind schedule, it may be necessary for us to meet on Mondays and Fridays as well, to give time to the reports to be presented and debated. I am, therefore, giving you notice that depending on what they report, we may have to sit on Friday, 30 August and also Monday, 2 September 2013. Once we have finalised the budget process, we will go back to our old schedule of sitting on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. I want to ask the whips to ensure that the Members do come and attend and handle the work which is outstanding.

I will now adjust the Order Paper to allow the presentation of two petitions, one by the honourable Commissioner, Jalia Bintu, and another by hon. Roland Mugume. I wish you successful deliberations. Hon. Bukenya had something he wanted to say. I will give you two minutes. I am looking for those who asked for permission in the morning. 

2.47
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides, under its national objectives and directive principles of state policy No. XIII,  that “The State shall protect important natural resources, including land, water, wetlands, minerals, oil, fauna and flora on behalf of the people of Uganda.”

Objective No. XXVII (i) states that, “The State shall promote sustainable development and public awareness of the need to manage land, air and water resources in a balanced and sustainable manner for the present and future generations.”

Article 245 of the Constitution provides for the protection of the environment and tasks Parliament to make laws to provide for measures intended to protect and preserve the environment from abuse, pollution and degradation, to manage the environment for sustainable development, and to promote environmental awareness. However, the State has reneged on the above mentioned. 

Lake Victoria is a shallow lake that allows for the breeding of various species of fish, unlike Lake Bunyonyi in Kabale, for example, which is a deep lake. In the last three weeks, an investor has on a daily basis been dumping about 100 trucks of soil into Lake Victoria at a place called Namulanda. This dumping of soil is even being overseen by the Police who escort the trucks and assist the management of the traffic at that point in Namulanda where the trucks turn off to go and do the dumping. The Police are now part of abdicating of the constitutional role of protecting the environment and instead they are enabling the degradation of the environment in total disregard of their constitutional mandate.

The ecosystem of Lake Victoria is very fragile. Any attempt to tamper with it will result in adverse consequences. This ecosystem supports globally threatened species of birds, endangered cichlid fish and over 100 very rare butterfly species. It is a breeding ground for clarias fish and lungfish. It supports more than 52 per cent of the white-winged black terns (Chlidonias leucopterus) population –(Ms Anywar rose_) -Madam Speaker-  

THE SPEAKER: No, you are presenting a problem; it is not a debate. Please, present your problem. 

PROF. BUKENYA: Madam Speaker, our lakes form an important part of our ecosystem world over. Due to the changing climate scene, measures are being put in place to reduce degradation of the ecosystem and the effects of climate change. However, for us here, the State is involved in protecting the degraders of the ecosystem. This ecosystem plays an important hydrological role. The papyrus swamps, which are now being buried, act as a natural filter for silt, sediments and excess nutrients in surface runoff, waste waters from industries as well as sewerage. 

Article 40(2) of the Constitution gives a right to a person to carry on any lawful business. The business of degrading the environment is an unlawful business and any person, investor or not, local or foreign, should not be allowed to degrade our environment. 

The National Environment Management Authority had instructed the flower company to ensure that the concerns of the community neighbouring the flower farm are addressed adequately from time to time as they arise, but this has never happened. When the neighbours complained about this, the Police brutally attacked them. In fact, over seven people are in prison for claiming what was right for them.

Madam Speaker, our neighbouring countries with whom we share this lake are busy protecting their sides of the lake yet we here in Uganda are busy degrading and reducing the size. What shall we do when we have poured a lot of soil in our part of the lake and filled it up? Ninety percent of us here in Kampala and Entebbe drink water from Lake Victoria. Water for domestic and industrial use also comes from this lake. Now if you contaminate it and also fill it with soil, there are adverse effects that will occur.

I, therefore, plead that the state looks into this state of affairs and brings to a halt this degradation. The investor is earning money for himself but busy killing the livelihood for many people. Now you cannot fish because the areas where the small fish go and feed are filled. I urge my colleagues to visit this place and see for themselves the level of damage occasioned. We must rise up together against this degradation of our environment by this investor.

I urge you, Madam Speaker, to allow Members of Parliament to come and visit. Instead of spending even one more day here, we should visit and take corrective decisions on what to do with this excessive dumping of soil in our lake. I live at the lakeside and I enjoy the lake; Igo fishing but I may not fish anymore because of this severe damage to the lake.

THE SPEAKER: Please, try to wind up. 

PROF. BUKENYA: I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what hon. Bukenya has raised is important. We invite the minister to take an interest in this state of affairs. Also, after we have dealt with the budget, we shall ask our committee to pay a site visit and come back and report to us. They should not go before the budget.

2.56
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am moving under rule 50 (k) of our Rules of Procedure to raise a matter of national importance. 

Western Uganda has experienced strikes in more than 20 secondary schools. Schools have been burnt and children have been sent home immediately after going to school. I got a phone call from one of the psychiatrists in Mbarara Regional Hospital who told me that a very big number of students he had admitted in his ward of psychiatry in Mbarara were taking a drug called Kuber.

Kuber is an Indian tobacco, which has got some addictive effects. This drug is sold in sachets and taken as mint for giving fresh breath. This drug has been imported into this country since 2009. This drug is manufactured by Zinparti Tobacco Company Ltd in Napal, India under the licence of a company called Kuber of India. The sole distributor of this addictive drug is called Big Boss Universal Ltd Uganda. I have the telephone number of these guys; it is 0713990991. They have an e-mail which is bigbossuniversal@gmail.com. There is something written in Swahili saying, “tayarikwamatumizi”, meaning “it is ready for use”.

This drug contains some tobacco, lime water, it has unknown oil, it has some menthol and it also has unspecified spices. This drug has up to 25 percent of nicotine and it very addictive. Studies show that Kuber contains 28 cancer causing agents. The users are taking in three to four times more nicotine than normal cigarettes that we have here. It also has Cannabidioland delta 9-tetra Cannabidiol, which are all primary ingredients in the Indian marijuana that is called hemp. It has been banned in Malawi and Tanzania because of its side effects. 

Some of the side effects include delusions - thinking that you are very high; you can even think you are a president. It causes hallucinations; you can begin to see some funny things even at night when you are sleeping. It causes headache, it weakens teeth and it causes gum bleeding. The long-term effect of this drug is that it causes discolouration of teeth. That is why you find people having brown teeth or black and yet they are very beautiful young people. It creates holes in the gums. It can predispose somebody to cervical cancer, which we have tried to prevent by even giving vaccines. It causes infertility and it also causes mouth and throat cancer.

What is killing most is that the drug is sold at counters in a variety of supermarkets. It is also taken by taxi drivers. No wonder we have a variety of accidents in this country. It is taken by street children because they do not sleep. Some students in Kabale and Mbarara have been found with the drug. The headmasters confirmed this, and the papers started running it. 

Madam Speaker, as we talk, you cannot get this drug when you go for it as Speaker. They cannot give it you, but they will give it to somebody who is very small. My problem is that the National Bureau of Standards accepts this into the country. The National Drug Authority has not actually taken it up because they bring it up as tobacco and not a drug.

THE SPEAKER: Please, windup.

DR BITEKYEREZO: I have one prayer - that the Minister of Trade and Industry implores the National Bureau of Standards, in collaboration with National Drug Authority, to find out the contents of this drug. I used my messenger to go and buy this drug from a supermarket in Mbarara because if I had gone there, they would not have given it to me. They brought it to me and it cost only Shs 1000 because students are the ones who use it.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table this drug called Kuber, which is made in India and it is marketed by Big Boss Universal Limited, Uganda. They have given a telephone contact and their e-mail address. This Parliament needs to act very fast to find out what is killing our people and to make sure that we stop people from importing things that are killing our children. I beg to lay the drug on the Table.  Madam Speaker, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Bitekyerezo. We ask the Minister for Trade and Industry to investigate this thing called Kuber and find out its effects and impact so that the government can take action.  

Honourable members, in the visitor's gallery, we have staff from the Parliament of Botswana, who are here to benchmark the Hansard operations and the digital recording system of the Parliament. They are: Mr Redman Josiah, Principal Assistant Clerk and head of delegation; Ms Esther Jean, Assistant Secretary in the House of Chiefs; Mr Karabo Maromo, Principal Public Relations Officer; Ms Judith Sebetlela, IT Manager; Mr Tumelo Gaodumelwe, Sound Engineer; and Ms Tshwanologo Rantsebele, Principal Clerk Assistant. You are all welcome. (Applause)

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to raise this matter for guidance. 

I would like to thank you for the instruction that you have given to the Minister for Trade and Industry to investigate Kuber. Given the importance of the matter and the fact that it has been raised in Parliament, I am seeking your guidance and indulgence as to whether it will not be useful for the country and Parliament that the minister reports back to Parliament within a given time as to what action she has taken and the effects thereof. I thank you very much.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I need guidance I also probably will need a reminder if I missed it. There used to be a Bill before this House called the Anti-Narcotics and Other Psychotropic Substances Bill. Where is it? I imagine those are some of the things that we could regulate.

I also understand that at implementation level, the Police is so disempowered as the law is very weak. This Bill has been before this House for quite some time, wouldn't it be useful, Madam Speaker, if you guided us and probably also advised the committee to speed up the processing of this Bill? Probably, we would have leverage in managing such substances.

THE SPEAKER: May I hear from the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. I think the Bill is in that committee.  Hon. Benny Namugwanya.  

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. By the close of last financial year, the committee had started considering the Bill. When this financial year began, we decided to first consider the policy statements and immediately after, the Bill is the next item on our business. I want to promise this House that immediately we are through with the policy statements, we are going to handle this with the urgency it requires. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Of course, when the minister does the investigation, we expect her to come back and report to us. 

MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to make a statement on a matter of national and public importance.

Honourable colleagues, many of you might have read in the Sunday Monitor newspaper of Sunday, 25 August 2013 that the DRC army set up base four kilometres inside Uganda along the DRC-Uganda border. The area in question is in Abanga Sub-county in Okoro County, which is my constituency, in Zombo District. The area affected includes the parishes of Pakadha, Asina and Pamitu. Now, all these parishes actually border the DRC. Right now, the people in these parishes cannot walk freely; they cannot go to their fields to dig. 

This afternoon, I received a call that the invading DRC soldiers had shot dead a 70-year-old man and I think this was because they wanted his son. Fortunately, the son ran away but they got hold of the old man from whom they wanted money. Unfortunately, he did not have the money so they shot him dead. 

The issue I want to raise is: what action has Government taken to contain the situation? Two, what is the status quo along our border because this has affected very many things?  Three, I know that all this is happening because we do not have clear demarcations along our borders; what has the Government done in correcting this? 

Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter, which I would like Government to take very seriously. Now it is now happening to us but it is going to happen to other areas as well. Madam Speaker, you will recall that when we were in Lefori Sub-county in Moyo District last year as members of the foreign affairs committee, we were arrested and put at gun point for two days in our own land in Uganda. So, this is a serious matter, which must be taken seriously. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you want Government to take action but now you are causing a debate. I gave you two minutes and you have raised your issue.

MR OMWONYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is all I wanted to say.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have the Minister for Defence, when responding to the report on his sector, to assure the country and the people of Okoro about what is going to be done about that security problem affecting our people? Commissioner Jalia Bintu, please, come and present the petition.

PETITION

3.11
MRS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, allow me present a petition under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

This is a humble petition of the occupants of Ranch 11,KimogoroCell in Mutunda Sub-county, Kiryandongo District on the painful evictions without resettlement and compensation since 1999 to-date.

Madam Speaker, your humble petitioners are aggrieved that there were formerly 745 homesteads in two groups of Kibyama and the Nubian communities and they were evicted in the 1970s by the then Government when the - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Commissioner, just read the source and the prayers.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, the petitioners presented a petition to the Office of the Speaker and these are their prayers. The petitioners are from Kiryadongo District, Mutunda Sub-county, Kimogoro Cell and this problem has been on-going since 1999.

The humble petitioners are aggrieved that there were formerly 745 homesteads in two groups of Kibyama and the Nubian communities of formerly Masindi, now Kiryandongo District, and they were evicted in the 1970s by the then government when a Palestine farm was established in Kiryandongo Sub-county. The petitioners in turn occupied public land in the neighbourhood- 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Commissioner, it seems you are reading the body. What are the prayers?

MS BINTU: I am on the prayers and I will wind up. I am concluding the subject.

Your humble petitioners pray that the Presidential directive of resettling the petitioners be implemented. They further pray that the boundaries of Ranch No. 11 be reopened and; that the petitioners be reissued with leases. They pray that social amenities be provided in form of roads, water points, health units and schools in the areas where they are supposed to be resettled. Further, they pray that a land fund be established to support the petitioners in income generating activities.

Madam Speaker, these prayers arise out of the communication from the office of the Minister of State for Lands, dated 23 March 2001, to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in which the settling of 750 families, which were displaced in Masindi District, was communicated. Here attached is a letter from the office of the Minister of State for Lands dated 25 April 2001, which I want to lay on the Table. She wrote to the RDC, Masindi, and the chairperson LCV asking them to appoint a resettlement committee for the 750 families displaced in Masindi. 

Another letter, which I want to lay on the Table, is from the Masindi District local government speaker dated 2May 2001 to the district chairperson. In this letter, the speaker referred to the resettlement of the evicted persons from the Karuma Wildlife Reserve and the Nubian community. Also, the appendix of the list of evicted persons from the Karuma Wildlife Reserve in 1999 after being gazetted in 1998 by the Uganda Wildlife Authority is hereby laid on the Table.

I beg to lay the petition on the Table. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this involves a presidential directive and also involves utilisation of land. I think let us send it to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure; they will get the support of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. 

PETITION

3.16
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, I rise to present a petition under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

This is a humble petition of the students of Makerere University. The petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that the Government of Uganda addresses the lecturers’ plight and comes to agreement with them. 

The petitioners pray that the Government of Uganda declares that Makerere University be opened immediately. Your petitioners have appended their signatures.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we ask the Committee on Education to look at it but we will also send a copy to the Minister for Education for her early action. 

3.18
MR Emmanuel DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The way Parliament conducts its business has given hope to the people of Uganda, to the extent that the work of Parliament is visible and many people will progressively send us petitions to handle. Whereas this is so, Parliament also has the traditional mandate of things that they must do, especially the statutory issues that we must deal with within the constitutional limits. 

Over time, petitions are progressively becoming many. You end up with a petition on Owino, a petition on districts and many other petitions. They will continue; we are not going to prevent them. Last week, when the Deputy Speaker was in the chair, this matter was raised again. He had proposed that the Business Committee will begin considering petitions to look at their appropriateness, to see whether, like you have just guided, that it should also be sent to the Minister of Education in this case. This is because some of the issues are brought to Parliament when actually, they should have gone straight to the ministry for handling, and that helps Parliament to perform its core functions. 

The procedural issue I rose on is that as petitions come in, the government should help us, especially the Executive. For some of the issues, such as the Makerere issue, they can provide answers; we do not need to inquire. We should just urge them through the budget process to go and discuss with Makerere and either allow Makerere to run as a commercial institution by taking into consideration the views of the people of Uganda that they should access quality education or they should find money and enable Makerere to run. 

A petition is good but it can take time and drag into quality time, which Parliament would have used. This is the issue I want to request on. We have reports of public accounts and of local government accounts and many other reports that we should handle within the statutory period, which we are not doing, Madam Speaker. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I was clear. I said that it should be sent to the Minister of Education but also our committee could look at it. 

On the issue of what petitions should come, I think we shall sit with the rules committee and refine the areas because it is a bit broad and when the public come, they expect you to do something about their work and not just keep quiet about it. We need to balance that. We shall ask the rules committee to come up with a strategy of refining which ones we should handle and which ones we should send somewhere. Hon. Fungaroo, you have one minute and then we will go back to the Order Paper.

3.22
MR KAPS HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I rise on a matter of national importance about traders and Ugandans moving on the road between Kampala and Juba, particularly after entering the Republic of South Sudan. Incidences of insecurity and theft have been reported on this road and they are taking a new shape - not only theft of property and money but also people, particularly children. 

Children, especially babies, are picked by the robbers. They target children. They take the children and keep them. This is a practise that has been going on in Eastern Equatoria State and in Jongolei. There is a community, which is well known in South Sudan for cattle raiding, and unfortunately they also raid children now. They are known as the Murule; they have been suspected to be the ones involved in this. No arrests have been made but the issue was reported to the Police division of Gumboin Juba. It occurred on the 17th of this month at 4.00 p.m. on the road, at a place called Nesitu. 

My point here is: one, the country should know that we have people like that there. Women, particularly those who travel on this road, should be cautious of the security of their children. If you can afford, do not take your child with you to Juba. If you have to go with the baby, make sure that proper security arrangements are made. The Government of the Republic of Uganda in partnership with the Government of the Republic of South Sudan should improve the security along the way. (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you for giving way. This is not an isolated case. There is a lady who came to my office last year. She had stayed with a man from Sudan. This man kidnapped and disappeared with her son who was not his biological son. I raised this matter with the Minister of Foreign Affairs. Even our foreign affairs officials were conniving with the people in Southern Sudan. 

I am happy to note that after I raised that matter with hon. Oryem, our staff who were based in Juba were withdrawn from there. So, this is not an isolated case. This has been going on and the ministry should help us to sort this out. If I knew this matter was coming up, I would have brought the documentation. This lady has been frustrated a number of times by officials from Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I would like to request this friendly government, the Government of the Republic of South Sudan, and the Government of the Republic of Uganda to step up the operations of rescuing the baby. Let me give you the names of the baby, the mother and the father. 

The baby is nine months old, named Brian Yoruda Alimi. The father is called Mr Robert Alemi and the mother is called Faiza Irene Alemi. They are residents of Moyo District, Gimara Sub County, Obongi County. The issue was reported to Gumbo Police division of Juba. Thank you for giving me this opportunity. This country should try to bring the baby back. 

THE SPEAKER: I ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to follow up on this matter and let us know what happens to the child.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

3.26
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Are there any seconders? (Members rose-) Yes, it has been seconded by several Members. 

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013”. According to section 10 of the Budget Act, I also beg to lay on the Table the certificate of financial implications to accompany this Bill. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ssimbwa. We shall send the Bill to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to commence immediately we complete the budget, taking into account the importance of the subject matter. 

PRESENTATION OF THE STATUS ON FINALISING THE REPORTS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS ON THE BUDGET

THE SPEAKER: I invite the chairpersons to give us an update.

3.28
MS EVERLINE CHELANGAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry will be ready by Thursday.

3.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are now finishing up with our draft report. Had it not been for lack of quorum because of so many committees sitting, we would have finished now. We hope that by Tuesday next week, our report will be ready.

3.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Physical Infrastructure is making good progress on the report although it is a big one. Currently, we are handling the alternative ministerial statement and we hope that next week, we shall have the report ready.

3.29
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Baka Mugabi): Madam Speaker, we have met all the ministries, departments and agencies and what we are left with is harmonisation with Ministry of Finance. We have started on that process and by Tuesday next week, we will be ready.

3.32
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Mable Bakeine): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Public Service and Local Government has completed the report. It is dully signed and ready to be presented tomorrow.

3.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Natural Resources will be ready to present on Tuesday, next week. 

3.34
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Presidential Affairs finalised harmonisation this morning and according to the programme, we are supposed to present on Thursday this week and we will be ready.

3.35
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Abrahams Lokii): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Foreign Affairs is ready to present its report tomorrow. 

3.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Bugembe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs harmonised the draft report this morning. What remains is getting signatures from the Members, which I am sure we will get tomorrow and we shall be ready to present on Thursday this week. 

3.37
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): Madam Speaker, at the moment we have a draft report, which will be considered by Members and hopefully, by next week on Tuesday we should be able to present to this august House. The committee is also considering the Revenue Generation Bill for Financial Year 2013/14 and if you give us the opportunity next week, by Tuesday, we should be able to report.

THE SPEAKER: Both the report and the Bill?

MR OKELLO: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

3.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Margret Komuhangi): Madam Speaker, the committee is ready to submit tomorrow as scheduled. 

3.39
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Huda Oleru): Madam Speaker, we already have the draft report. We are doing proof reading and by Tuesday next week, we shall be ready.

3.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Sylvia Ssinabulya): Madam Speaker, the committee has a draft report, which members are perusing through. We hope that we shall be ready to present next Wednesday. 

3.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Sarah Mwebaza): Madam Speaker, the Committee on East African Community Affairs will be ready to present its report on Thursday. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much. So, at least there are reports, which can be presented tomorrow and on Thursday. However, I would really urge you to try and complete them by the weekend so that they can all be presented next week.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was looking at rule 138 of our Rules of Procedure and it says that all reports must be here by 31st of August, but I noticed that some people are promising to bring their reports next week. Are we waiving this rule? I need guidance on that, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I shall handle that at the appropriate time. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

WAGE BUDGET CORRIGENDA FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, the House will recall that the Budget for the Financial Year 2013/2014 was presented to this august House on 13 June 2013. On 27th June, the House approved the vote on account for the Financial Year 2013/2014. However, the Ministry of Finance has observed some errors and omissions that necessitated the appropriation of corrigenda. 

The purpose of this corrigenda is, therefore, to inform the Members of this House on the inadvertent errors and omissions in the draft budget estimates for the Financial Year 2013/2014 that need to be rectified and considered during the budget approval process. Corrigenda are contained in tables 1, 2 and 3 that have been submitted to this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform this House that the net effect of the corrigenda to the draft estimates for the Financial Year 2013/2014 is as follows:

1. On the recurrent budget – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you want us to start debating those things now? I thought you were laying them on the Table so that the committee can look at them.

MR AJEDRA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the corrigenda for the draft estimates for the Financial Year 2013/2014. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the corrigenda is sent to the Committee on Budget to peruse and to report back at an appropriate time.

LAYING OF PAPERS

DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table, as directed by rule 32(1), the following districts’ local government financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinions thereon by the Auditor-General: 
    • Mbarara District Local Government – 

THE SPEAKER: I think it should be Maracha, not Mbarara.

MR SABIITI: I beg your pardon; it is Maracha District Local Government. I beg to lay. I would also like to lay on the Table statements and reports for the following district local governments:

    • Mubende District Local Government 
    • Kalangala District Local Government 
    • Bududa District Local Government 
    • Yumbe District Local Government 
    • Gomba District Local Government 
    • Amuru District Local Government 
    • Amolatar District Local Government 
    • Mukono District Local Government 
    • Luwero District Local Government 
    • Bukomansimbi District Local Government 
    • Adjumani District Local Government 
    • Mbale District Local Government 
    • Lyantonde District Local Government 
    • Budaka District Local Government
    • Lwengo District Local Government 
    • Buyende District Local Government 
    • Kaliro District Local Government 
    • Kibuku District Local Government 
    • Rakai District Local Government

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, committee chairperson. All those reports will be sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back as per the Rules of Procedure.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014 FOR THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON ICT

THE SPEAKER: Committee chairperson, we have a total of 45 minutes; please, present the report in 15 minutes and then the other –(Interjections)  You know she is in charge of the ICT committee and so she is dotcom; she is going to present using PowerPoint. If you could present in 15 minutes and then we use the other 30 for comments, if any. 

3.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Ms Paula Turyahikayo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to lay on the Table the ICT committee minutes which we used during the interaction with the ministry, departments and agencies. Allow me also to lay on the Table the original report signed by the various committee members. 

THE SPEAKER: Who is assisting you? You can start in the meantime.

MS TURYAHIKAYO: Madam Speaker, Members have copies but there was someone assigned to guide the slides.

THE SPEAKER: But you can present since Members have - Order, Members.

MS TURYAHIKAYO: Madam Speaker, hon. Members have copies of the detailed signed report. Articles 90 and 155 sub section (4) of the Constitution and Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandates sectoral committees to:

    a) Examine and comment on policy matters affecting the ministries covered by them;
    b) Examine Government recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House.

Regarding the scope covered, mainly regarding Vote 020 of the Ministry of Information and Communications Technology and its affiliated institutions, we interacted with:
    1. Uganda Communications Commission 
    2. Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology 
    3. Uganda Post Limited, that is Posta Uganda.

We had NITA-U, which has a Vote status now of Vote 126, which was previously operating as a subvention with Vote 020 under Ministry of ICT. They attained a Vote status beginning Financial Year 2013/2014.

Regarding the ministry’s sector performance for the Financial Year 2012/2013, the ministry’s release performance was 69.2 per cent and when you look at the recurrent budget, the performance for both wage and non-wage was 100 per cent.

The development budget release performance was 77.2 per cent and the taxes were 2.5 per cent, as far as release performance is concerned. The release on the taxes was only 2.5 per cent because the intended capital purchases were not made. On the development budget, the release performance was 77.2 per cent because the third phase of the National Backbone Infrastructure was not implemented.

The sector highlights and achievements for the 2012/2013, as far as policies and strategies are concerned, include: 
    1. The National ICT policy was done and is awaiting a certificate of financial implication. 
    2. The National Information Security Directorate has been operationalised under NITA-U.
    3. We also have the e-Governance Master Plan, which was developed with the assistance of the South Korean Government.
    4. The e-waste policy was approved by Cabinet.
    5. The Country Code Top Level Domain Policy was also approved by Cabinet.
    6. The Telecom Policy was developed and a certificate of financial implication was acquired.

As far as Bills and regulations are concerned, the regulations of cyber laws were approved by the relevant authorities including the Solicitor General. The principles of the Data and Privacy Protection Bill were also submitted to Cabinet for approval. The UCC Act, 2013 was assented to by His Excellency the President.

As far as the implementation of approved policies is concerned, so far, the National Backbone Infrastructure has been commercialised and the analogue to digital migration has been implemented and tested in Bulesa, Kampala.

The Incoming International Call Monitoring System is being installed to monitor revenue collection. We also have the Communications Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT), which has been set up at UCC.

The SIM card registration is also being concluded with 90 per cent success of the 17.6 million subscribers. A mechanism to curb counterfeit phones is also being initiated.

Sector resource allocation in billions since 2010/2011 to 2013/2014. During 2010/2011, we had a budget release of Shs16.85 billion. In 2011/2012, there was Shs 16.82 billion, in 2013/2014 it was Shs 20.328 billion and now in 2013/2014 for the Ministry of ICT, it is only Shs 5.460 billion. The reason it has reduced significantly is that originally, the Ministry of ICT was together with NITA-U, which at the moment has acquired a vote status.

The ministry’s planned activities for 2013/2014, as far as policy is concerned, include:
    1. It is in the process of completing the national ICT Policy.
    2. It also has to develop the ICT Sector Development Strategic Plan.
    3. Develop the Postcode regulations as per Clause 5 (1) (f) of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013.
    4. They are also in the process of reviewing the National Broadband Strategy.
    5. We also have a policy on-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, maybe you could summarise because all these things are written down.

MS TURYAHIKAYO: Yes. I will go straight to the recommendations by the ICT Committee. The committee’s observations and recommendations on Vote 020 are:
    1. There is lack of a well-documented policy, which affects implementation and streamlining of ICT projects across ministries, departments and agencies. On this observation, the committee feels that, that policy should be put in place by February 2014. 
    2. The Telecom Policy should be incorporated in the overall national ICT Policy.
    3. On the fibre optic infrastructure sharing, NITA-U and the telecom companies are laying fibre in the same routes even when they are not redundant. So, we recommend that the ministry pursues an open access for fibre optic objects to avoid costly and unnecessary duplication.
    4. On the analogue to digital migration, the committee observed that Uganda lags behind in the implementation of digital terrestrial television. The committee recommends that Government should initiate dialogue with private operators like Gotv who have already installed terrestrial equipment across the country to form a Public-Private Partnership like Kenya and Tanzania as opposed to pursuing loans.
    5. We also feel that unbundling of UBC is still a necessary strategy for proper signal distribution.
    6. The National Post Code and Addressing System. The pilot is long overdue and therefore the committee recommends that coordination of the pilot should be reviewed. In addition, signages should be replaced with durable rigid PVC that is hard plastic material. 
    7. Another observation, Madam Speaker, is about IT rationalisation and human resource in the ministry’s departments and agencies. Implementing e-government will be difficult without centralising ICT officers within NITA–U. However, this has been quite a challenge. 

The committee recommends that the ICT Ministry, working with the Ministry of Public Service, should consider reviewing the NITA-U Act to allow ICT personnel be recruited and deployed by the agency, which is NITA-U as it is done by the Office of the Auditor-General.

As far as ICT research and development is concerned, Uganda has many young IT innovators but that are not fully explored or utilised to develop software for MDA consumption. Microsoft initiatives at Makerere University are good but costly in the long run.

So, the committee recommends that a Research and Innovation Fund be created from the RCDF to help the young software developers. The ministry should develop a policy on open software to avert dependency on cost appropriate software.

On wasteful expenditure, the committee observed that ministries, departments and agencies spend in excess of Shs 30 billion on printing, yet, the ICT ministry got, for example, only Shs 5.33 billion for the Financial Year 2013/14.

As a committee, we recommend that MDAs, starting with Parliament should adopt ICT use by acquiring tablets to reduce on the printing costs for policy statements and reports that are debated in committees and on the Floor.

Vote 126

We have key achievements under this vote, which are by NITA-U. One of them is that phases I and II repairs were completed and work handed over to the commercial manager. A pricing model for the national backbone infrastructure services was developed; phase III has been redesigned and approved.

On the implementation of e-governance, a Government portal was developed at www.gav.ug and an e-government master plan is in place already. Capacity was also built in Cabinet with IT officers being posted across all ministries, departments and agencies.

On the rationalisation of IT, a strategy has been approved by Cabinet and an implementation roadmap shared with all the stakeholders. A consolidation for software licenses is also in place.

Business Process Outsourcing (BPO)

On this, a BPO centre is being supported with incentives, standards and accreditation guidelines, which have been developed with more agents being trained under BPO.
 
Information Security

The Directorate of Information Security has been operationalised and awareness is being created. The budget estimates for NITA-U – we have a grand total of Shs 26.8 billion, which caters for both recurrent and development expenditures. The planned activities for NITA-U under Vote 126 – the first activity is to implement phase III of the national backbone infrastructure with a new design. The fibre cable distance to be covered has been increased from 307 to 756 kilo metres. This includes a route to the undersea cable through Mutukula and the completion of the distance between Masindi and Kyenjojo.

The implementation of CCTV Cameras at all transmission sites will also be taken care of. But there is also an intention to change from a direct burying of the fibre to the using aerial fibre, which is cheaper. This will help us cover the missing link.

The phases that have been covered have taken care of the following: phase I covered the Kampala Metropolitan area, which includes Entebbe, Jinja, Mukono and Bombo. Five transmission sites were also installed.

Phase II covers Luweero, Nakasongola, Masindi, Gulu, Nimule, Lira, Soroti, Kumi, Mbale, Tororo, Malaba, Busia, Hoima, Kyenjojo, Fort Portal, Kasese, Bushenyi and Mbarara. In there, we have 17 transmission sites. A data centre for the BMI infrastructure and a pilot project for messaging and collaborating tools have also been installed.

Phase III will take care of Katuna, Kabale, Ntungamo, Masaka and Mutukula as well as the network operating centre. 

Other planned activities include the implementation of the rationalisation and harmonisation of ICT in all ministries, departments and agencies. There is also the implementation of the e-governance masterplan and the development of data band regulations. We will also work on the enforcement of regulations on the cyber laws and conducting a feasibility study for the public key infrastructure. 

But there will also be conducted a feasibility study for the development of IT packs. We also intend to do a feasibility study for the last mile connectivity as well as a plan to implement the National Information Security Framework for MDAs.

The other activities include: the establishment of a National Computer Emergence Response Team; the certification of IT products and services as well as accrediting IT training and IT professionals.

Key Sector Challenges

Madam Speaker, these include inadequate funding to key priority activities. If staff in MDAs do not report to NITA-U, there will be no change management and this has been witnessed in the failure of MDAs to utilise e-government equipment. 

There are other sector challenges of ICT security threats and attacks. We also talk about the inadequate local digital content in local languages, in addition to uncoordinated delivery of fibre infrastructure countrywide.

The others include: rampant damage on installed ICT infrastructure, for example, the fibre optics and masts; the changes or delays in executing RCDF projects.

The committee’s observations and recommendations on Vote 126
On the MBI, most products have been outlined, for example, the voice data internet, ISMS and IPPS. On this, the committee recommends that NITA-U rolls out, to the under-privileged areas like West Nile and purchases enough bandwidth for all MDAs.

On BPOs, the observation is that only 155 agencies are currently employed. The committee recommends that Government consumes BPO services in the health, agriculture and disaster preparedness sectors to increase employment opportunities.

Another observation is in regard to the e-government equipment that were installed across MDAs, but which is not being utilised. Our recommendation is that NITA-U should retool IT officers with the aim of making good use of all the e-governance equipment that was installed under Phase I of the National Backbone Infrastructure.

The committee also made an observation in regard to consultancies. NITA staff are very well remunerated despite being at only 25 percent of staffing capacity. So, Shs 2.7 billion that is usually paid to consultancies should be used to bridge the staffing gap.

On the NITA-U headquarters, we observed that the continuous renting by NITA-U as well as the ICT Ministry should also stop. The committee recommends that new design should include an IT pack as they look at the possibilities of acquiring space where NITA-U and the headquarters for the ICT ministry will be housed.

Madam Speaker, under the ministry, there is an agency called Posta Uganda Ltd. The key achievements and committee recommendations:

Achievements 
    1. There was an increased number of tele-centres to provide electronic services
    2. Increased financial services outlets
    3. Strengthened security for postal mail
    4. Track and trace of mail is now provided
    5. Created awareness of the postcode project, that is, the pilot in Entebbe.

Committee observations and recommendations

Uganda Post Limited is making strides to adopt technology to serve their customers better. The committee recommends that they harmonise with UCC in order not to duplicate, especially on community information centres.

We also have an ICT institute, which is mandated to manage and operate a communication services training centre as spelt out in section 5(z) of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013. Another mandate is to impart technical skills to Ugandans although it is drifting from the core role by adopting business courses in the curriculum.
 
So, the committee recommends that given the dynamism of the ICT sector, the institute should introduce courses such as Fibre Optic Maintenance, IT Security and Forensic Audit as opposed to business courses. 

The committee also understands that UCC is now funding the institute and it will soon be developed into a centre of excellence. So, the committee recommends that UCC must harmonise the institute with other laws that regulate education in the ministry. 

The Uganda Communication Commission

Key Achievements

These ones include:
    1. Contribution to GDP by an average of 3.4 per cent in the last five years. In the last Financial Year (2012/2013) the contribution was 6.7 per cent 
    2. The enactment of the UCC Act, 2013
    3. Implementation of the SIM card registration which is still on-going 
    4. Growth in the FM stations by 18 per cent

Under RCDF the following has been achieved:
    1. 254 laboratories in schools were set up, bringing the total to 931 
    2. 38 tertiary institutes and three universities were equipped with labs
    3. Internet connectivity to 230 sites
    4. Support to the heath sector by establishing tele-medicine centres.

On this, the committee observed that the quality of service as far as network is concerned continues to be poor with no punitive action taken by the regulator. Therefore, the committee recommends that UCC should emulate Nigeria and Rwanda and punish telecoms for poor quality of service and short code operators for sending unsolicited messages.

Under RCDF, the committee observed that the school labs and access are commended although the e-health initiative has a lot more work to be done. Therefore the committee recommends that given the scope, magnitude and mandate of the fund, senior management of the fund should be increased beyond the current director. Alternatively, the fund should operate as a stand-alone entity similar to the Road Fund. 

On Mobile Money, the committee observed that users are at a risk of losing money due to lack of streamlined regulations. So, the committee recommends that UCC and Bank of Uganda should finalise regulations and seek amendment of the necessary financial laws to accommodate the emerging technology.

Another observation that was made is that there is need to roll out a long term evaluation before new technologies emerge, that is LTE. So, the committee recommends that UCC should avail five per cent of the 800 megahertz band to telecom operators so as to facilitate them to implement the fourth generation technology (4G).

Committee observations and recommendations for UCC

The intelligent incoming call monitoring system: The law was put in place for its installation to increase telecommunications audits. The committee recommends that UCC should implement this project with URA to reinforce the ability to audit telecommunications revenue. 

An observation on the analogue to digital migration is that UCC is commended for getting the process started in greater Kampala. But the committee recommends that UCC should work with UBC to create awareness in the public as well and ensure that set talk boxes are affordable and available to the customers.

The third observation is the elimination of counterfeits. Telecom operators are hiding behind counterfeits as the cause of poor network quality. So, the committee recommends that UCC should carry out awareness on the pending disconnection of users with counterfeit phones. URA and UNBS should, on the other hand, stop counterfeits from entering the country.

There is a provision for the ICT trends in the region. The table is available. That table shows that Uganda is behind the rest of the East African countries in e-governance, with the exception of Burundi. This is a clear manifestation of what the delays in implementing the national backbone infrastructure has caused.  Seven years later, the project was only commercialised this year in February yet it has a lifespan of 20 to 25 years depending on the cuts visited on it. That table confirms that the higher the e-governance index and ranking the higher the GDP and the human development index.  

In conclusion, the Committee on Information and Communication Technology recommends that Parliament approves a total of Ugshs 32,304,000,000 allocated to the ICT sector of which Ugshs 5,460,000,000 is for vote 020 and Ugshs 26,844,000,000 is for vote 126 for Financial Year 2013/2014 as follows:

Item on recurrent expenditure –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance has just presented corrigenda and this affects the wages in nearly every sector because he has not explained which sector is going to be affected. If the presenter reads and finishes her report and we approve it, it may cause problems. Wouldn’t it be better to allow the Minister of Finance maybe to first read his corrigenda so that we incorporate the corrigenda element in the sectors?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I was going to suggest that after she has presented, the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget and his committee should probably meet in the morning tomorrow because I think six ministries will be affected by the corrigenda. But I know that this one will not be. So, let the Budget Committee sit in the morning – Yes, it is on wages.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If it is true, the minister has corrigenda like he is saying we may discover that the wages of this ministry like ICT can remain but they can cut on development expenditure and taxes and that is where the problem will be. So, we need to harmonise. It could affect some people unless- 

THE SPEAKER: So, you do not want the chairpersons to talk about the figures until we have got feedback from the Budget Committee? 

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, we have looked at the corrigenda, we are also going to look into the details in the corrigenda and see if this particular ministry is not affected by the corrigenda. We can pass these figures subject to that.

THE SPEAKER: I think I will probably ask the minister to identify the areas, which have issues such that we deal with those that have no problem.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I extend apologises from the Ministry of Finance for the delayed submission of the corrigenda.

The votes that are going to be affected are as follows - you will recall there were salary arrears for the months of May and June. This has now been brought into the current financial year and that is going to affect both the centre and the local government. That wage bill amounts to over Shs 44,889,297,650.

For the non-wage recurrent budget, the ministries that are affected are as follows; vote 004 - Ministry of Defence. The amount of the corrigenda is going to be Shs 4, 254, 660, 68. Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, that is export promotions board and the amount that has been captured is Shs 108 million. Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute the amount that has been transferred from one programme is Shs 666,666,667 only. Vote 119 - Uganda Registration Services Bureau. They had requested that the figure amounting to Shs 500 million be retained by them at source and that has been allowed by Ministry of Finance, so, vote 119 is affected by Shs 500 million.

The next vote is Vote 125, which is the Nation Animal Genetic Resource Centre and data bank and an amount of Shs 6 million has also been adjusted and the details are provided in the documents. Vote 153 - Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) a total of Shs 973,887,000 only is affected. 

Development Budget

The following will be the adjustments made to the following votes:
Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service, an amount totaling Shs 1,742,360,000, which will be adjusted.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we need a clear clarification from the minister because if you say that you put some money in corrigenda, then all sectors are going to be affected. If they are affected, we have already passed a Vote on Account.

You can imagine you are moving from one vote to another, other activities will be suppressed. I think we must be clear where this money will be got from because the budgeted activities are clear and it is good that we run a budget professionally.

This is because when you start cutting now, it will become a problem even to re-arrange and perfect others. So, we must be told where this money is going to be got.

MR AJEDRA: I wish to inform the hon. members of this august House that you recall our donor members had suspended aid to the government and they have reconsidered that position in view of the fact that we have made substantial progress and the additional money is actually coming from the donor particularly in the development budget.

You will also recall that there was an outstanding payment to the civil servants, it was supposed to be paid in the last financial year but it could not. So, this has been brought in.

I am reading the votes that are going to be affected by these corrigenda. Through you, Madam Speaker, I beg the hon. colleagues would carefully listen to the votes that are going to be affected before they make their submissions.

MR LWANGA: Madam Chair, this is the clarification that I seek from the minister; much as you may tell us where this so much money is going to be spent what we are interested as Parliament, is where you are getting the money from. Is that money going to come from the budgets already discussed by the committee or is it money from another source and when you come to the committee you will prove that there is a source. That is all we need. Otherwise, you are telling us stories.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am concerned about the way we are being taken through the issue of the corrigenda. I thought since we work through that appropriation that will better be dealt with by the budget and then substantively, this House will be informed on what has been affected, what are the sources of additional resources, which one has been suppressed or otherwise. 

Bringing these substantive submissions from the Ministry of Finance into a committee report has the capacity to derail us. We will not pay attention to the policy issues raised but secondly, and most importantly, I think that the minister is just going to give a sketchy presentation, which then will not allow this House justice. 

We might actually have to find ourselves discussing this same matter again when the Budget Committee comes. Wouldn’t it be okay if you allowed the chairperson of the committee to take only up to the end of the submission on policy matters and then, we stay over the votes that are supposed to be dealt with in this sector? Then, upon the submission of the Budget Committee, we will revert to it.

The chairperson will come and make a pronouncement, which is accurate based on what has been analysed. So, Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance on this matter, whether we would not do ourselves justice by telling the hon. minister to first proceed to Budget Committee and then you dispose of the issues of policy as presented by the chairperson.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I had already sent that corrigenda to the committee but I realised that there were some ministries that were not affected. Therefore, I was hoping that he would tell us which ministries are going to be affected and then we deal with those, which are not affected because ICT is not one of those which are being affected by the corrigenda. So, just tell us that ministry X, Y and Z so that we know where to stay the money.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When you look at the document the hon. Minister is actually reading, it is a voluminous document. The reason you interjected the submissions of the chairperson was mainly because of the two votes she is presenting on. That is Vote 020 and Vote 126. Could he briefly say these votes are not in this and we proceed other than reading because it will take us the whole day wasting our time when he is supposed to go and make those submissions in the Budget Committee?  

THE SPEAKER: I had asked him to identify the ministries that are affected, mention them here so that we know that tomorrow when that ministry comes, we defer the figures and we deal with the other thing. Please.

MR AJEDRA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise guidance. I was in the process of just concluding the ministries that would be affected or the votes that could be affected.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think this Government and the Ministry of Finance are taking us for granted. This is a wage budget corrigenda and they are saying they want to pay salary arrears of May and June 2013. This was passed in the last supplementary and if it was passed, then what would happen here is that they would come with a figure to appropriate for arrears specifically if we never paid. But I remember the Minister for Finance on that day, hon. Kasaija, said their accounts are open and that we just give them the money which they will transfer immediately and that even if it was a weekend.

Madam Speaker, this corrigenda here what does it mean? Does it mean the money we passed has been taken by these people and now they want more money? Is this under somebody’s house, Madam Speaker, and it is a lot of money! We are talking of over Shs 251 billion plus Shs 123 billion which is over Shs 400 billion!  

Madam Speaker, is this how we should operate? I think there must be something wrong with Government.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yes hon. Remigio Achia. 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Remember the day when we were discussing, we brought before this Parliament Supplementary Schedule No. 3 and what hon.  Nandala-Mafabi is saying is exactly true but unfortunately, it was the 27th and we would have had to come back on Friday 29th to pass Supplementary Schedule No. 3 but we didn't and the financial year elapsed. I still have the reports of that Supplementary Schedule No. 3 with me. So, we did not conclude that process.

THE SPEAKER: So what are you suggesting? Okay Members, I think we are really taking a lot of time. Let us – yes?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: My suggestion, Madam Speaker, is that this, as you have guided, would be treated at the committee of budget and those other affected committees because what budget does to us the chairpersons of the sectoral committees whether it is education or health to come and represent those issues before us and finally we bring a report here so that we are really clear where the source of money is coming from. Is it from the budget of this financial year? Is it some money that was meant for Supplementary Schedule No. 3? Where is this money coming from? I think this is a simple thing which we can handle in a day or two and then we can come back before this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us respond to the policy issues in the report and leave the money issues until the Budget Committee has reported. So, madam chair, you had concluded on the policy issues.

MS TURYAHIKAYO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I think that I had already concluded on the policy issues. I therefore thank you and beg to report accordingly.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you honourable chair of ICT committee and your team. (Applause) Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary one third of the Members of the committee and you may comment for the next 15 minutes. Of course, the figures we shall have when we handle the report of the Budget Committee which I must receive expeditiously. Please do it quickly because it is going to hold everything else - clarification from what? No, that one now goes to the committee. That document is not here but with the committee.  Comments on the report - two minutes for each of you.

4.28
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chair of the committee for having presented such a detailed and elaborate report. However, I have these comments to make -  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, before you go on, join me in welcoming the teachers and pupils of Arua Hill Primary School represented by hon. Ajedra and hon. Abia. You are welcome. They are on both sides of the House. The gallery is full. (Applause)

MR LWANGA: However, Madam Speaker, on Page 11 of the report, the committee recommends that RCDF should use part of the funds from the Energy for Rural Transformation and I would want the committee chair to clarify on this one because I thought Energy for Rural Transformation is for transmitting power and it falls in another sector and RCDF is in ICT and in any case, RCDF has got a big fund. When we checked last, I remember they had Shs 20 billion unused. 

So why should they want to go to another sector and use money from that sector? 

The other issue about UCC is I think up to now is that we have not had any pronouncement on their having a board. I do not know how they are managing so much money without a board - being managed between probably the CEO and his management committee and the minister. 

In the last Parliament there were similar problems with that kind of management and I hope the minister will be appointing a board immediately so as to make sure that the so much money that is being handled by this small group is properly looked after. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kafuda, two minutes.

4.30
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

My main concern was also on the recommendation on Page 11 on the ICT research and development. With this recommendation of the committee; RCDF to get money from the Energy for Rural Transformation - I have not bought that idea because at the moment if we look at our areas most especially the local administration, we need power there and that money is set to support or to construct small power dams in order to support the Energy for Rural Transformation. 

At the moment, Madam Speaker, we need power in those rural areas for Small and Medium Enterprises, to light the local administrative headquarters, the rural schools and health centres. I do not buy into that idea to divert that money to go to RCDF.

Another issue about the recommendation on Page 12 where the committee recommends that the Parliamentary Commission should expedite the issue of procuring Ipads for Members of Parliament. At the moment, we no longer receive stationery in our offices and all along we have been waiting for the Ipads and up to now, we have not yet received them. I thought the Ipads were going to be used here in the House or maybe outside –(Interjections)– okay both in fact but this cannot stop the use of stationery like papers because we need hard copies of our information. So, I do not buy the idea of Ipads but – (Member timed out_)

4.33
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few comments to make on this report. When you compare the activities for 2012/2013 and the activities for 2013/14, most of them are the same or they are related. This ministry has been in existence for quite some time but I wonder why it has remained in infancy, basing on the activities they are involved in. Related to this, this ministry has got an activity called “Developed IT Standards for MDAs.” 

At the same time, the committee is recommending that the ministry recruits staff to be sent to other ministries to handle IT departments. What comes first in this regard? 

Madam Speaker, also the committee says the ministry’s budget has declined from Shs 20 to Shs 5 billion because of NITA-U getting its own vote but the vote of NITA-U is Shs 10 billion. When you add Shs 5 billion to Shs 10 billion, you get Shs 15 billion. What accounts for the variance between this?

Lastly, I would like to thank you for not allowing us to continue discussing the figures related to this policy statement. The minister may not know but when you revise errors in a budget through corrigenda, it is likely that all the figures in the budget will be affected. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.35
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the committee for beating the deadline and presenting on time. My comment concerns page 6, where there is implementation of analogue to digital policy. I was a member of the ICT committee and indeed, we were pushing for the implementation of analogue to digital migration and I congratulate the government, especially UBC, for implementing this policy. There is only one challenge. Although they have done great in Kampala, we still have challenges in other areas. 

We had agreed that the switching off would affect those who already had analogue signals and the districts, which do not have analogue will remain behind. I do not know the plan that Government has put in place to give signals of analogue to those districts which do not access anything. I do not know whether we are switching direct to digital or we shall first go to analogue and then change to digital. 

4.37
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concerns are three. The first one is to do with the role of ICT in the national ID project and I think we need to take the committee seriously. The IDs that are being distributed do not have features that show your geographical location, and if the ID requires that you provide this for purposes of voting and service delivery, then our present ID is incompetent and I think the proposal of the committee should be taken seriously now that this has already been suspended. So, when it resumes, it should have the capacity to provide those features.

Secondly, the issue of analogue to digital migration especially the issue of signal distribution was a recommendation brought to this House last financial year and it was that UBC did not have the capacity. I now see the committee fell short of telling us to get rid of UBC in signal distribution and then in the private-public partnership, work with UCC and DSTV or Multichoice who have the capacity. Why would this Parliament, for God’s sake, accept to sanction a $74 million loan to help UBC develop capacity when there are already other people in the private and in the public sector that have the required capacity? Our children cannot go on paying these needless loans.

Lastly, I would like to comment on the counterfeit phones. There is something in the report, which said that if you dial hash-star-hash and then you dial six zeros, you will check if your phone is counterfeit. What my phone has done is bringing me a list of digits. It has not told me whether my phone is counterfeit or not. So, how does this help me? I think we need to be helped but most importantly, we need to deal with the importation of counterfeits and not just sensitisation. I am now sensitised but I do not know whether my phone is a counterfeit. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.40
MS BETTY ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I must appreciate that female managers are the best managers worldwide. (Applause) My concern with this report is that the committee has not clearly given the details about their concern of mushrooming and uncoordinated crowded masks all-over the country. At the close of the previous Parliament, I had pushed for a question to the minister to give to this august House the details about the looming dangers of the masts, which have been misplaced even near hospitals, in schools and are overcrowded across the country. Unfortunately, it was not answered. 

Probably, I will reinstate it at an appropriate time but I would have wished to have this committee look into the details and I am not quite sure whether the committee is aware that the mushrooming masts have health hazards. World over, they are always watched and regulated on where they are supposed to be installed. Unfortunately, our country has become a dumping ground for these so-called investors to go on installing these masts. With a rate of Shs 2 million, everybody is willing to give a plot next to a house, next to a school or next to a hospital so that they get that rent without calculating the impact of the mast. I want this to be taken seriously; that we look into the effects of the masts. In developing countries, they are regulated and even –(Member timed out.)

4.42
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have one issue to raise from the report. In particular, reference to page 21 in regard to the key planned activities for 2013/14, I notice that the committee mentions the need to implement digital migration. I would like the minister to clarify to Parliament whether they have been able to disentangle their disagreement between UCC and UBC on the implementation of digital migration. 

The last time we interacted with UBC in one of my committees, UBC had no budget line for this project. But they confessed that the money was supposed to come from UCC. And UCC was not in agreement as to the competence of UBC to implement this particular project because they thought that UBC and its management are also still analogue in their operations and there was no way they were going to implement the migration to digital.

Secondly, I wonder if greater Kampala is a pilot phase; how are Ugandans going to access talk boxes – is Government going to be the importer? We all know how good our Government is at contracting things; or is Government going to liberalise the importation of talk-boxes this time round? Otherwise, I can see this whole project plunged in a crisis of incompetence and inability to move things very fast. So, I would like the minister to clarify how they are going to handle this entire exercise.  

4.45
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I have issues, which need clarification. One, there has been conflict over the operation from analogue to digital. I want to understand whether the rift between UCC and UBC has been settled. 

Secondly, we agreed that by 2013, we should have finished this process. Now, you are promising that by 2015, we would have enrolled all districts in this country. May I know your budget for this financial year?

Lastly, I have observed and experienced challenges of ICT in Parliament here. Internet is a problem; our desktops break down. As leaders who are promoting ICT in this country, I want to know how much this committee has budgeted for this House so that we can become efficient beyond the iPads. I interacted with the staff in ICT and they were complaining that they are under-staffed - (Interruption)

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform you that budgeting for this House is for the Parliamentary Commission. Therefore, it is not related to our committee. 

MS ABABIKU: If it is the Commission, I believe that we have been depending on each other – let that be one of the areas of focus to ensure efficiency and effectiveness of our operations in Parliament. Thank you very much.

4.47
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well aware that I represent islands and I speak for them; I listened to the report and noted when the chairperson said there is need to extend to West Nile. I wonder whether you considered the islands also. In Bukooli Islands, we depend on the Kenyan network. So, what are you going to do to enable those Ugandans to also access the network?

Secondly, the committee were shy to indicate the issue of mobile money. They simply state that UCC and Bank of Uganda should finalise with mobile money regulation – the relevant laws should be amended to handle emerging technologies. I feel that this recommendation is very light because we are well aware of how our people are losing money through mobile money: sending money to wrong numbers and eventually try to retrieve that money. I wonder what the committee has done to save Ugandans from mobile money fraud.

Finally, I thank the committee for indicating that school labs have been given and one of my seed schools got the services. Thank you very much. 

4.49
MR GEORGE STEPHEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the work they have done. However, I want to raise issues on page 15, IT capacity building. Uganda Revenue Authority is implementing what we call e-tax. But in most cases, Uganda Revenue Authority has found problems in revenue collections because of network. 

So, when you talk of capacity building, what is UCC doing with the telecom service providers who provide network to the country? Revenue collection is hampered because we do not have reliable network in the country. 

Secondly, we have a challenge, again in relation to reliability of networks. A tax-payer pays tax and the whole transaction is through e-tax and they are supposed to get their consignments within a short period. But because the network is poor, it takes a taxpayer three or four days to get their consignment. 

We claim we are cutting costs yet taxpayers are supposed to pay demurrage charges, which makes dividends expensive in the country. We are now going for Single Entry System whereby we have one stop centre in Mombasa. If we do not have the capacity in Uganda, how shall we meet our target of 81 percent revenue collection this financial year?
 
I also want to comment on the reliability of telecom networks. Yesterday, I was in my constituency. People are quarrelling there, “We have telephones but we cannot communicate to one another because networks are not there”. So, how are these people building capacity – (Member timed out_)

4.52
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Madam Speaker, on page 5 of the committee report the committee observed that that development budget underperformed at 77.2 percent as a result of failure to implement phase III of the National Backbone Infrastructure. 

In the Eighth Parliament, before CHOGM, we borrowed over $30 million from China EXIM Bank to implement the roll out of the National Backbone Infrastructure in this country and all the phases were funded. There was Phase I for Entebbe, Kampala and Jinja; Phase II was up to Mbale; phase III up to Mbarara and the border; Phase IV was to cover Gulu, West Nile, Karamoja and the rest of the country. I want to know from the committee; what happened to that money and why was there failure to implement this?

On page 13, Madam Speaker, on the same issue, I have observed that the committee states that they are re-designing page 3 of the NBR. Why are they re-designing what we already designed and borrowed money for? Where is that money? I was the vice-chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and I presented the report here.

Lastly, on page 17, the implication of the failure to roll out the national backbone infrastructure is that we are not yet going to manage our IFMS (integrated finance management system); it is linked to the NBI. The integrated personnel and payroll system is on the NBI; so if we are not rolling out NBI, it means we are encouraging rot in our payroll – just refer to page 17; it says, “Products to be offered on the NBI include voice, data, Internet, IFMS, IPPS and a national database integration.” So who is refusing to roll out NBI to the rest of the country? Is Uganda composed of only Entebbe and Kampala? When we borrowed money to implement NBI, what happened? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, you have five minutes.

4.54
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will beg your indulgence that you give me more minutes. I want to start from where my brother, hon. Achia, ended. I would like to inform the committee that the President asked for an audit on this issue of NBI phase I and phase II and the audit report is out. The report clearly states that Government of Uganda has lost over $40 million so far with the gaps of work not being done.

As my brother said, phase I is NBI I and e-governance I – that meant that one would work on its own. After rolling out that one, phase II would also work on its own. Some of you, members of Parliament, in your offices – I have been in my office here for over two years now, there is something that looks like a TV set; that is one of the things of e-governance. For the period I have been in my office, it has never worked. And that was implemented by a company called Huawei. And the same company is pushing for phase III and yet phases I and II have not yet worked. And the Auditor-General’s report is saying that this should be implemented through competitive bidding.

The reason we got this problem is because this contract was awarded under the table and that is why we have lost that money. And for phase III to take place, I would recommend – and the committee should agree with us – that it should be through competitive bidding. There was confusion between the work done by Huawei and that done by MTN. MTN spent $3 million and their infrastructure is working but ours on which we spent over $70 million is not working. And you recall that during CHOGM, there was $5 million which was spent on communication gadgets – on walkie-talkies – and it was the same company. But the system never worked. 

Madam Speaker, there was an advert in Australia which wanted someone to do some work related to information technology. They said that all other companies could apply except Huawei. That means that world over this company is known for being a terrible company. In the UK, it is blacklisted and in the whole of Europe, it is having problems. That is the same company which was dealing with UBC (Uganda Broadcasting Council) to implement digital migration at $74 million. That money which my sister, hon. Alaso was talking about was full of kickbacks. To show you that it was full of kickbacks, Uganda Communications Commission has implemented digital migration in Kampala, Entebbe and Jinja for $2.5 million and they want to use about $10 million to $11 million to complete the whole country but UBC wants $74 million and yet those are our taxes. Why should we spend $74 million if we can spend only about $14 million to $15 million?

In Tanzania, digital migration took $18 million; in Botswana, it took $15 million and in Kenya it took $20 million but they never - they even had to bring in more things. If you look at that project, you could give it to UBC. A TV set you can buy at Shs 1 million, they have budgeted at Shs 4 million. This thing is dangerous and nobody should agree on that $74 million because it is very bad for us.  

This is daylight robbery and we know the people who are involved. During the 2011 elections, there were people who moved to China to deal with the UBC project. At an appropriate time, we shall produce that evidence – those who are interested in that $74 billion. We know those people and yet when you hear them speak here, you may think they are angels.

Page 22 of the report says –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, two more minutes to wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay. Madam Speaker, there is what we call Rural Communication Development Fund but it has no board; UCC has no board for over two years and yet the money they are handling is huge money. Every one percent of the money we use on phone goes to them – (Interjections) – Now, it is two percent. That means that the moment the board is absent, the minister and maybe his staff are the ones managing it. And yet experience has shown that where there is no board, criminal activities take place. For example in 2010, as chairperson of Bugisu Cooperative Union, I was suspended together with my board. The government took over but they took the little we had left there; the plant is no longer working and poverty is on increase. That is why government sold all its public companies.

So I would make a recommendation here, Madam Speaker, which the committee chairperson should buy – that within 14 days, before we pass the Budget, the Ministry of ICT should appoint a board for RCDF and UCC so that we drop this recommendation of senior management to be increased. The purpose is to appoint the board for RCDF and UCC. I hope the committee chairperson agrees with us. We thank your committee for this good report but we want you to address those gaps. If you do that, we shall support you 150 percent. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to invite the committee chairperson to respond.

5.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Ms Paula Turyahikayo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like thank the Members for their comments, compliments and issues raised. As far as conflict in the management of analog to digital migration is concerned, as a committee, the ministry informed us that this issue was resolved and that is the reason why UCC has gone ahead to implement the analog to digital migration in the Greater Kampala and eventually roll out to other parts of the country, I am sure, including the islands as someone has a dream.

As far as ICT in Parliament is concerned, I think that has been responded to. We also had an opportunity to interact with the ICT department in Parliament and recommendations were made, which I am sure will be presented to the Parliamentary Commission.

As far as mobile money is concerned, this was a matter of concern within the committee and we were clearly informed that the ICT Ministry or UCC provides just a platform but the issue of financial services or the mandate lies with the Ministry of Finance together with Bank of Uganda.

On the issue of network failure with URA and other departments and agencies in the Government, this is a very common problem and among the recommendations that the ICT committee made, one is that we need an Infrastructure Protection Bill because fibres are being cut every other day and this results in network failure especially on the optic fibres.

Regarding the issue of quality of service, this is a concern and the committee seriously considered it while interacting with the UCC. We agreed that the regulations on quality of service need to be developed, strengthened and also enforced to ensure improved services as far as telecommunication is concerned.

The issue of National Backbone Infrastructure has been a very long standing challenge and I am sure this issue has occurred several times in the papers since the last Parliament. The implementation of this National Backbone Infrastructure suffered a lot of irregularities and the committee, in the last Parliament, recommended that the implementation of phase one and two be halted so that an audit is carried out which it did and a report was produced. 

The ministry, together with the contractor, agreed to sort out some of the anomalies on this particular optic fibre and as I talk now, some of the issues were addressed. That is the reason why a commercial manager has been engaged to manage the optic fibre and put it to use.

Phase three has been redesigned because we felt that it was too costly. This was in the report; from 307 kilometres to 627 kilometres, which was within the contract provision and also to provide the route to the sea cable through Mutukula. That is why it has delayed because it had to be redesigned. A lot of complaints arose that the price was too costly so they increased the number of kilometres.

On the UCC Board, this has also been a concern to the committee. We raised it to the ministry and I am informed that names were forwarded to the President so that the board can be put in place. It is only through that, that we can also have the RCDF Board.

On the issue raised on the Energy for Rural Transformation (ERT), this is a World Bank project, which provides for tele-centres. Normally, this money is forwarded to UCC, being the technical agency competent for implementation of the tele-centres and community information centres. So this money is normally forwarded to UCC for implementation. It is a design of the World Bank project so it is normally given to UCC to implement –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification I seek from the chairperson is, we have heard this very good report but I am trying to find out if the committee looked at the dangers that all this equipment is causing to this country; the old TVs, the radiation from these masts, the computers and telephones. 

Has Government put in place a system on how they are going to dispose of this equipment? UCC is just rushing to issue licenses but we have not looked at the dangers of these machines. In some countries, before they give out a licence, they must ask the company, how are you going to dispose of the old equipment? The cases at Mulago Cancer Institute are so high because of these machines but you are just rushing to give licences and you are putting Ugandans in danger.

I do not know whether UBC -

THE SPEAKER: What is the clarification, honourable?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: The clarification I am seeking is whether this was put in the report and whether they looked at this as a danger to Ugandans. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not satisfied with the issue regarding the mobile money transfers and I think this Parliament is equally responsible. Can you imagine, as we talk, how much money is in the air with these mobile transfers? For them to say that it is Bank of Uganda and I think UCC and that it is not their concern yet they are the ones who transfer this money - can the Leader of Government Business in this House assure us that soon a Bill must be brought here to protect Ugandans? You cannot imagine, even for one day, how much money is in the air and is not regulated. So before we do this, can the Leader of Government Business assure us that soon this Bill will be in the House?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I just want to help the chairperson by clarifying one or two things because there are issues, which were raised, which touch on the Parliamentary Commission. Hon. Kafuda raised the issue of the IPads. The IPads that the Members of Parliament are going to get are not coming from UCC. Rather, they are part of our parliamentary stationery budget. You are going to get them next month. There was a delay because after the award of the contract to one of the suppliers, one supplier complained and the matter was referred to PPDA. He had to undergo administrative review and other processes and that is what delayed it.

Someone sent me an email asking where the money is coming from. You know every quarter we receive stationery. We decided to half that stationery budget. You will receive a half of it and the other half is going to provide an IPad for you. So I felt I should clarify that, Madam Speaker.

Two, about ICT in Parliament, even we were getting concerned because at one time, the Director, ICT did communicate that they would have to switch off Internet at 6 O’clock and over the weekend. This was unbelievable so we took interest and what we found out was that the original service provider of Internet here was UTL. When the contract ended and they re-advertised, UTL did not apply for whatever reason. So it was now given to Warid and when Warid merged with Airtel, they had those challenges but they have assured us - the management and Director ICT have had meetings with Warid because we were threatening to terminate the contract if it continued that way. That is the information I wanted to give the Members. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the debate is over. The chairperson should answer but maybe just for the record, I want to confirm that the money for the IPads is our money that was budgeted for stationery. We have been using UShs 30 billion a year on stationery; all these things we print. So we decided that we should not spend that much money. That is why we said no more stationery, let us just buy IPads and save that money. (Applause)

MS TURYAHIKAYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That has always been a prayer by the committee that Parliament procures Ipads for Members of Parliament because when you look at the amount of money that is spent across all ministries, departments and agencies, you realise it is quite a lot yet we could do a lot of saving, as Government, if all Government officials were equipped with Ipads.

On the issue of infrastructure sharing – someone talked about the issue of masts – I would like to say that that has always been a concern of the committee. As we talk, there is infrastructure sharing. The telecom companies privatized the issue of masts and so there are no more masts being erected. Whichever telecom company comes to the market, they use the existing masts by way of renting. These are currently managed and owned by two private companies, which are Eaton and American Towers.

On the issue of the e-waste to do with counterfeits in regard to telephones, I would like to say that there is an e-Waste Management Policy, which has already been approved by Cabinet. We hope that will put us to peace.

Madam Speaker, I think that is all I had to respond to. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let me now invite the minister to respond – okay, hon. Dr Medard Bitekyerezo, it seems you are dying with something. Please, say it. (Laughter)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak. When you consider the time when telephones started to come to this country – very many years ago – and I can tell you that a variety of them have become old and have been discarded. 

What I want to know from the Minister of ICT is: where are these phones with their old shells? Are they in Lake Victoria or River Nile? I am asking this because the amount of emissions from these phones is quite a lot. But I do not know where these waste things are going. We need to be assured by the Minister of ICT on where they have put these things including old computers?

MR MULONGO: Madam Speaker, earlier on, a point was raised about the reliability and credibility of the Huawei company and the security of our information systems given the fact that this company had problems in the US, Australia, New Zealand and partly in the UK. It was alleged that this company is connected to some powers that are laying infrastructure for information gathering. This is a very serious matter. I expected the chairperson of the committee to respond to it because this infrastructure can be used as a mechanism for collecting information and other cyber security related data. So, what measures has the committee recommended to ensure we are secure even when these companies are allowed to proceed with their work in this country?

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ICT (Mr Nyombi Thembo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank the committee chairperson for coming up with this report. I should say that we note the recommendations; we will try, as much as we can to see to the extent of our budget how we can implement these recommendations, most of which we totally agree with.

Madam Speaker, let me start with the issue that was raised by hon. Simon Mulongo in regard to that company by just giving him information that we know that issues were raised about the Huawei company in America. But I also think that he is aware that those issues have been dropped and Huawei is still operating in America. So, sometimes it is better to avoid being trapped into those international blackmails and the rest of it. This company is still working in America.

On the issue of inscription to secure our data – we should secure our data no matter whether it is Huawei installing the transmitters or another company. The onus is on Government to ensure we inscribe our data. Whatever company installs can have ulterior motives to have some backdoors to get your useful information. So, inscription of data is something we should seriously take on as Government, no matter which company is doing this work for us; no matter whether that company comes from Spain, South Africa, Kenya or the Democratic Republic Congo and even when it is a Ugandan company – you must inscript your data so that as transmissions are done, only those who are supposed to use it can access it.
On ERT, I would like to say that this is a small component of the Energy for Rural Transformation to support ICT related activities. In fact, we note the recommendations of the committee that we could use some of the funds for this project to partake an innovation and research fund – the committee chairperson will appreciate the fact that by the time this project implementation takes place, it might be very difficult for us to change although we note that of course we need the Innovation and Research Fund. But we can look for money from some other sources. Otherwise, it might not be possible to change the project at this time in point to consider the usage of some of the resources of this aid to cater for innovation and research fund.

On the UCC Board, I want to say that we are in advanced stages of putting a UCC Board in place. And as I told you, we are in very advanced stages – but again Members were saying we should put the two boards simultaneously; it can’t be done that way because the UCC Board will be the one to recommend some of the members on the RCDF Board. So, we have to first put the UCC Board in place before we consider the RCDF Board. But as I said, we are in very advanced stages and one of these days, we will give you that good news.

On the National Backbone Infrastructure –(Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. I actually thought that ears had served me wrong as I listened to the Leader of the Opposition mentioning that UCC has no board. I actually had to send a note to the minister to confirm that. But in the same breath, I would like to say that UBC has no board and this is for now about three years. But here we are discussing two critical institutions and agencies of government in a very critical project but operating with no boards to guide their policies. So, I am wondering whether this is a coincidence or a design by the minister or by Government to make these institutions run haphazardly. Will the minister clarify why these two critical institutions are being run haphazardly?

The last time we interacted with the Minister of Information and National Guidance, we observed that UBC management is implementing its policies illegally. They are recruiting people and spending illegally. Is this a coincidence?

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Well, thank you, honourable member. Of course you will allow me to talk only for UCC for now. I have told you that we are already in advanced stages of putting up the board for UCC. As for UBC, I think we can reserve that for another time. I don’t have the figures now.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of MBI, I would like to say that the chairperson of the committee has articulated the issues relating to it very well. But there are some issues I would like to make clarifications on. All of us know that this project delayed –(Interjections)– I will come to it. Don’t mind. Let me finish this point first. The project delayed and we have learnt a lot from the two phases that we are so far about to close –(Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Is the minister in order to proceed and ignore issues about the board when as Parliament we vote money - and when he was explaining about the progress, he did not assure us of when these two bodies would be instituted? Is he in order therefore to just proceed? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, our committees have, on more than one occasion, requested you to effect the appointment. Can you explain why it has taken so long and can you assure us when the bodies will have policy makers? 

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the UCC board, I should tell you that we should be able to put it in place as soon as possible –(Interjections)– but in any case, I do not think we should exceed three months from today –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have guided this House and the minister to give assurance that the money we are going to pass is going to be managed well; and it cannot be managed without a fully constituted board in place. Is the hon. Minister therefore procedurally right to continue ignoring that directive? And would it even be procedurally right for us to entertain more of the budget allocations when the management of these institutions is not in place, Madam Speaker?  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think three months is very long. You have known for some time that you do not have a board. Our committee reported last financial year about that board and they have reported this financial year again.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I always do not want to say things here and then come back and start saying, “Excuse me. I did not implement this because of time constraints.” But I want to assure the House that I will do everything in my power to ensure that the board is put in place immediately. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I restrained myself to bring my honourable colleague to a point of order. We have been partners in the progress of the ministry. However, the hon. Minister is ignoring the fact that we are humbly asking within what time frame we can have a fully constituted board for this institution mindful of the amount of money that we are about to pass. Is he therefore in order to be given more space when he is not responding - within what time frame we can expect him to institute the board? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, for today we are not dealing with his money; we are dealing with the policy. We are only going to adopt the report minus the money. We took that decision earlier because of the wage corrigenda. So, I hope that you can bring your update before we vote the money - (Applause) - since you said immediately. 

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. Then I will go for the MBI. The Leader of the Opposition talked of the $74 million. I want to put it to the House that as far as my ministry is concerned, we are not aware of that loan of $74 million. I want it to be on record. We are not looking for any money - $74 million - and I want it to be on record.

Phase three is contingent on the closure of phase two. I want to inform the House that we are soon closing phase two and immediately after that, phase three will commence. This time we believe the problems we faced in phase one and two will not arise because we are using the lessons we have learnt from the previous two phases to ensure that we put up a robust supervision framework to ensure that we get value for money.  

Analog to digital migration - UBC and UCC squabbles: we have resolved all those matters. On the entry of such a big project, usually there are those misunderstandings and expectations; but I should tell you now that we are moving as a team and we are moving full stream. I can inform you that come 17 June 2015, Uganda will be fully migrated to digital transmission.

The mast: this is a standing question. We are compiling a comprehensive answer - [MS ALASO: “Clarification”] - Clarification? 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, please finish quickly.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Okay. We are compiling a comprehensive answer to this. But I want to inform the House that actually the issue is not the masts. The issue is the transmitters on the masts. The mast is just a collection of steel and those alloys. In other countries, you may not see those masts because most people in those countries, especially developed countries, live in urban areas. Those transmitters are always on top of the buildings - they are there. There is no way. When you talk of universal access, if you have to access, you must have the masts. Yes we know studies have been done and there are some concerns. We are compiling a report because this is a standing question and at the appropriate time, we shall come to the Floor of the House and inform you of the findings.

Termination rates: the table on page 30 –(Interruption)

MS BAKO:  Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker and hon. Minister, you realise that not so long ago, a minister resigned as a result of trying to use our mast without the consent of Government. I would like to know from you whether there was compensation or recovery for illicit use of government masts or it was just adequate to resign as a political figure that time. I seek your indulgence and an answer to that effect.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. The hon. Minister, in responding to my concern, has said it is about squabbles between UBC and UCC. That is a misrepresentation of what I asked. The issue in contention is the capacity of UBC to distribute the signals across this country. That is the issue in contention and that is why we are concerned that while UCC may be in a private public partnership could distribute this signal at a cost of about between $11 to $15 million, UBC requires this country to get into a loan or use taxpayers’ money to the extent of $74 million dollars. I am concerned about reducing such a fundamental concern to mere squabbles. Can he address the issue of the capacity of UBC to distribute the signal without plunging this country to another hon. Minister?

MR NYOMBI TEMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Abia raised a concern but with due respect, I think that is beyond my pay check. You will excuse me because there is no way I can answer that. Coming to hon. Alaso 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you will ask the minister of that sector to answer that question. You answer for your sector.

MR NYOMBI TEMBO: Hon. Alaso, does UBC have capacity? We are saying yes, Government policy as per today is that we must have a sole signal distributor for five years. Parliament has recommended that it would be good if we got a second signal distributor and in the sector, we have made consultations. We believe that recommendation is highly reasonable and Government is considering whether we should have a second signal distributor because it makes business sense; it sort of enhances UBC’s capacity. We do not have to have a monopoly in signal distribution because it will take us back. Government is considering that but for the time being, we are empowering UBC to ensure that they execute their mandate.

Mobile Money regulations; like the chair put it clearly, we have similar concerns like the Members but in technology everywhere, regulations follow innovations. When you put regulations before innovations before innovations, you kill innovations. We have now learnt a lot of lessons. Bank of Uganda and UCC are working in unison to ensure that we put up a regulatory framework that will ensure that we do not get some of these issues here. But most of the issues we hear about the problems of mobile money, we have to ask ourselves, are they technological issues? Some of them are not technological so with the regulatory framework that will come in, we shall handle the technology part and the Bank of Uganda will handle the financial part.

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought my chairperson had handled that one comprehensively. The policy is in place and when you put the policy in place that is when you come up with the operational guidelines. Developing an operational framework is work in progress. You start with the policy, operational guidelines - probably we shall need a law to come to Parliament and we are moving full steam to ensure that people should not die out of e-waste.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that save for the recurrent and development expenditure under vote 020 and recurrent and development expenditure under vote 126, we approve the rest of the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of St Francis Primary School in Hoima represented by Rt hon. Kajura and hon. Kaahwa. They are here. You are welcome.

Join me in welcoming citizens from Adjumani who are also here to listen to their report - they are this side. Join me again in welcoming councillors from Kakumiro town council in Kibaale. You are welcome.

Can I invite the hon. minister of education to lay a paper on Table?

5.37
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I have a document here which I promised to bring to this House today which the hon. Alice Alaso has been crying for and the title of the document is “The Uganda Students Higher Education Financing Policy”. I beg to lay it on Table, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. It will help us to inform the Bill which we have already received.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE RECOMENDATIONS OF THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION JULY 2013

5.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Madam Speaker and Members, I move under rule 174(2) to present to the august House the first report of the Human Rights Committee of Parliament and I beg to begin by laying the minutes of the committee duly signed.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission is required under Article 52(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to publish periodic reports on its findings and submit annual reports to Parliament on the state of human rights and freedoms in the country. Consequently, the Committee on Human Rights is mandated under rule 174(c) of the rules of Procedure of this Parliament to consider the reports submitted to Parliament by the Uganda Human rights Commission. In compliance with the above provision, the committee has considered the commission reports for the years 2008 to 2011 and now wishes to report.

The committee held meetings with key government department and now wishes to report. The committee held meetings with key government departments including the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Uganda Police Force, the Uganda Prison Services, the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, the Electoral Commission and Uganda Human Rights Commission.

The committee also received written submissions from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Office of the Prime Minister. The committee undertook field visits to check on the facilities of selected Uganda Prisons Services and Uganda Police Force facilities in Gulu, Mbarara and Mbale regions and interacted with stakeholders in the said areas.

General observations and recommendations

The committee noted with concern that most of the human rights issues continued to reoccur in the years under review despite Government efforts to address these concerns.

Investigations and resolutions of complaints

The majority of complaints received by the commission were reported by adults while 4.5 percent were reported by minors. The committee recommends that Uganda Human Rights Commission should be adequately facilitated to expeditiously investigate complaints lodged in order to create confidence in the institution. 

The institutions which appear to be habitual violators of human rights should be exposed and their leaders be brought to book.

Conditions in places of detention; the problem of overcrowding which was mostly a result of having many inmates on remand has continued to be a major challenge. The committee visits to various detention centres revealed that 58 percent of the inmates were on remand. Some prisons were found to house up to three times their intended capacity. There is shortage of resident state attorneys in addition to other judicial staff to handle cases and the Gulu circuit was found to have not had a resident judge for quite some time which aggravated the situation.

The committee recommends that the judiciary services be improved by recruiting and facilitating more staff to expeditiously handle and clear cases. The community service programme should be strengthened to reduce on congestion and also to make inmates more productive.

Human rights promotion and outreach activities. The major challenge that the commission faces in providing human rights promotion and outreach activities is the lack of sustainable funding. It was noted that the commission depends mainly on donor funding. 

While the committee will endeavour to undertake human rights promotion in partnership with the commission and other stakeholders during this financial year, this function should not be largely left to civil society organisations who are sometimes driven by donor interests.

The committee recommends that Government should take the lead in funding the Uganda Human Rights Commission to carry out sensitisation and outreach programmes in execution of her mandate enshrined in Article 52 (1) (c), (e), (f) and (g) of the Constitution. 

Security agencies

Security agencies face challenges including inadequate capacity, inadequacies in the law, weak internal accountability mechanisms, illegitimate political interference and deplorable living and working conditions for staff.

During the committee visit, it was noted that the living conditions of officers are deplorable. The committee also observed that human rights desks have been created in the security agencies but these need strengthening.

The committee recommends that the security personnel who act unprofessionally and violate citizen’s rights should be disciplined accordingly. It is after the population realises that security agencies are professional that they will in turn, respect their orders. The committee re-echoed the need for professional behaviour by the security agencies including visible respect for human rights.

The committee urges the public to observe the law and respect the role of the security agencies and calls on the Members of Parliament and other civic leaders to sensitise the people on the importance of observance of human rights during the course of their work. 

The government should take the affirmative action to provide adequate accommodation and remuneration for the security agencies. It is their right to have fair accommodation and commiserate pay as they serve the nation. The duty free facilities should be rolled out in all facilities for the security agencies. 

Electoral democracy and human rights

The human rights commission observed that during previous elections, especially the local government elections, low turn up was registered. 

The commission notes that the right to vote imposed a positive obligation on the state. Civic and voter registration campaigns played a vital role in ensuring effective exercise of the right to vote. 

The committee observed that the above issues are the core activities in achieving a democratisation process. The committee noted with concern the usual complaints relating to lack of free and fair elections which sometimes lead to violent and fatal demonstrations.

The committee noted that one of the reasons for poor voter turn up is the interference by security agencies. The committee, therefore, recommends that there should be timely and regular update of the voters’ register as well as civic and voter education. The Electoral Commission should take full charge of the electoral process and the military and other security agencies should be kept out of the electoral process unless they are invited by the Electoral Commission.

The Electoral Commission should ensure that all voters have voter cards. No polling station should be stationed in the barracks premises. 

The committee further recommends that the Electoral Commission should be constituted in consultation with all relevant stakeholders. The committee believes that the involvement of all players in the political process will result in a free and fair election. 

Both Government and the Electoral Commission should ensure that candidates strictly observe guidelines regarding the use of government facilities especially vehicles during the electoral process. The committee further recommends that Government should adequately fund and operationalise the National Consultative Forum in order to promote peace. 

Access to justice for the vulnerable and poor

The commission noted some violations of the right to access to justice and this included the high costs of professional legal services, delays in trials and proceedings, corruption among police and judicial officers, political interference, charging the public for bail and police bond and suspects being detained beyond the stipulated 48 hours.

The committee confirmed this in Mbarara where over 50 persons had been detained beyond the legally permitted 48 hours. Some of them had been detained at the police station for more than a week.

The committee further noted that court premises are inaccessible to the PWDs in terms of structures. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that strict observance of the legal provision relating to bail and police bond applications which emphasise them as rights to the persons detained be adhered to.

The committee calls on the Uganda Police Force to observe these rights as they are the most commonly abused rights in the police barracks and other places of detention. 

The committee recommends that Government should tackle corruption in the mentioned institutions with utmost zeal. Government should ensure that court premises are accessible by PWDs.

The right to health as a basic human right

The commission registered and investigated complaints on the rights to health which included discrimination on the grounds of HIV/AIDS and denial of the right to a clean and healthy environment which is provided for under Article 39 of the Constitution. 

The committee noted with concern that is a right that is also one of those mostly abused rights. Access to affordable medical care is a problem across the whole country. There is understaffing in the medical sector and the facilities are equally inadequate in public health centres. 

The committee noted that there is lack of specialised accessories of PWDs including maternity beds, sign language interpreters, access and mobility facilities to mention but few in most health centres. The committee recommends that Government allocates enough resources, both human and financial to provide adequate and affordable medical care to all its citizens including the concerns of PWDs.

Government should streamline the delivery of drugs to all health centres and allocate an ambulance to every health centre IV to ensure that medical service delivery is more realistic.

The government should also ensure that there is protection of children from immunisable diseases. This calls for better remuneration of all health workers and hardship allowance for staff that are deployed in very remote areas. This will ensure retention of staff in that sector.

The human rights situation of Persons with Disabilities

The human rights commission observed that the most serious and deeply rooted factor affecting the enjoyment of the rights of PWDs was that of negative attitude and exclusion from programme design and budgeting. The committee recommends that there should be consistent sensitisation of the population on the rights of PWDs and their involvement in development activities.

There should be Special Needs Training for teachers in schools to facilitate PWDs who are learning.

The right to work and the rights of workers

The committee observed that some workers in Uganda are treated with indignity especially the casual labourers who are exploited due to limited chances of employment. They work for long hours and they are sometimes treated to verbal and psychological abuse. 

Workers in the informal sector are greatly exploited in terms of remuneration, working conditions, dismissal without notice, to mention but a few.

The committee notes that there are enough labour laws to guarantee workers’ rights but the problem is the lack of implementation and compliance. 

However, the committee also noted that some employers are faced with a challenge of Ugandan workers who do not take their work seriously. This has resulted in Ugandans losing out to other more active foreign nationals especially in the hospitality industry. 

The committee therefore recommends that labour officers should be facilitated to do their work of monitoring the compliance to the various laws and regulations and make regular reports to the ministry.

The committee further recommends that the worker’s union be used as a channel for bringing out the abuse of rights of workers without fear and urges Government to urgently come up with a minimum wage. The committee also recommends that the industrial court be operationalised and facilitated to address the workers disputes.

Further, the government should urgently carry out massive sensitisation of the population on work ethics and the rights of both employers and employees.

Hunger and the right to food

The Uganda Human Rights Commission monitored the right to food because the food situation in parts of the country was reported to be severe with some people’s lives threatened by hunger. The right to food is a fundamental human right provided for under the international covenant on economic, social and cultural rights.

The committee observes that the recent trend of floods and prolonged droughts in various parts of the country caused by environmental and climatic changes has caused shortage of food. Another major cause is the land tenure system which has resulted into land evictions and land grabbing leaving many people landless, insecure and unproductive.

The committee further observed that there is lack of planning for food security in the country. In some cases, there is plenty of food in one part of the country while there is famine in another part. In the past, Government had silos which were put to use in case of food shortages. These silos are no more and this makes it complicated to address cases of food shortage in the desired time. 

The committee recommends that Government should revive the use of silos in all corners of the country for food storage. This will also serve to assure the farmers of the readily available market in case of bumper harvests. Further, Government should embark on modern commercial methods of farming especially irrigation and use of fertilisers to mitigate the effects of climatic change. 

Government should address issues of land tenure by putting in place a land policy which will address the issue of security of ownership of land by the people. The land fund should be established to compensate landlords and redistribute the land to bonafide occupants to ensure security of ownership and productivity. 

The committee further recommends that a commensurate tax be imposed on idle land owners in order to maximise land usage. Government should also explore provision of food for the children in schools as a right. 

Disaster, national preparedness and related human rights

The committee noted with concern the fire-fighting approach to disasters in the country. There is less preparedness for disasters including fires and lightning especially in schools. The committee further noted that reports of investigation especially of fires in schools have never been published. Publication of these reports would inform government initiatives to curb disasters.

It was also noted that the fund for disaster areas like Bududa are greatly abused and the beneficiaries do not get help in time and in right quantities. The committee recommends that the Police and indeed Government should ensure that the fire-fighting equipment and lightning arrestors are installed in all public institutions without fail. All relevant authorities should take it up urgently and ensure that these facilities are installed. 

The committee recommends that the ministry in charge of disaster should ensure that what is provided for relief items goes to the intended beneficiaries and those that have abused the funds and relief items should be held accountable. 

Further, Government should put in place a special fund to restore common facilities such as bridges destroyed by natural disasters. Government should develop an early working system so as to avert catastrophes caused by natural disasters. 

Government should plan new methods of resettling people displaced by disasters like establishing satellite towns for easy management of supplies to the affected people. 

Uses of culture

The committee observed that culture plays an important role and serves as a unifying factor in communities. However, some cultural aspects are destructive and in a way result into abuse of rights of some members of society. These include female genital mutilation, child sacrifice, to mention but a few. The committee recommends that Government should make public investigations of child sacrifice cases and bring the culprits to book with heavy penalties as deterrent measures to the practice. 

Government should allocate sufficient funding for sensitising people about the Anti-Female Genital Mutilation Act in order to end the practise.

Universal Periodic Review

The committee noted that the universal periodic review provided an opportunity for interactive dialogue that highlighted steps taken to promote human rights. The committee also noted that this function is undertaken by states to provide steps taken to promote and protect human rights best practices and challenges, to enhance the states’ capacity to promote and protect human rights. 

The committee therefore recommends that Government should adopt a consultative process for implementing all recommendations that have been adopted during the UPR. Government should ratify all the protocols which have not been ratified to ensure promotion of human rights in all aspects. 

General comments and recommendations on the Uganda Police Force and Uganda Prisons Services 

The Uganda Prisons Services – observations

The Uganda Prisons Services have tried to maintain good environment of the prisons facilities as was noted during the field visits. The inmates have access to water, prayer places, clean uniforms and have at least two meals a day. The medical facilities were also fair and the inmates appreciated this. It was also observed that there were no juvenile offenders mixed with adult offenders in the prisons visited. 

In addition, the prisons were engaged in productive activities including access to formal education in a few of them while others are engaged in some activities where they earn some money. 

The major problem and complaints received was the evident over congestion in prisons. The Uganda Prisons Services attributed this to court delays due to lack of judges but were trying to meet the needs of the ever increasing number of inmates now at an average of 8.5 percent  per year. Some inmates complained of staying too long on remand which is an abuse of their right to a fair and speedy hearing. 

Recommendations

Government should urgently appoint judicial officers and staff to clear the case backlog. The Justice, Law and Order Sector should be encouraged to continue the case backlog strategy to reduce the case backlog.

Government should also consider the promotion of non-custodial sentences and strengthen implementation of the community service programme. Funds should be allocated to the Uganda Prisons Services to expand the existing old infrastructure in all the prisons facilities across the country. 

All inmates who have spent long periods in prisons without hearings and qualify for mandatory bail under Article 23(6)(b) and (c) of the Constitution should be released.

Formal education currently carried out in Luzira and a few other prisons should be rolled out to other prisons centres with big populations. This may be one of the best ways to rehabilitate inmates. 

Children incarcerated with their mothers should be adequately catered for and their nutrition enhanced by special meals.

The Uganda Police Force 

Observations

The Uganda Police Force detention centres visited were in a very deplorable and embarrassing state. There is too much congestion with tiny rooms holding over 30 people in a very unhygienic environment. The bucket system is still in use in most of the upcountry stations including main centres in Gulu. 

There are people who have stayed in the police cells for up to three months without agreeing in court on the pretext that the regional state attorneys are still perusing the files. There was a 60-year old man arrested for rape who was put in the same prison with juvenile offenders in Mbarara which would expose them to any abuse and all sorts of negative influence. 

The committee observed a growing concern in the manner in which the Police is conducting itself in regard to the enjoyment of the right of freedom of assembly and expression and the manner in which it carries out arrests. 

Recommendations

The Uganda Police Force should urgently address the issue of congestion and long detention hours. The Uganda Police Force should release all those who have stayed beyond the Constitution mandatory period of 48 hours in police cells. The officers in breach of this provision should be investigated and prosecuted. 

At no time should the minors or juvenile offenders be detained with older inmates and if found the responsible officers should be serious disciplined. 

There is need for professional behaviour by the police working within the framework of the law so as to create confidence between the police and the population. There is need for visible observance of human rights in the course of their duties thus preserving the respect and dignity of all Ugandans. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the above general comments are substantiated by the detailed analysis which follows in part two of the report, this being part one which is the executive summary. 

It should, however, be noted that most of the general concerns cut across the entire report covering the period under review; the period of 2008 up to 2011. I pray that this august House adopts the report and the recommendations therein. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. I must congratulate your committee, for the first time in so many years, presenting a report on the Uganda Human Rights Commission. Thank you so much. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary numbers; are there any brief comments; the report is very clear. 

MR ACHIA: Madam Speaker, this is a very important report which has come at a time when we are considering policy statements. This report should have been availed earlier because it has come for the first time after a very long time. There are issues cutting across the country that we need to give more time so that we can deal with them step by step for us to have understanding of it and make replies. 

There are specific institutions like police and prisons – there are issues to do with the Electoral Commission; there are issues to do with disaster preparedness; issues to do with children; the behaviour of the police - all these issues require more time to be dealt with adequately. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very important report and this is the first time we are receiving it; and it is covering ten years. So I think I will concede to the request. But that means it will come after the budget process. So Honourable members, please study the report carefully, we will look at it after the budget. Next item. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON BOUNDARY DISPUTES BETWEEN AMURU AND ADJUMANI DISTRICTS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that report was presented. I know you have had time to read it. Can we have some comments – who was the petitioner? Okay, hon. Olanya. 

6.60
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for infrastructure for the work done. The report presented by the committee for infrastructure on the boundary dispute between Adjumani and Amuru – there were a lot of loopholes. And the report the committee got from the ground was not included in this very important report. 

On human rights violations, the committee stated clearly that they did not find any evidence of human rights violation. Yet the committee visited Apaa where police officers carried out the evictions and they were given all the evidence. I was surprised that the committee did not include all the evidence in their report. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to present the evidence that was given to the committee and I wonder why they say there was no evidence of human rights violation. During the eviction in Amuru District in Apaa the police officers shot dead one man called Olanya Patrick aged 28. He was shot dead on 13 February 2012. 

I beg to lay on Table the photo of Olanya Patrick who was shot dead by the police officers and the UPDF during the eviction exercise. 

Now only that, during the eviction, police officers beat up the people, which was wrong. We thought that was acceptable only during slave trade. The police officers, commanded by Assistant IGP Grace Turyagumanawe, stripped the youth; they locked them in a house naked – it was a very nasty situation! I have a photograph of those people who were stripped naked and placed in a house. We do not know their intention in removing all the clothes of those people. I want to read out their names: Otim Francis aged 23; Omony Richard; Ocheng Bongomin; Ocheng Venancio. They were stripped naked and they were locked in the grass thatched house. This is their photograph. 

Madam Speaker, I felt so embarrassed when the committee said there was no evidence of human rights violation –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute to lay your papers.

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the photograph. The people who were there had cameras on their phones. I beg to lay. I beg to lay the pictures of the houses which were burnt; the children were left to suffer; women suffered, and food crops were cut down. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, the map that was presented by the committee was false. That is one of the tricks that land-grabbers use to grab other people’s land. Allow me to lay on Table the map of Kilak County, Amuru District which was drawn in 1962 by the British Government, instead of the false map that they have presented. I beg to lay.

Finally, I would like to appreciate the committee for having observed the rule of law in this country. In their recommendation, the committee said the issue is in court and they dared not enter deep into the discussion because the case is in court. It is true that we took the Uganda Wildlife Authority, the Attorney-General, the UPDF and Police for doing a lot of atrocities in our area to the courts of law. 

The committee said that I went and disorganised people who were sent by Parliament of Uganda. I want to state that the committee was not all that right. The procedure of putting mark-stones in somebody’s land is very clear –(Interruption)

MS AURU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When that incident happened – when the Police, Uganda Wildlife Authority, leaders of Adjumani District and Amuru went to re-mark the boundary it was covered by NTV. And I remember seeing hon. Olanya violently throwing dust. Is he, therefore, in order to stand in this Parliament and claim that the committee is blind to see that he did something violent on the ground? And yet the whole event was televised and the whole world watched an honourable member of Parliament behaving like a lunatic. Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you know you are the subject of that issue; I think you should leave it to other Members to talk since you are the subject. Yes, you are subject of that report.

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to raise a point of order – I had just started explaining on that particular point. I thought we were going to complete that point and then the Members would deliberate on it. On that point –

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear the point of procedure from hon. Anywar.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our Rules of Procedure bar Members from using unparliamentary language. Is the honourable member procedurally right to refer to a colleague as behaving like a “lunatic”? 

THE SPEAKER: No, the Member did not say that hon. Olanya is a lunatic; she said he was behaving like one. (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was explaining that particular point. We all know the procedure of planting mark-stones in somebody’s land. When you are surveying land, the landowner should be properly informed and they should know exactly what is going on in their land. To our dismay, the community of Apaa did not know what was going on; they were not informed. The surveyors went and started work on people’s land and I was called very late in the evening by residents of Apaa. That is why when we went, we told them to stop the exercise until people are properly informed. In other words, Madam Speaker, as we speak now – (Interruption) 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of order I am raising is this: Is the honourable member for Kilak County in order to continue telling lies in this House when the preparatory exercises were carried out? I can quote one meeting where the current state minister for lands attended which hon. Olanya and some Members from Acholi Parliamentary Group including hon. Okot attended. In that meeting we agreed to cooperate and allow the technical team to do its work. Therefore, is he in order to continue telling lies to this House when he participated in the processes? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let us concentrate on the recommendations; let us not go into the how and why and so on.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Sarah went to stop evictions; she did not say anything about the demarcation. She only stopped the Police from evicting the people of Apaa - 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear the point of procedure from hon. Boona.

MS BOONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since the aggrieved member has a long story about what happened, I would propose that he asks for a day for personal explanation. This is because he seems not to be speaking about the recommendations and at the same time he seems to be aggrieved, and would like the whole world to know how he did not participate in the violence. He could look for an opportunity to write a full explanation about his involvement so that he allows the House to do what we should be doing this evening. You have kept guiding him on what to do but he insists on talking about his personal experience. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. Hon. Members, please concentrate on the recommendations. And also, if you recall, the reason we sent the Committee on Infrastructure was so that the aggrieved parties and all those who are disputing should not be part of the process. So I do not know how you ended up there to disrupt the committee’s work. 

6.19
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this report and would like to support their recommendation that Government should prioritise the immediate demarcation of the border so that we have a lasting solution. That is found on page 22, paragraph 2. Why do I say this? On page 15, the truth about the land under contention has been unearthed. The committee states clearly that the Amuru and Adjumani residents are not talking of the same land – in terms of its location, size and purpose. Therefore, for us, our interest – where we need support – is that let the demarcation be done. Secondly, the sugar-coated statement and open lies have been unearthed on pages 17-18, where it shows clearly how some people had intended to divert the focus in resolving this issue.

Madam Speaker, the lives which were lost, human rights which were abused and the property which was vandalised, to me, are signs, symptoms and effects of Government not pronouncing itself on the border. Therefore, the main issue is the demarcation. If we can focus on it, we shall rest our case. We have co-existed with the people of Acholi and in this country you can settle in any part. However, let it be known that there is no way one can be in Adjumani and then claim to be in Amuru.

Madam Speaker, through you, I need some guidance from the Attorney-General: If I happen to go to Kamuli and claim for your land and the committee of Parliament comes out clearly to say that my boundary is in Adjumani and not in Kamuli, and if I decided to go to court, how would the operations in Kamuli District be stopped since Kamuli is not in Adjumani District? I need that explanation because I do not see the correlation – when on pages 17-18 we have clearly been told that the land under contention is totally different and that the people of Amuru went to court on a different land. 

Madam Speaker, on some allegations –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, the land that we took the government to court over is the land, which is located in Apaa, Pabbo Sub County in Amuru District. We have the court order that was issued for that particular area. People of Amuru have never gone to claim any land apart from when we took the government to court. 

Is the hon. Member in order to say that we went to court over different land? If she is saying so, that means that the place where the killing and evictions took place is the land that we went in court over. Is she in order to say we are claiming different land yet the name is indicated clearly, “Apaa village found in Pabbo Sub County in Amuru District”? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should leave matters, which are in court. We cannot discuss them; the court will decide where the land belongs. Those are court issues.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. The issue being debated now is a conflict between Amuru and Adjumani districts. Two Members here have got great interest and stake in the matter before the House. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for them to allow Members with an independent mind in this matter to exhaustively debate it instead of it becoming an issue between hon. Gilbert Olanya from Amuru and hon. Jesca Ababiku from Adjumani? I think it may end up derailing the debate. I thank you.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, bearing in mind that the Constitution allows Ugandans to settle anywhere in any part of the country and two, bearing in mind that the main issue is which part of the area is in contention, where does it fall, in Madi or Atiak? I am saying this because I worked there as an administrator and as a district commissioner so I know what I am talking about.

Bearing in mind that this is an issue, which is already in court and the court is supposed to take a decision on which area falls in Adjumani and which falls on the other side, isn’t it prejudicial to continue talking about this issue? Can’t we leave it to court? I am just seeking your guidance concerning the simple administrative and human rights issues, which are coming in. Can’t we leave this matter to the courts of law because they have been presented with physical maps and I am sure they will know, which is in Adjumani and which is in Amuru. Can’t we leave it at that because it is just going to cause unnecessary unconstitutional hiccups for nothing? I need your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it seems it is difficult to debate this report without talking about boundaries and yet we have asked the government to demarcate and we have also asked the court to handle this matter. I think let us just adopt the report and ask the court to expeditiously handle the issue so that we know, which land falls where.

Hon. Members, I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Minister, did you want to update us on what you have done? We want you to go and demarcate quickly.

6.27
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank the committee for this report but I thought I needed to clarify one thing. The coordinates are not in dispute because these coordinates were passed onto us at the time of independence and this is what the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Department of Surveys and Mapping are using. We really cannot shift them. The only thing we need to deal with –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, we have just pronounced ourselves and we decided to wait for court. We are just going back on the last position right now. Is the minister in order to bring us back to the old position we left?

THE SPEAKER: I do not think the coordinates were an issue in the recommendations so I think we have adopted them. Let the court finish its work and you also do your work. 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much for that guidance, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to say one thing. If we are going to bring down or minimise boundary disputes between communities in different districts, we the political leaders must play a central role in getting our communities and people to support the constitutional position. If we do not take off time and first of all study the constitutional provisions, get the coordinates and how they are determined and then sensitise our people, even when we appoint committees like the one we have had and even when court rulings are made, getting the boundaries on the ground could still remain a problem –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to inform the senior minister that on matters of land, we are all very conscious of the constitutional right of individuals but the information I would like to give the minister is that I happened to have travelled to Amuru personally and I happened to have sat under the tree, which was the polling station where people voted Akena P’Jok, former MP from Acholi. Under that same tree is the land, which is under dispute.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I think court is the only way to resolving this matter. I cannot expect that I, coming from Dokolo, would come to this House and say, people who voted in Kaberamaido are actually Langi when they were voting in Kaberamaido in Teso. This is a very contentious issue and I am just advising that let us not be entwined in things we do not quite understand. I think historical facts are there and I am even surprised that the chairperson, who was then steering the committee, decided to bring this report at this material time. This is because I reminded him of the court issue and of the reality on the ground and I told him it would be better for us to go with the court decision. I am surprised that he has brought this. I even told him that if he was going to bring it, I was going to come with a minority report but I am surprised that he did it anyway. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, it is the Business Committee, which directed all the committees, which had pending business to expeditiously handle them and bring them here. That was our directive from the Business Committee – no, but we have said we are not going to speak to the reports now. 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I just want to give additional information to what the minister is saying. As leaders, while we talk about boundaries, we should be mindful of how Ugandans have settled. My biggest worry in this kind of debate is that people start looking at tribes other than administrative issues. I think we should have a focus in order not to cause Ugandans problems. I physically travelled to that place - at one time I appeared on a talk show with hon. Gen. Moses Ali at some radio station in Gulu and he knows what transpired while on that programme.

I think as politicians, we are trying to peddle more tribalism than addressing the boundary issues. While we wait for the court matter to be concluded, my personal advice would be that we look at the conflict – because that area is double-edged - you find the Acholis on that other side –( Interruption)

MR SEMUGABA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. Hon. Reagan Okumu should not insinuate that the committee or Members of Parliament handled this issue on tribal basis because this is a committee of Parliament. It engaged a technical team. The minister has been explaining generally, the boundary conflict and how we can solve it. So, is he in order to insinuate that this Parliament works on the basis of tribalism?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let us leave the – 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I am an interested party to this matter and so let me declare that now. Actually I had intended not to speak to this matter. But let me give some advice that we should know that since time immemorial there has been the Acholi-Madi boundary. This boundary has been there since independence.

What is very important to me, and something which I am seeing, is that court that is now being brought in should really consider the fact that the team that was sent has got good information, though it wasn’t acceptable to some groups. 
So, don’t you think opening the boundary will help the court to reach a decision? These people have technical information and if some people want to say there has never been a boundary, which was the boundary then? The boundary has been there. Who is going to say the boundary has not been there? That is my fear.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the issue of the demarcation was in the recommendations and we have already adopted it through the adoption of the report. Let us give court time to finish up with the case as we wait for the ministry to do their part.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for that guidance. I still would like to appeal to my colleagues that if we are going to be in a position to do our work and it gets accepted, we need their understanding and their support. It will be upon that that everything will run smoothly.

As for the voting that some people voted from here and there in 1980 as opposed - I would like to say that that depended on how the constituencies had been demarcated. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I think let us leave this matter. Yes, hon. Huda.

MS HUDA: Madam Speaker, I want to seek guidance from you. When the committee was going to do this work, hon. Hassan Fungaroo raised an issue of a border conflict between Moyo, Yumbe, Koboko and Arua. And I recall you directed the committee to consider those issues for them to bring one report. However, in this report, I have not seen anything talking about those border issues. So, I don’t know whether the committee will now give us another report pertaining to that or not. That is the guidance I am seeking from you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, chairperson of the committee, where do you stand on the Yumbe issues?

MR SEMUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the House that this was a specific and urgent issue. You issued an express order for us to act on the petition, which was a separate petition. I can tell you that we have the Moyo issue on schedule to be handled. We have halted processes on many of such issues because of the budget process because it takes precedent. But after that budget process, we shall expeditiously handle the various petitions including the ones of: Otuke, Kapelebyong, Mbale, Moyo, Nebbi and Manafwa districts.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, those other reports will come after we get done with the budget process. Next item, please.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE LOCAL AUTHORITIES ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2008/2009

6.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Ms Florence Kintu): Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Report of the Auditor-General on the Local Authorities for the year ended 30 June 2009.

The Report of the Local Government Accounts Committee is presented to this august House in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution and rules 170(2) and 170(3) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

The report is structured into parts. Part one is about the general observations and recommendations, conclusions on prominent policy matters relating to financial management in the local governments.

The copies are being distributed – 

THE SPEAKER: Please proceed, chairperson of the committee – no, the Leader of Government Business is just doing something small in the corner. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, it is true that the Leader of Government Business may be coming in shortly. But the State Minister for Local Government was around. We are handling a matter that directly concerns local government. We don’t want to encounter a situation where the Leader of Government Business will just take notes and refer them to the responsible minister. So, are we procedurally right to continue when we only have ministers for Luweero Triangle and Teso Affairs? When the Minister - and the things of local government are very important where we would have wanted the Minister of Local Government to be here to answer some of these things.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have been trying to get these matters presented for a long time. So, I think we can receive and the debate can follow when the ministers are here. Let us receive it and get it out of the committee’s docket – the copies are here. 

MS FLORENCE KINTU: Madam Speaker, some Members have got copies and I do not know why the person who has been distributing copies has disappeared. 

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, where are the copies? 

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, according to the rules and the laws that govern the budgeting process, we have a deadline on 30thor 31st of this month; and we are therefore required as Parliament to complete submission of committee reports. 

This morning I attended our own Committee on Physical Infrastructure and out of 21 members from the Movement there were only two members against seven members of the Opposition. And right now the records on the expenditure of the budget show that this Parliament and this country is spending a lot of money on the numerous ministers whose salaries are being paid; their allowances are being paid by the Government and by the taxpayers. I am meant to understand there are over 60 ministers dully appointed and approved by this House. As I speak the third one is now taking his proper position. (Laughter) There are only two ladies who have always laboured to do their best. Madam Speaker, I believe there is a conspiracy to fail Parliament because if we do not beat the deadline we would have breached our own laws. 

I am raising this as a matter of concern. Where are the others? To whom are they accountable? They are not in the committees; they are not in Parliament. Where are they? Madam Speaker, it is important that the voters must know that we are spending money to keep people here when actually they do not give reasons why they are not here. How many letters of apology or telephone calls telling you that they will not be sitting in Parliament today have you received? Even in our committee, our chairman did not receive any apology apart from one person but the members were not there. Is there a conspiracy to sabotage the institution of Parliament? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is really unfortunate. Today is not a cabinet day. It is well-known that it is a parliamentary sitting day and I would have expected at least one of the ministers of local government to be here. The Order Paper was issued early enough and of course when the budget is not done we shall be blamed conveniently. I do not know what the Minister for Lands has to say about this matter - including also the committees. Why were members not in the committees? 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I remember hon. Alex Onzima was here earlier on; as I walked in he was around here. I have been trying to get him on phone and that is why I was seated out there. It is not our way of doing things - not to be here. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal will correctly recall that the whole of last week, whenever we were summoned to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we were in attendance and we engaged each other in regards to the issues that needed to be attended to in order for a report to be presented to the plenary. As to what happened in the committee this morning, as ministers from my ministry we had not been invited. 

Madam Speaker, I am going to dutifully inform the Leader of Government Business - (Interjections) – yes, he had to go and see his doctor. I remember he was passing word on to the Speaker that he had a problem. But I am going to inform the Deputy Leader of Government Business and the Leader of Government Business that it is extremely important that we are here from the beginning to the end of the sitting of Parliament at any one particular time so that we can be in a position to get through with the passing of the budget. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think I have no choice but to adjourn the House because the responsible ministers appear not to be interested in being here today, and yet these reports are very important for our decentralisation process. 

So House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. and we shall be receiving the three reports on the policy statements, which are ready tomorrow.  

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, the reports have been issued so they should come with the reports. There should be no complaint that there are no reports.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, sometimes when you leave here you abandon the reports and when you come in the following day you say, “We had no reports,” but everybody who has received a report please - 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, as I informed the House, I was trying to place a call so that ministers can come in and as you can see the front bench is almost getting full and - (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: But where is the Minister for Local Government? He is not here! 

MR MIGEREKO: He is also on the way coming, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, it is my request that tomorrow you bring us nearer on the Order Paper because we have been waiting all these days and we are on the tail end of the Order Paper. So, I am requesting that the report on human trafficking, at least you move it up tomorrow- (Interjections) – honourable colleagues, I have been on the Order Paper for the last two days and I have been waiting. 

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to present today? 

MS KOMUHANGI: Yes, I am ready. 

MR OKUPA: I remember bringing the issue of trafficking in persons on 13th February last year. Since that time the people concerned have suffered. Some of them have died; some of them cannot be accounted for. I think we would have done justice to them if we finished up with this report tomorrow, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we will determine how to handle the Order Paper tomorrow you just be ready. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. - Hon. Members, whether tomorrow is Cabinet day at 2.00 O’clock I want some of the ministers here because they are at least three.

(House rose at 6.53 p.m. and was adjourned to Wednesday, 28 August at 2.00 p.m.)
