Thursday, 16 August 2012 
  
Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 
  
PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

 National Anthem (Three Stanzas) 
  
The House was called to order. 
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to this special sitting convened to pay tribute to Mr Stephen Kiprotich upon his outstanding performance in the just concluded Olympic Games held in London. 

But on a sad note, I wish to register on behalf of Parliament, and on my own behalf, our sincere condolences upon the death of the following gallant soldiers who were on a mission, which was approved by this House, to assist the people of Somalia, Africa and humanity in general. These are Capt. William Letti, Lt Patrick Nahamya, and 2nd Lt Robert Mushabe. We offer our condolences to their families who we know are currently undergoing trauma and loss because of this tragedy. We ask the Almighty God to give them strength and courage to go through this trying time. 

As for the other gallant soldiers who were injured, we pray for their quick recovery and I wish to inform the House that our High Commissioner to Kenya, Her Excellency Angelina Wapakhabulo, is monitoring the injured on a daily basis and she will be updating us on their condition. 

Again, on a sad note, I have learnt of the death of Dr Avitus Tibarimbasa, a former Member of Parliament representing Ndorwa East, Kabale District, who died yesterday. In view of all these tragedies, I invite the House to observe one minute of silence in their honour. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the right of my Chair is our main celebrant, Mr Stephen Kiprotich –(Applause)– he is accompanied by his employers. The wife and the parents are on their way and I will let you know when they arrive. 

Those seats are normally reserved for the treasury bench, which is restricted, but because of the achievement of Mr Kiprotich, and the pleasure he has brought to Uganda, we have waived the restriction to allow him to seat in that distinguished position in this House. (Applause)

We also have, accompanying him, the Commissioner General of Prisons and numerous senior officers of the Uganda Prisons Service, where Mr Kiprotich is employed. (Applause)

I wish also to take this opportunity to commend other sports personalities of earlier generations who won medals and put Uganda in the limelight. We wish to remember Ayub Kalule, Judith Aya, Davis Kamoga, “The Beast”, Shadrach Odhiambo, Leo Rwabogo, Eridadi Mukwanga, Dorcus Inzikuru, Moses Kipsiro of recent and many others who have brought honour to this country. 

On a special note, I wish to acknowledge the outstanding contribution of Mr John Akii-Bua, who won the last gold medal in the 400 meter hurdles in Munich, Germany in 1972. And I take this opportunity to introduce his son Tonny Akii-Bua –(Applause)– he has come with the medal we last won 40 years ago in 1972. He has also come to witness this achievement. 

We want to thank the family of Mr Kiprotich, namely, his father Mr Kapchesukok and his dear wife Ms Eserena Cheptumi Kokop for bringing him up and for educating him. We also want to thank the great people of Sebei for bringing honour to this country continuously. (Applause) 

To Mr Kiprotich our Golden Boy, I congratulate you on behalf of Parliament upon your exceptional performance and for ending the famine; we have been in a drought of medals for all this time –(Laughter)– you are a young person, and we wish you all the best in the years to come! And as I told you in the lounge, I look forward to hearing your name again in Rio in four years’ time. 

But I take this opportunity to call upon the Ministry of Education and Sports to continually support the development of sports in this country. Yesterday, I was in Nairobi and the Kenyans were saying that they had loaned us the medal –(Laughter)– this was because Mr Kiprotich trained with them in Kenya for three months. So, they felt that they had contributed to the medal and that they owned it. But I told them, “No, we roundly defeated you and this is our medal”. 

I know that His Excellency the President, sometime back, promised to establish a high altitude training centre in the Elgon Zone. We hope this will become a reality so that the potential of the young people can be improved. 

I urge the Committee on Education and sports to ensure that the budget for sports is enhanced so that we can support our athletes. These are very rare moments, but it is a very great day of joy for Uganda and Parliament. That is why we have suspended the work of the budget to come and honour Mr Kiprotich. So, I would like to invite the Members to congratulate Mr Kiprotich. When I say, “Hip! Hip!” you say, “Hooray”. So, Hip! Hip!

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Hooray!

THE SPEAKER: Hip! Hip! Kiprotich.

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Hooray!

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much! (Applause) I now invite the Clerk to show a short clip of the joy we received as our Golden Boy was running to reach the tape. What is the problem?

MR OKUPA: Procedure, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR OKUPA: Since this is a golden moment, I want to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Opposition, to give amnesty to our colleagues on the other side so that they can be able to cross. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those who are seated uncomfortably can cross to the Opposition side. (Laughter)

(The video clip was played.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was the historic moment. I would like to remind you that after the session, we are hosting a reception for Mr Kiprotich at Sheraton Hotel at 6.00 p.m. in the Rwenzori Ballroom. You are all invited to continue the celebration. 

I also want to announce that in the gallery, we have the Sergeant-at-Arms from the National Assembly of the Seychelles, Mr Glynny Larval. (Applause) He has come here on one-week’s official visit to compare notes with his counterpart. 

May I now invite the Minister of Education to move the motion? 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY GLOWING TRIBUTE AND RECOGNITION TO MR STEPHEN KIPROTICH FOR HIS EXCELLENT PERFORMANCE BY WINNING A GOLD MEDAL IN THE 42-KILOMETRE MARATHON RACE IN THE 2012 OLYMPIC GAMES HELD IN LONDON

2.59
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament congratulating national athlete and Prisons Warder, Stephen Kiprotich, for winning, in the name of Uganda, at the 30th Olympiad 2012 London Olympic Games, a priceless Olympic Gold Medal in the Olympic marathon event in a time of two hours, eight minutes and one second.  

This motion is moved under Rule 43: 

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, Objective XVII, mandates the state to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 8(a) of the Constitution of Uganda provides for governance based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy;

AWARE THAT on Sunday 12 August 2012, through the excellent and exceptional performance of Uganda, National Athlete and Prisons Warder, Stephen Kiprotich, at the Games of the 30th Olympiad, which is also unofficially called the 2012 London Olympic Games, won, in the name of Uganda, the second Olympics Gold Medal after trouncing all the other world athletes in the olympic marathon event by emerging first and winner in a time of two hours, eight minutes and one second at the Olympic Stadium in London;

FURTHER AWARE THAT Uganda has now won two Olympic gold medals, the first having been won by legend John Akii-Bua, 40 years in 1972 in Munich, Germany at the Games of the 20th Olympiad in the 400-metre hurdles event in a world record time of 47.82 seconds, and since then, John Akii-Bua being the brightest positive image of Uganda in the olympics;

FURTHER AWARE THAT this triumphant victory of Stephen Kiprotich presents a rare and unique opportunity and platform for national unity, patriotism, national consensus for future development, and for the advancement and promotion of physical education and sports in Uganda for citizens’ physical wellbeing, health and productivity;

COGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT Government of Uganda needs to take a strong stand in enhancing the realisation of patriotism, unity, national pride, citizens’ physical wellbeing, health and productivity;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

    1. Parliament of Uganda extends its lustrous appreciation and congratulations to Uganda National Athlete and Prisons Warder, Stephen Kiprotich, for winning, in the name of Uganda, at the Games of the 30th Olympiad 2012, a priceless Olympic Gold Medal in the Olympic marathon event in a time of two hours, eight minutes and one second.

    2. Parliament of Uganda supports an increase in the annual budget to the sports sub-sector of the Ministry of Education and Sports to facilitate development of physical education and sports countrywide through schools’ talent development programmes, enhanced sports competitions, development of appropriate sports facilities and human technical and managerial capacity.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Seconded.

MAJ. (RTD.) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, I would like to make a brief statement that relates to the history of Stephen Kiprotich in light of the sports sector.

Stephen Kiprotich was born on 27 February 1989, in Cheptilyal, Tegeres in Kapchorwa District. Stephen Kiprotich is a Prisons officer who was promoted yesterday to assistant superintendent of Prisons. (Applause)

Stephen Kiprotich is married and he has a very stable marriage. He has a very beautiful wife with two children; a boy and a girl.

Madam Speaker, Stephen Kiprotich has athletics events in which he normally participates, including 10,000 metres, cross-country running and marathons.

Kiprotich appeared at the national athletics events in 2005 during the national cross-country championships. The following year, he was selected by the Uganda Athletics Federation to compete in the Junior World Cross-Country Championships in Japan, which was his first major outing. The following years, Madam Speaker, he represented our country in World cross-country Championships in athletics, African Senior Championships in athletics and various IAAF Grandprix and other races organised by member federations of the IAAF.

In regard to the training, I am happy that you have also emphasised the directive which the President gave the ministry yesterday, that we should conclude the issue of the establishment of the high altitude training school in Teryet in Kapchorwa within one year, and honourable members of Parliament, with your support, I am sure that the ministry will be able to accomplish this mission without causalities. 

Madam Speaker, I wanted to draw the attention of Parliament to the record on how Stephen Kiprotich has been doing his training. He mainly trained at high altitudes in Kapchorwa for national competitions, and Eldoret or Kapsabet in Western Kenya for major competitions. He is part of the Global Sport Management Organisation that runs a training camp in Kenya for all its athletes. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to outline the track record of Stephen Kiprotich in the world competitions. He won a gold medal in the 30th Olympiad Marathon 2012 in London, which footage we have just finished watching. He participated in the 13th IAAF World Championships Marathon in athletics in 2011 in Korea and was the Ninth. Stephen Kiprotich was also sixth in the 39th World Cross-country Championships, 2011 in Spain.

In addition to that, Stephen Kiprotich was the sixth in the 10,000 metres in the 17th African Championships 2010 in Nairobi Kenya. He also became 23rd in the 37th World Cross-country Championships 2009 in Jordan. Kiprotich was number five in the 10,000 metres in the 12th IAAF World Junior Championships in Athletics in 2008 in Poland. Stephen Kiprotich was number 12 in the 36th World Cross-Country Junior Category in 2008 in England. Stephen Kiprotich was also 19th in the 35th World Cross-Country Junior Category in 2007 in Mombasa, Kenya. And on his track record also, Stephen Kiprotich was 16th in the 10,000 metres in the 11th IAAF World Championships in athletics in 2007 in Osaka Japan. 

Stephen Kiprotich has competed in several IAAF Grandprix races in Africa, in Europe and Asia. He also won the 21 kilometres MTN Kampala Marathon in 2009 and 2010; and the 10 kilometres in 2006 and 2007; and a national record marathon of 2:7:20 on 17 April 2011 in Netherlands. 

Madam Speaker, the government has been able to support Kiprotich in two major activities, including in 2010 when he was facilitated to attend the 17th African Championships in Nairobi Kenya where he attained sixth position in the 10,000 metres. In addition to that, in 2011, he was facilitated to attend the 13th IAAF World Championships in athletics, which took place in South Korea, where he came ninth in marathon and in the most recent, which we are celebrating, Stephen Kiprotich was facilitated by Government –(Interjections)– to travel to London and back to Uganda. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I now invite hon. Hamson Obua to second the motion, followed by the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Football Club, hon. Odonga Otto. 

3.12
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): I thank you, Madam Speaker. In seconding this motion to pay tribute to our gold medallist, Mr Stephen Kiprotich, let me start by thanking you for convening this special session for the Ninth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda to pay this tribute to Mr Kiprotich for winning an Olympic gold medal for Uganda.  

Madam Speaker, in Mathew 7:7, the Bible provides and I quote, “Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you. For everyone who asks receives. He who seeks, finds and to him who knocks, the door will be open.” Since 2 September 1972, when the late John Akii-Bua, a Police officer and an athlete, won the first Olympic gold medal for Uganda, this country called Uganda has been asking; Uganda has been knocking; and the answer was provided on Sunday, 12 August 2012, 40 years down the road in waiting and a month to the 50 years Independence anniversary for Uganda! I think this was just a blessing in disguise. 

I want to emphatically put it clear that there are two things that these two Olympic gold medallists share in common. Both Akii-Bua and Mr Kiprotich won Olympic gold medals at the age of 23 years. The second unique thing is that both of them are from the forces. The late Akii-Bua was a Police officer; Mr Kiprotich is a Prisons warder. I should now use this opportunity, because I am always a prophet of hope, to put the Uganda People’s Defence Forces on notice –(Laughter)- that the third gold medal for Uganda should and must be won by a UPDF solider, if a civilian has failed to win it. (Laughter)

To my young brother, Mr Kiprotich, I want to say that this hard-won gold medal has opened for you opportunities within and without. You are a world champion; from a warder you are now an assistant superintendent of Prisons. You have joined a long list of household names in Uganda. Kiprotich is a household name now; Kipsiro is a household name; Kadaga is a household name; (Applause) Obua is a household name; Inzikuru is a household name; Akii-Bua is a household name. Welcome to the family of Uganda’s household names.

I want to say that this win is a great motivation and inspiration to your generation and generations to come are celebrating over 50 gold medals. So, this is a wake-up call, Madam Speaker, to the Government of Uganda and to the people of Uganda that the only thing we need to do in order for us to promote patriotism, nationalism and unity in diversity, is to invest, and invest in sports. To the government, I want to say that this gold medal is a litmus test and a wake-up call for action in the following areas:

    1. Supporting grassroots sports development;

    2. This opportunity should be used to fulfill the pledge to provide the national high altitude training centre in Kapchorwa; and


    3. This opportunity should be used for calling upon Government to fulfil the pending pledges made to the sports fraternity and some personalities that have excelled. Cases in point are: Kipsiro; Government promised to build for him a house and buy for him a car. It is still a pending promise. The late Akii-Bua who won a gold medal in 1972, issues surrounding his house in Kamwokya have not been settled. To-date, the Akii-Bua Stadium has never been constructed although land has been availed by Lira District Local Government. 

These are some of the personalities; even Government promised to pay some form of allowances to sportsmen and women who excel both at national and international levels. We are still waiting for all these pending pledges from the Government of Uganda to be fulfilled. In the 2001 manifesto of the NRM, we promised the people of Uganda that we shall construct regional stadiums in all the regions of Uganda. I think we should also use this opportunity to remind ourselves that this was a pledge we made to the people of Uganda in order for us to nurture and develop young talent from all the regions in this country.

The Ministry of Education and Sports has 32 sports schools that have been established. I think Parliament should use this opportunity to appeal to Government to support these schools because they are used for nurturing and mentoring talent already identified. I think they are in all the regions of this country.

Our national stadium is Namboole; space is provided there for constructing a national gym to help our sportsmen and women, and I think the budget requires between Shs 400 to 500 million. This is too meagre on the side of Government to ensure that the space that is provided at Namboole National Stadium for constructing a national gym for our sportsmen and women, should be utilised efficiently and effectively.

Lastly, we need to use this opportunity to call upon Government. There have been calls to establish an independent ministry in charge of sports in Uganda. I think there is no other better time other than now for us to make this call again to Government. Let us use the second Olympic gold brought in this country by our own son, Stephen Kiprotich, to create an independent ministry in charge of sports.

Madam Speaker, let me thank you once again. Let me also thank the Commissioner General of Prisons and the Uganda Prison Services for according Warder Kiprotich Stephen a marathon promotion to the rank of Assistant Superintendent of Prisons for being the marathon Olympic champion. (Applause) I want to thank the ministry, Government of Uganda and the corporate companies because we have read that the companies are equally organising a big do for our brother, Kiprotich. We want to call upon them to continue supplementing the efforts put in place to nurture our young talents in Uganda.

I will also live a very happy man, the fact that I witnessed, and I have even held it (the gold medal). I have held the two gold medals won by Uganda; the one of 1972 and that of 2012. I think I will live a happy man, and the fact that I have seconded this motion. Kiprotich congratulations, congratulations; congratulations Uganda Prisons Service; congratulations to the people of Uganda for supporting our very own Ugandan!

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the seconders and movers first then I will come to the other Members.

3.19
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for convening this session. Actually good things have started happening when the Rt Hon. Speaker is in that Chair, including winning the medal. But thank you for this extraordinary sitting. (Applause)

I think Stephen Kiprotich has become a uniting factor in this country. Today, I am very happy both the NRM and FDC are seated on either sides of the House. I am seated here near hon. Steven Baka and there are very many NRM Members who have crossed this side of the Floor. I think for those who want to come, the front bench is empty. It can be a consolation given what happened just yesterday. (Laughter)

I am talking as the chairman of parliamentary football club. I am also the Chairperson of Government Assurances Committee, which means that all the pledges that are going to be made today, some people may be summoned in the nearby future and most interestingly although coincidentally, I am also an OB of Luzira Prison. (Laughter) I only do not remember seeing Stephen Kiprotich when we were in Luzira, but now I feel proud for having been there with hon. Lukwago. Though I do not wish to go back. 

I want to thank the Commissioner of Prisons and the entire Prisons Service for they have brought us pride. Stephen Kiprotich’s achievements cannot be isolated from the Uganda Prisons Force. It is just like a hen cannot be separated from an egg. The Uganda Prisons Service, especially through the commissioner general himself, as an individual to ensure that the Golden Boy brings the gold medal home. (Applause) Your contribution to Stephen Kiprotich has been historical; you were not taken unaware like some people, so that you woke up to see a gold medal and then started planning on what to do. You have been supporting him from the little budget of Prisons to even allow him board a bus to go to Kenya and train. We really have to thank you. Probably if you were not the commissioner, we would not be having this medal.  (Applause)
  
But most importantly, as a 35 year old, I am very happy that this thing has happened during my lifetime. Because at this rate, one medal every 40 years –(Laughter)- it means someone born in 1973 could have easily died without seeing any medal during their lifetime. So, I think it is of great pride. I don’t know whether I will be there in the next 40 years because I would be 75 years old although I don’t want to miss the UPDF medal. But Stephen Kiprotich should make this come every other time so that we can see medals in our lifetime. It should not be so seasonal like the lunar and solar eclipses. 

I want to appeal to Government that this motion – I am glad the Prime Minister is here; we need concrete commitment from Government on the Floor of this House today. I am of the opinion that we need a national sports academy or university, isolated; whether in Kapelebyong, Kanungu, Arua, Pader or Amuria, Government should identify one place and create an opportunity for Ugandans to learn all the games that are competed for in the Olympics: Swimming and many others; there are these girls from China who come and raise the legs and arms -(Laughter)– I don’t know how they call that sport. So, Government should open up a national university for sports and Ugandans should be given an opportunity to take sports as a profession and not as a last resort.
 
I would have been happier if Stephen Kiprotich had taken sports as the first option. Probably he got a home in the Uganda Prisons Service, but how many people out there cannot afford to join Uganda Prisons Service and yet they have the talent? This is where we are appealing to Government to come out in concrete terms and not operate as a fire brigade. We don’t want victory to come and then say, “We are going to build you a house; we shall buy you a car.” We have to plan for those victories in the same way that the NRM planned for the revolutionary struggle. You don’t just wake up and get a revolution. (Laughter)

What are the lessons learnt from this victory? I am an author and I watched the Olympics. By the grace of God at that time my mother-in-law was at home; I almost entered the television screen. (Laughter) I was so excited; I was so emotional; I actually even finally broke down when he went to pick the flag. It was a very moving moment! I didn’t know that I loved this country that much until I saw this great son of the soil running for two hours and eight minutes.  

One of the lessons I learnt from Kiprotich Stephen’s victory is that you have to watch your back in whatever you do. After every other minute, he would look behind to see how safe he was. I think these are life lessons. You need to watch your back especially when you are doing bad things. (Laughter)  Kiprotich was doing a good thing, but bothered to watch his back and I was only praying that as he looked behind, his leg wouldn’t turn. But for those of us who do so many bad things, I think Kiprotich’s victory should give us a lesson to watch our backs because someone behind will get you especially when you are doing a wrong bad. This young man has brought victory and glory to Uganda, for which we thank him. Those of us who have got an opportunity to steer this country, please watch your backs. 

The second and last lesson I learnt for which I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker is that when they were singing the National Anthem, Stephen Kiprotich thought they were going to sing only one stanza. It is only after the Rt Hon. Speaker’s directive when we were paying respect to a fallen colleague here, the late Kakoma, that Members of Parliament raised a query as to why we should sing only one stanza and as to when we should sing the three. And the Speaker came out clearly – this is part of the revolutions that take place when leadership positions change. (Laughter) So, we saw a situation in the Olympics where they were singing the three stanzas and Stephen Kiprotich was used to only one stanza. I think the Speaker of Parliament and this Parliament as a whole should take credit for having unearthed that issue. So, even if you raised your hand, Stephen, you don’t have to get embarrassed. These are some of the changes we are getting when we change and have good leaders in big offices like that of the Speaker. 
On the last day of the Olympics is when Uganda got the medal. This is a lesson to all of us. Not all of us can be runners. But never give up in life. On the last day, when we were coming home with nothing is when we saw a Ugandan coming with a gold medal home. For me I wanted any kind of medal and at one point I was saying at least one of the medals should come home, but Stephen surprised us and went for gold. We were overwhelmed! Actually, I don’t know what to say; we are not even prepared for this enormous achievement. I would like to really thank you and wish you good health; may the sky be the limit. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I invite hon. Chemutai, the parents of Mr Stephen Kiprotich have arrived. The parents of Mr Kiprotich, could you please stand up for recognition? (Applause)  May I now invite hon. Chemutai, the Member representing Mr Kiprotich. 

3.30
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion to thank Stephen Kiprotich for winning the 2012 Marathon Olympic Race in London. I am very happy about what happened and the people of Kapchorwa are equally happy to join the rest of the Ugandans to thank Kiprotich for the wonderful performance he has portrayed to the people of Uganda. Kiprotich, you have made us proud of you and as I stand here, I feel honoured and privileged because I am the area MP. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, Kiprotich is a member of my constituency; he is my voter and he has been a very serious supporter. (Laughter) I am proud of you.

Madam Speaker, Kiprotich is a very determined young man; if you want to know and understand his principles, I will re-echo what he said before running. These are some of the statements he made. I want to read them to you so that you know that determination is the key to success: “I want to be a legend.” And he is indeed a legend now. (Applause) “I want to be great and I know I can achieve it.” He is now a champion. “Perhaps, I will be the one to end the worries of Ugandans. I feel I am ready.” Before Kiprotich ran, we had lost hope – I am sure most of us had lost hope. But he gave us the hope because that was the last race. He has indeed ended the worries of Ugandans. The last statement is, “I would like to hold a medal and I will fight for it. I am staying calm.” He stayed calm; no one knew that we had someone who could come with a gold medal. At the end of it all, he has come with it. Thank you, Kiprotich.

Kapchorwa is a high altitude area and most of our young people have the potential of becoming very good runners. I call upon Government, especially the Ministry of Education, to give full support to the sports sector. We can produce more than the Kipsiros and the Kiprotichs; there are many other Kips who are out there who can make Uganda proud. The high altitude training centre, which was promised about a year ago, has not yet been established. But I am happy that the President yesterday gave a directive to the Minister of Education that work on this centre should start immediately. So, I call upon the Ministry of Education to take this as a very serious matter and ensure that this centre is completed even before the end of the one year that was talked about.

Much as our people are determined, and have the spirit and body that are willing to run, there is poor facilitation. We are proud of Kiprotich, but he has made it through a lot of difficulty; he has been training on his own. At home there – because he is my neighbour – he sometimes runs barefooted. Sometimes he comes to us, the politicians, asking for support. It is not only him, but many others who are also pursuing a career in sports. We really need to give them support. 

I want to thank the following organisations for the support they have given to our son to enable him bring us the gold medal. I thank Uganda Athletics Federation (UAF) because they have done a lot in mentoring Kiprotich. Thank you very much UAF. They escorted him to London and came back with him back. I will not forget to thank the Kenyan Government because it is from Kenya that Kiprotich learnt the tactics of world champions whom he finally beat. If he had not gone to Kenya to train with them, I do not think he would have made it. I also thank the Prisons Service for giving him time to go for training in Kenya. He has been training there freely while earning his salary. Thank you very much Prisons Service. I thank Kiprotich’s parents who bore such a great son. I also thank the Ministry of Education though we have not felt their support. Next time we want more support to come from the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

Madam Speaker, I thank Kiprotich for making us proud. I thank Ugandans and everyone else who prayed – I am sure many people prayed when he was running because we had lost hope. Thank you for your prayers and support. May God bless you!

THE SPEAKER: Let us finish with the seconders before we come to the rest of the Members. Hon. Tete, you want to go to the podium? Please come down. (Laughter)

3.40
MS EVERLINE TETE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Honourable members, for today, I deserve to be here. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad for getting this opportunity to second the motion. I join my colleagues in thanking you, Madam Speaker, in a special way, for convening this special session to allow Members to honour the gold medallist, Stephen Kiprotich. I thank the honourable members for their quick response; this shows how committed they are. I thank the President for hosting Kiprotich and his family at the State House Entebbe yesterday.

As a country, we are grateful and proud; who in this House or country is not proud? If today you dissected the hearts of Ugandans, you would find Kiprotich in the centre of everyone’s heart. Is it not the case? [MEMBERS: “Yes!”]. God came to our rescue at the time everyone had lost hope through that blessed boy. Glory be to God! God did not forget Uganda; it has been a lesson to all of us that God is not too late to change things. The final decision comes from God because He is the Alpha and the Omega. He answered the prayers of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I wish to stand here to clear the air; there are rumours by some people that Kiprotich is not a Ugandan - (Interjections)- yes. Kiprotich is a real Ugandan - 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Please listen. This is important.

MS TETE: Kiprotich is a real Ugandan. You find the name Kiprotich in Kenya and Uganda. We have Kiprotich, Kipsiro, Kiplagat, Kipkwayet and Chemutai. Those are our names. The Sabiny of Sebei are the only Kalenjin in Uganda. We are the only Kalenjin in Uganda. The rest of us are in Kenya. When we share these names, these are our names. So, this is the Kiprotich of Uganda. It is just the colonial boundary which has separated us. That is why we are Ugandans and the others are Kenyans. We share the same traditional leader; we share the same culture, the same names and everything. We are one people, my colleagues. That is why we have seen the parents here with us. The parents are there. Who is not seeing them? They are not Kenyans; they are Ugandans. 

I want to say something briefly about the background of this boy called Kiprotich. Kiprotich was born in Kapchorwa, but the origin of Kiprotich is that the parents lived inside the forest. That was the home of those two parents you see. But Government brought them out of the forest because these people inside there could not access social services. There were no schools; there was no food; they were making baskets for survival; they were eating bamboo shoots; and selling baskets in exchange for food. So, that is the man that God has raised and he is now what he is today. We are celebrating.

Madam Speaker, we last got a medal by Akii-Bua in 1972. Forty years down the road, we recognise Akii-Bua. We shall miss him. Even when he is down in the grave, we still recognise him for being a medallist. We would have got more similar medals, but because of the instability as a result of cattle rustling which was so rampant in Sebei, poor governance, conflict, wars and people running into exile, we missed out. We want to thank Government now that we have peace. 

Of course, these are Uganda’s days of wilderness. I will liken these days to the days of Moses. After 40 years, Moses rescued the children of Israel from Pharaoh’s power and they crossed the Red Sea. They suffered in the wilderness like we have suffered. They crossed and entered the land of Canaan - the land of milk and honey, where they celebrated the celebration we are celebrating today in this august House as a country and the entire world. 

We want to thank the Diaspora for their hospitality. What has happened to Kiprotich, the gold medallist, brother to me, is not a surprise. God has a purpose and He has a plan and moreover a big one for this country. It is biblical, like my colleague hon. Obua has said. He has quoted the Bible - the story of Moses to rescue the children of Israel from the land of Pharaoh. Like Joseph, the son of Jacob. God chose him among many to suffer and be rescued. Likewise, David son of Jesse was among the giant sons of Jesse but God picked David to overpower Goliath and rescued the people from the hands of Satan. Also Esther; she was led to the palace and she was able to rescue His people. 

Madam Speaker, this is a very strong signal and message to this country from God by using Kiprotich, that boy you see here, for Uganda to pay attention to the many challenges faced by the people of Sebei. God used Kipsiro, Ayego and many others who have brought glory to this country, but it is like the message has not been taken in good faith. Kipsiro, my colleagues have said, nothing has been done for him. We have so many of our sons who are running. Even as we talk we have sons from Sebei land who are running. There are those in Japan as I talk. I facilitated one with my colleague, hon. Sabila. There are some in India and many other places. They are doing it on their own and the glory will always come back to Uganda. 

I want to thank His Excellency the President, for promising to build the high altitude training facility for the athletes. That is a long-term plan, Madam Speaker. What is there for now as we talk? These boys are in the camps. We want support in terms of boots because these boys are training without boots. As we talk, the food in Sebei land is not ready. Our food takes eight months to get ready. As we talk there is no food. In terms of accommodation, these boys provide their own accommodation. In terms of medication, safe water, communication network, and generally the financial support - Madam Minister, you better talk again.

Kipsiro facilitated his own training. Fellow colleagues what will happen now that Kipsiro has lost out? Who is going to gather these people? So, Minister, please do something.

The success of Kiprotich is a result of his own courage, determination, commitment, endurance, confidence, strength in the Lord and being visionary and patriotic. I am told he confidently assured people at home, the mother and the wife, “I am going to London but I will not come back the same.” And indeed he has done it.  Kiprotich kongei kokating mungut. Amunye keyi Uganda kungarach (God bless you Kiprotich. You have made Uganda happy.) (Applause)

I want to thank the Prison Service; the Uganda Athletics Federation, Uganda Olympics Committee, the ministry, Parliament. Thank you. Thank God that things are happening when we are in the Ninth Parliament. I am also proud that I am in the Ninth Parliament. Gold medals shall start pouring in Uganda. (Laughter) 

I want to thank Ugandans in the Diaspora, the parents of this boy, and the Sabiny community. Personally, I have had keen interest in athletics. I have been going to the Uganda Athletics Federation offices; I have been going to the Uganda Olympic Committee offices linking up with the administrators and many other people. I have been interacting with them and the coaches both here and at home because the coaches are really at home. I have been interacting with people from the Ministry of Education and Sports. I have had an opportunity, honourable colleagues, to visit the camps in Kenya, Eldoret. I was there in April. I had gone to visit these boys and see what exactly was happening there. I have been frequently interacting with Members of Parliament on the Kenyan side. For example, the minister called Kilimo Jebihas I have always been with her. The Kenyans are very hospitable. They hosted me for four days and they have always welcomed our people. 

Colleagues, we need to add support. We have done everything for this country. Kipsiro has come up; Kiprotich has now come up; and many others who are outside have done their best. We are saying, colleagues we need your support. We are not demanding for things that we have not sweated for. As a community of the Sabiny we have sweated. We are entitled to these things –(Interjections)- we have brought up a man of Kiprotich’s calibre; a ready-made gold. 

This is my appeal; Government sincerely should fulfil all Kipsiro’s promises of the house, a strong car, a hostel and upgrading Bukwo stadium because the President promised. 

We are happy that the President has promised the high altitude centre in Kapchorwa. We also want these two boys really to be recognised in a special way. Some streets in Kampala should be named after them: Kiprotich and Kipsiro. They should have a place in this city of Uganda. 

We have been crying and crying; the time is now. We have been crying about Bukwo Road. Don’t you think it is time now to work on the road? Don’t you think it is now time to send electricity to a district like Bukwo where there are gold medals? How do you reap from where you have not planted? Resettle the people. I have told you Kiprotich’s parents came from the forest; they have never been resettled up to today. Resettlement of their community is very important; resettlement of the IDPs in Sebei region; and fulfilment of the President’s pledges.

Lastly, yesterday as a community we were hosted in State House. While there, we were celebrating Kipsiro; we were honoured together with Kiprotich, and in another room, the President was there awarding senior citizens of this country with ministerial posts. I was very disappointed; people who have produced gold in this country cannot even be considered. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, now that the movers and seconders have spoken, the rest will use two minutes.

3.54
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In this short time I have, I rise to add my voice and the voice of Government to those that have very articulately and loudly expressed their sense of happiness and their sense of pride in the performance of our son, Stephen Kiprotich. Stephen congratulations and well done. You have made Uganda proud. (Applause)

The 30th Olympiad had 200 participants and many won medals. Only those who won gold had the honour of having their national anthems played to the whole world. I want to thank Kiprotich for giving Uganda the honour and the glory, in his victory in the marathon, of being the last and I think the most memorable anthem of the 30th Olympiad. (Applause) Who will remember the others? 

In recognition of his achievement, I want it to be on the record of this House that yesterday when he arrived in Uganda, he had breakfast with the leadership of this country. He had breakfast with the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister.(Laughter) I look forward to him being entertained by the Leader of the Opposition in recognition of that feat -[Mr Okupa: “This evening.”]- This evening? That is beautiful.

Yesterday - just for the record, the President handed over - you know, those who are not very update in terms of how things are done, would not have appreciated - a cheque of Shs 200 million to Stephen Kiprotich. (Applause)

The President also announced that the government is going to build a house for the parents of Stephen Kiprotich -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute more.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I beg for your indulgence, Madam Speaker, because I think it is important that the things, especially in light of what people have been saying, that Government has decided to do, be recorded. If you do not want it to be on record, that is alright. The reason why I stood was to have, on the record of Parliament, the things that Government is going to do as a result of the performance of this wonderful young man.

Government is going to purchase land in Sebei sub-region to establish a high altitude sports centre, especially for long distance running for young Ugandans who are ready to participate in that. 

All sportsmen and women who attain high levels of qualification and do attain medals in international sports, starting with Africa and going beyond, will be paid a monthly allowance thereafter by Government. This allowance will be determined and announced in time. Anyone who has attained that level and wishes to be employed in Government will be employed. In fact, those who attain this level will be entitled to be employed by Government unless they do not so wish and this will be mainly in security services -(Interjections)- I said, “mainly” because as hon. Denis Obua was saying, you need to be in a place where you can be given the time like the Prisons Service gave to Kiprotich; where they instil discipline in you to do the kind of things that Akii-Bua did for Uganda and what Stephen Kiprotich has done for Uganda. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us allow him to finish.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The government announced yesterday, Madam Speaker, that we will start inter-regional competitions in order to identify talent and develop that talent for Uganda to be more competitive. We cannot afford to have a medal every 40 years, otherwise those who will not live long like hon. Odonga-Otto -(Laughter)- was feeling, may not see many. 

Let me quickly say thank you to the British for organising the 30th Olympiad very well. I think it was well-organised. I did not hear of any major problems and credit goes to them. But the thing which stands out which I urge Ugandans to emulate is the sense of voluntarism exhibited by the British during this 30th Olympiad. Seventy-thousand Britons volunteered to make the 30th Olympiad a success and they succeeded. I want to congratulate them!

May I congratulate Kenya and thank them for the support they gave to Kiprotich and others. Because, although Kenya did not win the traditional medals they win, those who won had been trained by Kenya and they trained in Kenya. That is why I support the idea that we should move towards establishing a team in East Africa so that we have Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda, Burundi and Uganda competing together. I am sure if we do that, we will do much better than we can do individually.

The question of money is not really the answer. I have just heard on the news that the president of Nigeria is taking drastic steps because Nigeria spent $15 million on these Olympics and got no medal. (Laughter) So, I want to thank Stephen Kiprotich for bringing Uganda glory, for bringing glory to himself; you have our support, we are proud of you. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is something hon. Chemutai did not bring out clearly. Mr Kiprotich comes from the Ndorobo community. The Ndorobo community were got out of the forest, but have never been resettled. I think while we are going to build a house for the parents, we need to resolve the issue of the Ndorobo.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Government is carrying out an exercise right now in that region, in Mount Elgon zone and the main purpose is actually for settling people who need to be settled. One of the targets of this programme - even a team of ministers is in that area today looking at that. The team is to find land for people who need settlement; either those who had been displaced or those whose lives are threatened by the frequent occurrences of landslides in the area. I expect a report maybe in another two weeks or so and we will be announcing the decisions Government will take.   

4.06
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Finance joins you and the honourable members to congratulate Mr Stephen Kiprotich, Uganda’s gold medallist of the London Olympics. We also congratulate all the support groups we have heard who assisted him in his memorable climb to gold medal status. 

I would just like to pay tribute to the personal attributes which we have seen in Stephen Kiprotich, even those who are not personally acquainted with him. Apart from his athletic ability, he showed self-reliance. He did not wait for sponsors; he went out and got them. He showed determination to succeed. As we have read in the pamphlet passed around, over the last five years, he has collected an impressive array of wins and medals. That is determination. He showed planning. He trained with the competitors in Kenya. He learnt from them and he learnt of them. That is planning. He also showed self-confidence in teh extreme to the extent that the Uganda flag was available before the finish line for him to grab. This is a combination of attributes that carried him fast across the finish line with the Uganda flag firmly held above his shoulders. (Applause) In our ministry, that is value added. (Laughter) Even Kiprotich added value to Uganda. Our standing before the marathon and up to the marathon was very, very different.

I would like to add on to the Prime Minister’s commitments. Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, will shoulder the tax burden of any taxes due to URA on the prizes given to Mr Kiprotich. (Applause) This includes the Presidential pledge of Shs 200 million, the houses to be built for his parents, the taxes due on the purchase of land and also on the corporate donation which is being collected. So far, the corporates have collected a total of $100,000 but they have a target of $500,000. The ministry will assume those tax burdens. (Interjections) We cannot waive; we can only assume to pay. The ministry must pay; and it will pay.

Once again, we congratulate our gold medallist, Stephen Kiprotich. Thank you.  

4.08
MS SYLVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join you and the rest of Parliament to congratulate Mr Kiprotich -

THE SPEAKER: I understand the golden girl, Dorcus Inzikuru, is in the gallery. Could she please stand up? (Applause) 

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Speaker, I join you and the rest of Parliament to congratulate Mr Kiprotich for the golden win. During the Olympic period, I sometimes took off time to watch the games and realised that most of these games were dominated by Western and Asian nations. Therefore, Mr Kiprotich’s win was not only Uganda’s win, but a win for Africa and we congratulate you for this. Today, we are proud to say that we are from the country where Kiprotich comes from. Many of us who travel - whenever you say you come from Uganda, they ask you, “How is Idi Amin? What about Kony?” But today, we are going to say, “No, ask us about Kiprotich.” 

Mr Kiprotich has exhibited what having a positive attitude can make one achieve. Of all the members of Team Uganda, perhaps Mr Kiprotich received the least publicity. They were talking about other names who were likely to win the medal. But Mr Kiprotich because of his positive attitude and his humility, he remained in the shadows. But at the end of it all, he shone more than everybody else -(Member timed out.)

4.12
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As Ugandans grieve for the loss of their gallant soldiers and the crushed helicopters, my son Stephen from the mountains of the sun has brought light to Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, I joined Government in October 1988 in the Ministry of Finance. That means Stephen was born five months later. Now, since I have been on earth together with my brother, Amama Mbabazi, when we die, what will they remember us for –(Laughter)– this is the question we should ask ourselves. I believe it is very important for all of us as Members of Parliament and Ugandans. 

It saddens me that we do not have criteria to honour our people. To motivate our people, we should have criteria, that whoever makes achievement X is entitled to this. That will motivate everybody to do the right thing. This business of having one event and everybody comes out; the Minister of Finance is saying, she is going to pay taxes for him. Where will you get it from; this money belongs to Ugandans, not yours as a ministry. We heard the President saying that he was giving a dummy cheque of 200 million. Where is that from; this is the taxpayers’ money; it is not personal money.

Maybe we could even have given him a billion shillings; because since that time you have been to London, hon. Amama Mbabazi, have they ever sang for you the National Anthem with all the three stanzas? (Laughter) So, we should really come out with criteria on how to handle these issues.

Well, I want to thank the parents of Stephen for having brought him up as a good person. I know that because to join the Prisons force, you must have good manners. I also thank the commissioner general for having helped our son to train and attain gold. But we should not stop here; we should go further. 

When you go to the countryside, you will find young boys and girls playing football or netball barefoot with balls made from fibre; but they play so well. In fact, they play better than those in Kampala who have shoes. But we are not tapping that resource. It is important that Government devises means of how best to tap those resources in the villages of sportsmen; they are very many. I can assure you, if you did it, you would have a good number.

I agree with Government for having done the first thing of giving him Shs 200 million. We know a Shs 200 million cheque does not exist; you could have said by EFT of Shs 200 million to his account because the maximum a cheque can transfer is twenty million –(Interjections)– yes, financial regulations. Also, for building the parents a house, because those are my people – by the way, I come from the mountains of the sun, where the wise and the fastest people come from. 

We hope that what Government said about building a school for training will be immediate; you should have given us a timeframe. Because you may talk like this and it takes years. You might wait another 40 years when there is another gold medal then you will remember the same school.

Madam Speaker, today when we are making our budget, we should put in a budget line for the Ministry of Education and Sports, which is going to facilitate the sportsmen and sportswomen who will do very well in sports; they are very many in the mountains. If you love the people of the mountains, this should be the beginning point. 

Secondly, I agree with my sister, hon. Tete, that where these talents are coming from are the most disadvantaged people in this country. The road to Bukwo, if you do not have a four wheel drive, it would take you two weeks, or you have to go via Kenya. I want to thank my son Kiprotich for this. Hon. Amama Mbabazi, as a way of rewarding the people of Sebei for having brought gold in Uganda after 40 years, that road between Kapchorwa and Bukwo should be worked on immediately. (Applause)

Finally, Uganda belongs to all of us. I never watch sports, but this time I was watching sports with my son Andrew. When I saw Stephen taking the lead, I saw Uganda. If we all love Uganda, then these people who steal public money for Ugandans should stop! For example, the Office of the Prime Minister should stop, because this money could be used to build up Uganda to make it a better place for all of us. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you gain for this opportunity. There are only two special sittings I have witnessed in this House; the first one was the oil debate; and the second one is to honour our son from the mountains, Stephen. Thank you.

4.19
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was impressed when I watched SK – I prefer calling him SK –(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Now both sides of the House have merged. (Laughter) 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I was touched when I saw Stephen Kiprotich, SK in short, being asked by the journalists, “What will you bring to Uganda?” He did not behave like Golola –(Laughter)– who was shouting all over the place: “I am going to get gold; I can even make a woman pregnant by just watching.” How can you talk like that? He just said, “I have come to London to win one of the three medals - gold, silver or bronze”. But he knew what was best, he brought us gold. We are proud of you Stephen. (Applause) 

When I saw him kiss our flag, I was touched. I do not think he thought about it; it just dawned on him. I guess if he had not slowed down – even if he had walked, he knew he had won; he would have broken the record. I hope next time in Brazil, we are going to have another gold medal and at the same time breaking the world record of the time. Madam Speaker, SK has advertised Uganda for free. How much did we use during CHOGM?  

I want to thank the Commissioner-General of Prisons. From the interactions we have had with the Commissioner-General of Prisons, the prisons department – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, only one minute.

MR OKUPA: I thank you because this is very important. We must recognise the prisons department. They decided in 2005 to adopt a policy that whenever they are recruiting, they provide 100 slots for sports and they went to Kapchorwa region to scout for potential athletes. That is when they identified the likes of SK. If there is any person to be honoured or recognised, then it is the Commissioner-General of Prisons. If there was any other rank or the equivalent of Field Marshal of Prisons, we would bestow it on Dr Byabashaija. (Laughter) So I thank the prisons department.

Finally, members, this is budget time so let us look at the budget. The Government promised an academy and if it is not there, let us reallocate money within the Ministry of Education to provide for that academy. (Member timed out.)

4.23
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Once again, I join colleagues in appreciating what our brother, Stephen, has done for motherland Uganda. I will waste no time since I have been given only two minutes. 

I want to speak on the predicament that our men and women go through while preparing for these games. You are aware that while in London, the athletes clearly voiced out their suffering. To begin with, some of the athletes lost their equipment in form of boots or gadgets that they were supposed to use. Some of them were not given the boots that they required. Some of them actually ended up at the mercy of Ugandans living in London. Madam Speaker, you will believe with me that this is not the type of preparation that we would like our sons and daughters to face while representing this country. 

You have seen the kind of praises that people make when somebody has finally made it where we deserve to be. Some of the athletes resorted to hiring coaches for themselves and yet the Ministry of Education and Sports and officials were given a lot of money to escort these athletes. These monies would have hired professional staff to manage the representatives of this country but to our dismay, we are hearing of monies being spent in hotels and ministers – (Member timed out.)

4.25
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to congratulate Stephen for the gold. I also want to thank all Ugandans from wherever they are watching now. I have gone to the webpage of the New Vision where it has launched a fundraising drive for Kiprotich. As of this morning, Ugandans of different capacities, both private and corporate, had raised Shs 375 million in honour of the gold boy, Stephen. 

I want to appeal to this House that probably the minster or this Parliament thinks of either joining this drive or we think of what we can contribute to this drive. It is important. I do remember one time that this Parliament moved a motion for a deduction of a certain amount for a footballer or one of the sportspersons. I would appeal that we should link up and see whether we can amend this motion in that line. 

There was unity that I saw in Ugandans. All those who live in Uganda, including foreigners, went to the airport to receive Stephen. I watched when he was running and then he went and grabbed the flag to the finishing line. I watched the Olympics the whole of Saturday. The only name that Uganda had hope in was Kipsiro. – (Interjections) - They were not thinking about him! So I watched the whole of Saturday waiting for Kipsiro and he did not perform well. 

On Sunday, I lay on my bed thinking about the last marathon and I wanted to watch and see whether any East African – because the only hope that I had was in a Kenyan, David Rudisha, who had broken a world record. So I was now hanging on David Rudisha from Kenya as an East African gold medallist who had broken the world record. But when he won, I broke down. When he won, you could see the pride that it was no longer him the man, but Uganda. When he carried that flag – the announcement was not even about Kiprotich – (Interjections) - it is true that hon. Okupa has given SK but the announcement was about Uganda. Actually, I kept on asking whether these people who announce are professionally trained. They said that the man had broken the gold drought of Uganda. That was the announcement. It was not him but Uganda, and that is what mattered. From London, Uganda came number 50 of – (Member timed out.)

4.29
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not know when I last stood on this side of the House but I think it was during the time of the Movement system when for 10 years I sat this side and deliberated for this country. However, because of Kiprotich, this tradition has been repeated. I want to thank the Opposition and the Speaker for this indulgence in allowing this to happen. 

Around 1994, 1995 or 1996, a boxer from South Africa went to compete in the US and he won gold. Nelson Mandela asked when he would return and he went to his home with gloves. He sent a chit to him in the House that read, “Thank you for cheating the gods but if you are a true boxer, come out and meet the real champion.” The boxer was enraged. He came outside and he got the King of Madiba with the gloves and told him, congratulations. The boxer wrote later to say that every time he entered a boxing ring, he knew that he was not fighting for himself but for the people of South Africa and for the King of Madiba. 

Kiprotich, you do not know the pride you have brought us. Every time you appear on the track, know that the people of Uganda and the world are watching. When I was at home, I watched for one hour and I got tired, so I went outside to converse with the constituents. Somebody from the United States rang me and asked me, “Where are you? Are you on TV? Can you see a Ugandan winning gold?” By the time I ran back, he was grabbing the flag and running. Madam Speaker, you should have seen the excitement and the emails we have got from the Ugandans in the Diaspora.

Because of this, let us invest in sports as it brings unity to our people. It reminds me of 1987 when the Uganda Cranes was playing in Kenya against Malawi in the East African championships. That time, Uganda was fighting the rebels in Lakwena’s area and for once, they said the guns fell silent because the rebels were supporting the Uganda Cranes and the UPDF were also supporting the Uganda Cranes. (Laughter) So, if the rebels and the people who fight against one another can, through sports, come together for a united cause, let us invest in sports if we are going to build unity in our country.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to tell the world and the people that behind Kiprotich’s success, there is his personal coach. People must realise that behind Kiprotich – Government has donated but there was a deliberate effort of individuals. Let us reward the people who invested. Let us also call on the Ministry of Education and Sports to make Kiprotich a goodwill ambassador of sports because this could be the turning point that Uganda has been waiting for. Congratulations Kiprotich!

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr John Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand here to support the motion to pay glowing tribute to the golden boy, Stephen, who has brought glittering honour and fame to our motherland, Uganda. As a minister, MP and a humble sportsman, I also join those who have already congratulated Stephen and wish him many more victories and accolades in the near future. 

There are very many lessons to learn from this victory. First of all, sportsmen will tell you that just to participate in the Olympics alone is enough prestige. When these sportsmen were entering London, I happened to be in London to see how they were feeling good and great, of course while carrying the flags of their countries. Therefore, for somebody to come up with a gold medal it does not only make the athlete outstanding but it brings glittering honour and fame to his country. I want you to imagine that within just two hours, Stephen had marketed Uganda all over the world. 

I want to agree with the people who are saying that we invest heavily in sports. Yesterday, I happened to be among those who were at the airport to receive Stephen. I saw the happiness, the joy, the unity of Ugandans and they were speaking one language, sports. Madam Speaker, this is the first time I am seeing Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi holding the hands of his brother, hon. Nandala Mafabi, as if they are twins and this is because of sports. (Applause)

On a very serious note, as we congratulate Stephen for a job well done, I want us to pay special tribute to the parents and the teachers who did not suffocate Stephen’s talent. Many times, parents and teachers have dictated to the children what they feel they want them to become. Little do they know that each and every individual has been created with his or her own talent. This lesson should go to the teachers, parents and all of us; we should not dictate, force or suffocate talent. 

Last night, my ministry hosted Stephen to a very big party which took place at Serena. (Member timed out.)

4.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion moved by the Minister of Education. I want to begin by congratulating Ugandans for having come up to this level. I am so happy that it has happened at a time, after 40 years, when I am making 40 years. Praise be to God. (Applause) 

I want to thank Stephen for having advertised Uganda in a few seconds. Our international relations and public relations, as a country, had gone bad because of us, the politicians. Thank you so much, Stephen. Many have done it the bad way but you have really saved our image as a country. 

I want to take this opportunity to advise Stephen. As a qualified teacher and as a parent, I want to tell you that it is not easy to manage change. You have got accelerated promotion but at the same time your social status has changed and even your financial status is changing every minute. So, you must manage it very well so that it is for the good of all of us and does not make us go in the opposite direction.

I want to end by thanking his wife and in a special way thanking the parents. I want to thank the wife because she did not disturb him to get to where he is. (Applause) She could have said “You must facilitate me to go with you”, but she opted to stay and take care of the family. Thank you, wife of Kiprotich. I want to thank the parents for bringing up Stephen in a religious way. He made the sign of the Cross and as I Catholic, I said “Praise be to God.” 

I want to thank you, Stephen, for having brought us the Olympic medal. Actually, when they were announcing, they did not say he has won a gold medal; they said he has won the Olympic medal and that is the – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to complete. 

MS LUMUMBA: Thank you so much. I want to thank you Stephen for bringing us the Olympic medal because you won the best of the best. Thank you.
 
4.40
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of the Ugandans to congratulate our brother, Kiprotich, upon the attainment of a gold medal for Uganda. Indeed, you have made us proud. 

This gold came at the right time because God’s time is the best time. It was a few minutes to midday and I was listening to radio; a pastor was preaching, Pastor Serwadda, and he was lamenting about how he felt that Uganda had not got any medal. He prayed saying, “Oh God, I wish at one time the national anthem could be played in those countries that despise Uganda.” Two hours later, I got a message from my husband that Uganda had got a gold medal. I glorified God for that.  

May you be blessed mightily for making Uganda one of the countries that has got a gold medal! Among the five countries of Africa, Uganda is counted as one of those with a medal. However, this should not be the end. To the rest of us Ugandans, we should make sure that we try to bring up our children from the grassroots. Many times, there have been competitions in the districts but the schools that can afford to take their children to national level are the only ones that are exposed. If all the children can be studied, if we can have leaders from the centre go and identify those talents, we shall not wait another 40 years – (Member timed out.)

4.43
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues of the Ninth Parliament. First of all, I would like to thank the Government of Uganda for having sponsored and sent Team Uganda for the Olympics, of which our dear golden boy was among. 

We are talking about building training centres, we are talking about funding for sports, we are talking about implementing and also making sure we get more gold medals, but this may not be possible if our leaders continue bickering. You find the National Council of Sports versus FUFA; FUFA versus USL; the sports department versus the education department. All these are pointing fingers and quarrelling amongst themselves. There is a lot of corruption. We cannot talk of developing sports unless all this stops. 

Secondly, I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for having installed for us a gym down here. We who are here have got access to foods that make us fat and huge. I therefore request us, members, to visit the gym, take part in football or do some jogging so that the obesity we have may go down and things like heart attacks, hypertension, cardiac arrest, blood pressure, diabetes, mention them –(Laughter)– may stop. (Member timed out.)

4.45
LT COL SARAH MPABWA (UPDF Representative): I stand to thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the armed forces – that tribe where I come from - I would not be in position to salute Kiprotich but I feel that I have permission and I am confident to salute you my brother. (Applause) You have made us in the armed forces proud. I want to salute and reemphasise your wife, who is not here to share this glory physically. She would also have felt it, and I know what I am talking about. I call upon UWOPA, as we continue carrying out other programmes, to invite Mrs Kiprotich and give her honour because she is the helper. 

I wish to explain my condition, Madam Speaker, and to say God works in mysterious ways. I have been having health challenges and they took me to specialists. The specialist that is attending to me is one of the two anti-doping assessors accredited by the World Anti-Doping Agency to Uganda and this is a message from that department. They are having trouble with doping control kits and there is no facilitation. These are very important and critical kits that are used in the sporting fraternity. They are very expensive but they are not there. So, being in that place at that time and with Kiprotich here is not a coincidence but God ordained it so. 

I also want to again congratulate you as a believer. I have been following your submission and I know that God exalts the humble. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: We are delighted to see you back, despite the challenges. 

4.48
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Sunday when it happened, I was in the salon plaiting this beautiful hair you see – (Laughter) – and every Ugandan had lost hope and so many Ugandans were no longer watching including myself. However, I received a very strange call from my husband. This time it was very different and it was, “good news”. (Laughter) I want to emphasise this because he has never called me and simply said “good news”. It was so sweet and he said, “At last, we got it”. This was so thrilling to me because everybody had lost hope, including the minister by the way. The Minister of State for Sports had returned to Uganda. He was no longer in London. He had returned because there was no longer hope. 

Following the statements made by the sports fraternity - I watched Dorcus Inzikuru complaining that they were going but they did not really think anything could come out well because all was not going well; she actually even had no shoes. These are the reports that we were getting. However, I want to thank – I want to call him hon. Kiprotich. You have earned the title “honourable” from today, with permission of the Speaker and members. Because of this honour, you have made all Ugandans very proud. 

However, this is a very big lesson to all of us especially – (Member timed out.)

4.51
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I just want to associate myself with all other speakers that have praised our golden boy. I will not add much in giving praises where they have been given but thank you and welcome Stephen. I also want to congratulate the Prisons authorities and particularly his coach who saw him from nowhere and brought him to where we can see and praise Kiprotich the man. 

I want to join colleagues that are going to render support to the Ministry of Education and Sports. I just want to caution them and all those people across your side of government that once we approve this money, with what we are reading in the papers, kindly prevail upon those people behind you and yourselves not to have this money stolen.

I want to congratulate, in a special way, the Commissioner-General of Prisons. He took a deliberate step, out of the competition with the other two forces, and said “Deliberately, we are going to start recruiting 100 sportsmen per recruitment”. That explains the honour and glory that we are celebrating here today. In fact, as a Government, we should be apologising to Kiprotich and other sportsmen and women in this country because we have not done enough. We come after these people have made their name. 

We have just learnt from our honourable colleague here that Kiprotich and other sportsmen would go to the politicians in the area to fundraise for them. Yesterday I saw, in excitement of course, the President give out a cheque of Shs 200 million and I said, “Thank you, Mr President; I wish we could have had this cheque a little earlier.”

The President gave a cheque bearing the title “Bank of Uganda”. There are many people out there in our constituencies that come to us and we have very little to offer to them. All we need is a deliberate policy. I just want to invite the ministry, before you tell us, “support us when we bring the budget”, bring the budget in the first place because - (Member timed out.)

4.54
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. This speech is important to me because I am speaking as a former sportswoman. When Stephen was in London, I got glued to the TV for the first time and I was there to see. First, I heard him complaining that they were not being treated very well; the conditions they gave to them from home were not right. This made me anxious to see how he would advance this statement. When he ran and beat the two people in front of him, I was there to say “Hehe, a Ugandan has done us proud.” Stephen, I want to thank you sincerely for being a very determined and disciplined sportsperson. Sports needs discipline.

I want to thank Stephen’s parents. It takes time for a child to advance in sports. If parents do not treat such a child well, the child may not do well. I want to thank the Prisons service for nurturing Stephen very well. 

Stephen, I want you to translate this fame into three important things: One, you must advance in your education. I have learnt that your education stopped somewhere. Be like people outside there who continue advancing their education. Tomorrow, we want to see you with your PhD so that this fame can last.

Two, use this opportunity to improve your comfort at home. Nobody will do it for you. People are giving you donations, so transform your background. Develop your own area including your parents.

Three, I want you to use this opportunity to develop your wife. Everybody has talked about it but I want you to take both yourself and your wife back to school. (Member timed out.)

4.56
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I want to thank you for calling a special parliamentary session to honour Mr Stephen Kiprotich who emerged winner of the gold medal in the 42-kilometre marathon race in the London 2012 Olympic Games. This is no mean achievement for Uganda. Therefore, on behalf of the people of Okoro County, Zombo District, I would like to congratulate Mr Stephen Kiprotich for this achievement especially in ending Uganda’s 40-year wait for an Olympic gold.

Mr Kiprotich has joined the rest of the Ugandan Olympic medallists like the late Akii Bua, David Kamoga, John Mugabi and Leo Rwabwogo. The question is: why did it take Uganda this entire time after Akii Bua to get a gold medal? The answer is one - the Ministry of Education and the Government at large have not been taking sports activities seriously. Sports has been relegated to almost nothing both in primary and even in secondary schools.

In the past, in the 60s, 70s and even 80s, there used to be competitions among schools at primary level and even post primary level. These competitions used to be done at district, regional and national levels. (Member timed out.)

5.01
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to congratulate Kiprotich for having won a gold medal for Uganda. I wish to thank you, Madam Speaker, for convening this special sitting to recognise the achievement by Stephen, our brother. According to his track record, he has been struggling in vain. Even when he was leaving the country, nobody was aware. I wish to thank the President for whatever he did in appreciation of this national athlete and in recognition for his achievement. 

The sports sub-sector is being neglected. At district level, there is nothing under sports. The policy requires the districts to take a small percentage from the locally realised revenue and allocate it to that sector. However, because there is no local revenue at district level these days, from the small amount that is collected, sports is not given priority. So you find that even in schools, as my colleague was saying, competitions are no longer there. Schools are no longer competing against each other. In case they do, they stop at sub-county level. I wish to thank Stephen for giving Uganda the honour. (Member timed out.)  

5.03
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in lauding our hero, Stephen Kiprotich, for making us, Ugandans, proud. I also thank all those who welcomed him in a heroic way. 

Madam Speaker, the talent of heroes like Stephen is identified, nurtured and improved through organised institutions. This, in our case, would be institutions right from primary to secondary school and then to tertiary institutions. However, to our dismay, these institutions have been neglected. When you go down to the primary level, it is due to lack of funding. When you visit schools, they lack the basic equipment for shot-put, javelin, football and discus, to name but a few. This has impinged on the development of the talents in the pupils and students. 

Madam Speaker, today we are proud and lauding the achievements we have made through sports, which has put the country in the limelight. However, Uganda needs to put in a lot more effort. It is at this point that I would like to request the Ministry of Education and Sports to help Ugandans; can you help the schools right from primary, secondary through to tertiary institutions by allocating more funding specifically for sports. When they organise sports competitions, we have 120 districts but you will be surprised at the national level to receive only 40 districts participating. This does not do us any good.  

My prayer is that the great hero, Stephen Kip - that name - (Laughter) - should not be neglected. His achievements and stamina should be maintained. That motivation should continuously be given to him. Also to Stephen, you should encourage other Ugandans to join you, and teach them the basics and encourage them so that they can reach where you have reached. Thank you, Madam Speaker. Congratulations, Mr Kiprotich. Thank you.   

5.05
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate my brother, Kiprotich, and thank the entire Prisons Force, his family, the Sabiny community, the Parliament of Uganda and the Republic of Uganda upon this wonderful success. 

Kiprotich has done us proud. There are three things that he has done: one, Kiprotich has been a source of light. At the darkest moment when Ugandans least expected anything called a medal in the recently concluded Olympics, Kiprotich became a source of light. I attribute it to how dark it is at dawn; if the sun does not rise, then there is no hope for light. Kiprotich was a source of light.

Secondly, Kiprotich was a source of hope, a redeemer of the image of the Sebei community. For many years, Sebei has been attributed to negatives, known for FMG. We are now proud to be associated with the positive of having medals. (Applause)  This shows you that for the 40 years that we have lacked medals in Uganda, it was just because of the instability in our region and because that region did not have infrastructure. Now, if Government concentrates on that, - further pacifies that area and provides infrastructure – be rest assured that you will not wait for 40 years to get medals again. You will get medals year after year. We have a good line of potential athletes. Like my colleague said, we even have some who are out of the country now.   

Finally, Kiprotich is a source of inspiration. You recall that during his performance, if you follow the pattern there was a time that he was in the distant 23rd position but he never gave up. He has never been below number three, which is a source of inspiration. The rest of the athletes who think they cannot make it should learn from Kiprotich that they could make it at one time. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

5.07
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Stephen for the work he has done and more especially for helping the ruling Government redeem itself from those historical references that have time and again been made in this House whenever we have been debating sports. It has been portrayed that Government does not do anything, but you have helped Government and nobody will continue referring to 1972; we shall be referring to 2012. You have brought the history nearer. Thank you for that. (Laughter) 

The patriotism or nationalism, for which we are always appropriating money here, can easily be achieved through sports. This has been vividly seen by the way we received Stephen from Entebbe International Airport. The patriotism and nationalism were reflected. Why should we continue budgeting for teaching patriotism in classes other than through sports? (Applause) It has been shown and, therefore, we can take the path that has been shown to us by Stephen. Thank you for opening our eyes, Stephen.  

I want to thank Stephen for showing that the youth of this country can do anything to earn a living especially through sports and music. The youth of today are not interested in tilling the land with the hoe, so why don’t we now invest in sports? (Member timed out­.) 

5.11
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me also to congratulate Stephen Kiprotich for bringing us pride and causing our country’s national anthem to be sang in London. 

The information I have is that Uganda took 16 participants to the Olympics and we had 25 officers. Out of the 25 officers, eight were from the Ministry of Education. I think that we wasted a lot of resources around this area; the Minister of Education should clarify on this. We had many participants who were left out because of insufficient resources. I believe that if this money had been invested in the participants through athletics, maybe we would have also got silver or a bronze medal. Our participants were given US$ 75 each as per diem and the 25 officials took US$ 150 each, which I feel was a disservice to our country. 

When Stephen was being interviewed, he was asked, “How did you feel after crossing the finish line?” He replied, “I felt good.” The interviewer further asked, “What message do you have for Ugandans out there?” He replied, “When the Minister was talking, there is one word that touched me about the training centre that is supposed to be constructed in Sebei.” He pleaded with Government to have this centre established to enable the other young people to expose their talent so that Uganda can get more medals. (Member timed out.)

5.13
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of the Ugandans in congratulating Kiprotich on his distinguished performance in the 2012 London Olympics. According to the Kalenjin group that includes the Sabiny of Uganda, the Pokot of Amudat District, the Nandi and Sabaot of Kenya, among others, the name “Kiprotich” means “cows have come back after grazing”. Indeed when Kiprotich was running the race, he had the meaning of his name at the back of his mind. He made sure that he drove back the “cows” in form of gold all the way from London. (Laughter) 

I was very impressed by his determination. When he was interviewed before the race he said that he knew very well that he was competing against the Kenyans and Ethiopians but he did not fear them. Indeed he beat them and brought us the gold medal.

My call to Kiprotich is that now that you have seen the way Ugandans have appreciated you, like some members have already said, that talent should not end with you. You need to help others so that we get more gold medals.

To the Ministry of Education, you have left a lot to be desired. When you look at the timetables in our schools, much of it is academic work. How will learners perform well in co-curricular activities when they are concentrating only on academics? During the days of Fagil Mandy – when he was in ESA – (Member timed out.)

5.15
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE KAFABUSA (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving us this opportunity to welcome our hero back. I congratulate our hero and son, Kiprotich, for making Ugandans proud. Mount Elgon has been known periodically for certain sorrowful events like landslides but this time, I am delighted that Mt Elgon has brought joy to Uganda. 

When the Olympics team left Uganda for the UK, Ugandans had hope for many medals, but as the games progressed, this hope kept on fading away. Alas! Just as we inched towards the end, God, through our son, Kiprotich, delivered Uganda with a gold medal. This means that we, Ugandans, actually love sports but we need to have a structured system where we can identify, train and reward talent. This should be spearheaded by the Ministry of Education and Sports. Therefore, there is need for us to make sure we fund the sector with some money ring-fenced for sports. This is the only way we can continue promoting sports that has made us proud as Ugandans.

I wish to appreciate and acknowledge the parents – (Member timed out.)

5.18
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the youth fraternity and on our own behalf, the Members of Parliament, I would like to congratulate the “golden boy”, Mr Stephen Kiprotich, who is a youth. You have brought us joy and indeed we stand proud and tall as the youth of this country to share in your glory. 

A lot of time when we are talking about youth issues, some members here look at us as people who do not have much to say but just talk about the youth. The reason behind our talk is that we want to neutralise this House to understand that youth is the most important time of your life. If you are 35 and below, that is the time you can make a fundamental contribution to your country. I would add that once you exceed that age, you may not do anything great in your life. If you have not built a house by 30 or 35, you may not build one for yourself. If Kiprotich had not won a gold medal by 30, probably he would not have won it after that. The age of 35 and below is very important for every person. If we did not invest at that age, including those of us who are here, we would not be here as Members of Parliament, as President, ministers or whatever.

This is the time for us to reflect. We received the message on 12 August 2012 when we were in Kabale, and I was sitting next to hon. Aza. He told us, “We have finally won a gold medal.” By then we had lost hope. The 12th August was the International Youth Day and on that day the gold medal came to Uganda. To me, it is sends a message home about what we have been talking about - this is the time to invest in young people. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the youth; this is their achievement. (Laughter)

MS AMODING: Finally, Madam Speaker, on the issue of investment, I am very happy that the Minister of State for Sports has been here listening to all these issues. I think that the curriculum in this country looks at sports as recreation. A member here was talking about the gym; the gym is recreation. Sports should be taken as a career or profession. It should not be an extra-curricular activity – something that is just added on the curriculum. Sports should be taken as the centrepiece of our education system because we cannot compete with countries that have gone very far. Uganda has a comparative advantage in terms of talent and in areas where we are gifted by nature. Therefore, sports should be an area where we should invest. By doing so, we should be able to address unemployment.

I once again congratulate the “golden boy”, the “golden youth”, the “golden man”, whichever way you want to refer to him. I want to thank you for making us proud as Uganda and as the young people. It is a point to prove that we are able to do whatever we need to do in this country. Therefore thank you very much. Thank you, Members of Parliament, for accepting that the young people are here to do a commendable job. 

5.22
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating Stephen Kiprotich. The day Stephen won the gold medal for Uganda, Amuru District celebrated. Our District Forestry Officer got a he-goat and he roasted it in celebration of our gallant son. Therefore, the success is for Uganda not only for the people from Kapchorwa.

I liked the determination of Stephen. When he was being interviewed, he made a very important statement. He said that even if he was to walk, he was confident that success was on its way. This is a very important lesson for all of us, that whenever you are competing, you have to build that courage and determination. You have to try your level best with all the zeal to make sure you defeat your opponents. 

I saw Dorcus Inzikuru complaining that the one pair of shoes that she went with got stolen. That means our participants were not properly facilitated. I was very surprised when I heard that we had over 25 officials who went to London yet the participants were less than 20. Why did we take more officials than participants? How much did we waste on those officials? 

This is a very good lesson for us as Ugandans. Next time we need to put our participants as priority above officials. (Member timed out.)

5.24
MR CARTER ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. On behalf of the people of Padyere Constituency, allow me to support this wonderful motion to congratulate our friend and our brother, Kiprotich, for the wonderful success he has achieved. 

First, this is a Jubilee year and biblically the Jubilee year is the year of revival. Therefore, I speak here prophetically that even the Uganda Cranes will qualify for the Africa Cup of Nations after 34 years. (Applause) You have led the way for us, Kiprotich. We are very happy, and I think because of the unity that you brought even beyond parties, religion and so on, you should be appointed a minister of patriotism. (Laughter)  Unfortunately, the appointments have already been made, but there is no problem anyway. 

Being a believer, you know very well that the saying is from grass to grace, grace to glory, glory to glory. Kiprotich, you have now moved beyond all levels. You even had breakfast with the President my friend, which you would not have had, and now you are internationally captured. You have moved beyond - in fact, you have even entered the class of people who will have their taxes waived like the Basajjabalabas and so on. (Laughter) So you are a great man.

Now to the ministry and the policy of recognising our achievers; the day you were running, I was with Inzikuru and she was working on her nails somewhere in a place that I will not mention. A national hero cannot even go to some international manicure and pedicure place! This is just because you do not have policies of recognising these people and rewarding them even after they have achieved enough for the years they are living. Simple anniversaries of remembering our achievers should be put in place. 

I also stand to thank the following groups of persons: to the President, that was a good gesture; the New Vision for running the campaign they are doing; and I want to say thank you to the Kenyans for training our young man. They did not know that they were training their own competitor. In fact, the saying goes that the hunter became hunted. So, you hunted them - (Member timed out.)

5.27
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to contribute to the motion to congratulate Stephen Kiprotich upon the honour he brought to this country, Uganda. 

I take cognisance of the fact that Uganda had a team of 15 persons participating in the Olympics but after Kiprotich won the gold medal for Uganda, all attention turned to Stephen alone. I was even tempted to think that when the President was extending a token of appreciation to Stephen, he did not get the proper briefing that actually there were other participants. The way I know him, if he managed to extend Shs 200 million to Stephen, who knows, he could have extended Shs 50 million to the other participants. 

Madam Speaker, I implore Parliament that in future, when we are paying tribute, we should amend the motion to pay tribute to the entire team. The purpose of that is to encourage other members who also participated.

Secondly, I implore the Ministry of Education and Sports that actually sportspersons should be granted a status where they should be in a position to have official passports. Why am I saying that? I happened to have seen the communication coming from the ministry and the technical department of the ministry when one of the participants, Inzikuru, was complaining about the sports equipment she had. We received conflicting information about what actually the truth was. So it happened that it was more of adventurism than promoting of the sport. That is why I am saying that it may even have been very difficult for any other sportspersons to come up and complain the way Inzikuru came out to say that there was ill preparation for the Olympic Games. (Member timed out.)

5.30
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to welcome and congratulate Stephen, my namesake - (Laughter) - and also to thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Colleagues have talked a lot about investing in education, especially sports related education. It is true that the ministry has not done much. When you go to our schools, games and sports have been ignored totally. 

The other issue is about patriotism. I think when we were starting this issue of patriotism here I was one of those people who were hesitant. I was seated there and I remember I remained hesitant as to why we are voting for this money. You do not need to teach a person about patriotism in words but let us put it in action. You saw how the Leader of the Opposition moved from here and moved to the other side with the Leader of Government Business. Why? It is because of Stephen. They do not first have to go to Kyankwanzi. They did not have to first do anything but the actions that have happened compelled them to come together, and this is what we need to invest in. 

Standardising rewards is very important. I say this because now supposing the President gave Shs 10 million, Stephen would not have gone to court or anywhere because there is no policy in place. Let us put a policy in place so that our sports personalities know what is for them and do not depend on individuals and on the mood. That, I think, we need to revise.

Most of our sports personalities have ended badly. You have talked about Leo Rwabwogo. He was one of the best boxers in this country and he did Uganda proud, but I can assure you, I was there when we were burying this man; he was buried like a pauper. He was from my constituency. I was there and I shed tears. He can no longer be remembered because there is no policy in place - (Member timed out.)

5.32
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank Kiprotich for what he has done for this nation. I wish to thank him for his determination, his effort and his struggle to be able to represent Uganda and not only to represent Uganda but to do it in a way which lifted the whole nation. 

I would also love to appeal to the government; when Kiprotich raised the Uganda flag, he raised the spirits of the nation. He also has given hope to a young generation who know it is possible. We must be able to capture that generation and harness those energies and channel them so that our flag can continue to fly at the international stage. What he has done through his own struggle should have been a collective struggle of the nation to really showcase our talent.

At this stage, I am part of that generation who were alive 40 years ago, but 40 years ago we only had the radio to hear the achievements of a Ugandan breaking a world record and bringing a gold medal. Today, we saw our flag. The whole world witnessed the raising of the Ugandan flag. I only hope and pray that we are not going to lose this moment. 

We have got a gold medal during our golden jubilee. The significance is that we must not lose the potential which is there. I am seeing my colleagues on the front bench looking as if - anyway I will not - (Member timed out.)

5.35
MR MAXWELL AKORA (UPC, Maruzi County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute and to congratulate Mr Stephen Kiprotich for the gold that he brought to our country on 12th August this year. I want to share the moment as I witnessed his victory last Sunday. I was in a parliamentary retreat with the Public Accounts Committee and it so happened that at the time the race was ending, the committee was getting out for lunch. As we walked out into the dinning, we saw somebody wearing the Ugandan shirt running. It came as a surprise to the committee, and I think the whole country, that that Ugandan was running the golden race that afternoon.

When Mr Kiprotich won that race that afternoon, coming to 50 years after our Independence and coming to 40 years after the last Olympic gold medal that was won by my father-in-law, the late John Akii Bua, coming on the day of the International Youth Day, it was truly a moment to exalt and to remember. It was a moment that united the country, a moment that brought a rare smile on the face of the people of Uganda and a moment that brought a rare glimpse of hope and joy in our hearts. 

Today, as we pay tribute to Mr Kiprotich, I want us to reflect on the achievements of the late John Akii Bua who not only brought us our first gold medal but also broke the Olympic record at 47.82 seconds in the 400 metres hurdles, probably the toughest race of the Olympics. Today in the House we are joined by the son of the late John Akii Bua, my brother-in-law, Tony Bua. He presented to the House a gold medal that his father won. 

In 1972, the Head of State then gave a number of gifts to the late John Akii Bua in recognition of his feat. One of them was a house that was donated to the family in Kampala in Kamwokya.
Madam Speaker and honourable members, the family is at the verge of losing that house today because the owners of the house were not compensated. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: That is important. I will give you half a minute. That is very important for the government assurances.

MR AKORA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The owners of that house were not compensated for the gift that was given to the late John Akii Bua. They have been pursuing the family to the extent that they have attempted to evict the family. 

Last year, Government made a provision in the budget to settle the matter, but the money was not released. When I inquired with the Ministry of Education, they said that they were not aware of the money. We do not know which government department should have handled this matter between the Uganda Police Force and the Ministry of Education and Sports. So, I want us to take this opportunity, as we pay tribute to Mr Kiprotich, to reflect on our past heroes -(Applause)- and see how we can reward them not just after the event or after they have been in this world and gone, but as they live. 

Today, as a lot is being given to Mr Kiprotich, and quite rightly, I urge this House to urge Government to please settle the matter of the house of the late John Akii Bua. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Minister for Education and Sports is taking note of that outstanding pledge.

5.39
MR STEPHEN BAKA MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to join colleagues in thanking you for convening this very special session to honour our golden boy. 

I rise up to support the motion by congratulating Mr Stephen Kiprotich for the golden opportunity Uganda witnessed on the 12th of this month. I wish not to end there but also congratulate the other members of Team Uganda for participating in the event. Although they did not win medals, they were part of a team that went to London hopeful to win medals. Actually, one of them, the golden girl, is here to share in the glory of her colleague, Stephen Kiprotich. This is the way to go. I wish to thank you, Dorcus, for coming to attend this very important session today. (Applause) The colleagues, who did not make it, keep it there. We will do everything we can to ensure that in 2016, the atmosphere is conducive for you to win medals in Brazil. 

After this, Government should now move very fast to galvanise this achievement by ensuring that you have a plan for sports development in Uganda, of course starting with the construction of the high altitude centre in Kapchorwa for training of athletes. This is a very important activity that you must embark on immediately because you must hit the metal when it is hot. This is the moment where the country is rallying support for the sports budget to be increased and, therefore, you must come up at this moment to encourage young people to carry on your programmes. I think Parliament, as you have appealed through the Speaker, will come up to help you raise your budget.

Talking about the lessons learnt during the golden race, I watched Kiprotich from around the 20th kilometre and I wish to applaud his very good tactics. He ran behind the Kenyans, never threatening them. They did not know there was a threat behind them. At one time, they would leave him for around 10 metres and he would only run to catch up with them but not threaten them. Actually, one of them acknowledged that they thought it was between the two of them. They did not know there was an enemy behind. It only hit them when it mattered most at a hill when he overtook and they never saw him again. (Laughter) To me, that is patience which you exhibited and please carry on with that attribute. 

Finally, I want to thank the Prisons Service for promoting him to the rank of ASP. This is something going to last. The money we are giving him, the money he has received, maybe within one year he may not have it on his account, but the rank will stay until he goes to his grave. I thank you very much.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we have consulted with colleagues, with the chairperson of our sports team in Parliament, and agreed that we will make a contribution of an amount of money which we cannot commit now. Honourable colleagues have accepted that they will sign. You know our usual method. We will pass around and sign. Also, the Commission has accepted to make a contribution. When we have a handsome figure, we will invite Mr Kiprotich with his team to Parliament and at a formal function we shall hand over our package. That is what we have agreed upon and within a week, we should be able to do that and join the rest of the country.

I thank you very much, Mr Kiprotich. Thank you for winning us that golden moment. God bless you.

5.44
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I join the country and colleagues to congratulate ASP Stephen Kiprotich. We congratulate you so much. 

As a chairperson of the committee which oversees the Uganda Prisons Service which produced the medal which we are all proud of, I have to say, and I am proud to report, that this is part of the accountability we are presenting to this House. (Laughter) One of the key challenges the sector has is funding. Everything we are talking about is coded to unfunded priorities. It is my humble prayer that as you are considering the budget, something should be considered to this effect, that we try to enhance funding to the Uganda Prisons Service. 

About the promotion, I think I should also salute the leadership of the Uganda Prisons Service, specifically Dr Byabashaija and his team, for accelerating this promotion. Where there is performance, I think we need to give the necessary credit. The day Gen. Moses Ali was decorated among others, he appeared here with pips. Unfortunately, we were not given time or an opportunity to comment or say something. It is just the Speaker who said, “Congs, congs.” This is an opportunity to say congratulations, but we want to see Generals who are useful, Generals who are in the field, Generals who are operating. This will motivate our sons and daughters who are at it, who are in the game. I missed that opportunity to go on record. 

Once again, I have to thank the entire House and thank our brother, Kiprotich, and the Uganda Prisons Service. (Member timed out.)

5.46
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative): Madam Speaker and colleagues, first of all I want to thank my brother, Stephen Kiprotich, for having the dream he wished for. I have one comment, which I want to go directly to the Ministry of Education. Today in our country, there are many mushrooming schools. You ask yourself, do these schools have the facilities for identification of talent? 

I want to challenge the Ministry of Education and more so, Maj. (Rtd) Alupo. In Kampala here, you find a building which is a school. I thought for a school to qualify to be opened, there must be facilities which qualify it to be a school. So, I am challenging, as a representative of the young people, that for us to tap talent of these young people, let us make sure that we provide these facilities where they are meant to be. 

I represent eastern Uganda and my brother comes from Kapchorwa. I am privileged that on 25th, I will be officiating at the celebrations of the Youth Day in the same district. However, I want to make this comment. I have been to Bukwo and there is a training facility which is not up to date. During my campaigns, I did not get a lodge in Sebei and was taken to sleep in that facility. Hon. Tete mentioned that there are young men there who are trying to see how to nurture their talents. As we are waiting for this facility to be built, why doesn’t the Ministry of Education help us with facilities so that money is channelled to help those young people who are already training in that camp? I have been there not only once but over three times. I appeal to the Ministry of Education to do that.

Lastly, Rio 2016 is coming, I want to appeal to you, through your office, to be key in a fundraising drive to help us, specifically help these young people who are already trying to do something in that facility in Bukwo, who are training. If you invited corporate organisations, they will be able to make significant contributions which would help this talent which is already there. They will help us bring more gold medals like the way our brother has done here. (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you do not want to sign the form with us? 

MR OGWANG: Regardless of that, I want to give my contribution.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, give your contribution.

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I represent Kapchorwa and Sebei as a sub-region. Tomorrow, I would like to hand over Shs 1 million to hon. Chemutai to hand over to the family of my brother, Kiprotich, who has brought a gold medal. It will help inspire my young people in the Sebei sub-region who are participating in athletics. I thank you so much. Can we dedicate this gold medal to that road, Bukwo-Kapchorwa-Suam? As a person from there, let us dedicate that gold medal to those people. Government, please help us to sort out that problem as immediately as possible. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have to go to Sheraton. I think let us give just one minute -(Interjections)- What can we do? We either stay here and not to go to Sheraton or - You can do it in one minute. 

5.51
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion and particularly thank you for convening this special session to celebrate the victory of our brother, Stephen Kiprotich. On behalf of the people of Buhaguzi County and on my own behalf, I wish to thank you, Stephen Kiprotich, for making us as Ugandans proud by wining us a gold medal. 

I also want to thank the Prisons authority, your parents, your wife and all those who helped you gain this important victory. I want to thank them particularly for your promotion. I also want to say that the Ministry of Education should help Mr Stephen Kiprotich, especially in regard to the pledges made by Government. Quite a number of times, Government makes pledges but fulfilling them becomes the other challenge. We have just heard of a situation where the old gold medallist in the names of Kipsiro, up to now, 2012, we are still debating the issue to do with – (Member timed out.)

5.52
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that I am speaking at the end because I am a member from that region, Kween District. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking Mr Kiprotich Stephen for the achievement that has come for the whole of our country. I was actually watching and when he kicked back to pick the Ugandan flag, all of us, together with our children, started jumping. We did not even see when he crossed the line because we were just in jubilation. My neighbours even came out to see what was happening to us. 

I also want to say that there are so many commitments that have been made by the government. I want to urge government to fast track these pledges. 

Secondly, I want to thank Mr Kiprotich for winning and I encourage him to continue winning. When I looked at all those athletes, most of them were old but when you look at our people, after a long time they lag back and lose. I want to reassure this House that we have the potential in Sebei region; there are so many of our children who can bring for us medals. (Member timed out)

5.54
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues and the rest of Ugandans to congratulate Stephen Kiprotich for bringing the second Olympic gold medal to Uganda in 40 years; of course after the first Olympic champion, John Akii Bua. 

Madam Speaker, allow me thank Stephen for using his natural abilities and incredible strength and persistence to become a spectacular athlete. As Ugandans, we were all watching and we saw Stephen dripping with sweat. He stepped up his speed and just in a third of the time it takes to blink an eye, I saw Stephen was in full range of motion and he crossed the finishing line holding the Ugandan flag high. What a brilliant performance; what a phenomenon athlete. 

This achievement is a unifying factor to keep the memory of the achievement vibrant. Allow me move that the construction of the high altitude training centre be expedited and named after Stephen Kiprotich. (Member timed out.)

5.56
CAPT. SUZAN LAKOT (UPDF): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to join the rest of my colleagues in congratulating Stephen Kiprotich upon achieving the gold medal at the time when we are going to celebrate the Golden Jubilee of Uganda’s Independence. 

Madam Speaker, from the time you gave us your communication from the chair, you told us that the wife of Kiprotich would be joining us later but we have waited up to now and I have not seen Patricia joining us. I am getting worried. My worry accrues from the fact that many times when people climb ladders they tend to forget their spouses who ushered them onto those ladders. It is my prayer that it is not the case with our golden champion, Stephen Kiprotich. 

If I do not see Patricia up to now, I do not have any hope that she will join us to celebrate and to see with her own eyes as we congratulate Kiprotich. Up to now, we have not been given any information as to where she is – (Interruption)

MS BINTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague. When we were receiving Mr Stephen Kiprotich, we asked him where the family was. We were informed that the wife was not feeling well and that they have taken her to the clinic. So we thought that if the situation allows her, then she will join us here. So it is not that they have refused to bring her here, but she is undergoing treatment. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: When we were in the Speaker’s Boardroom, we were informed by the Commissioner of Prisons that since Stephen Kiprotich arrived in the country, even the Uganda Prisons service is overstretched and overwhelmed. They are overwhelmed. Everywhere they go, there are thousands of people. So in the circumstances, we should sympathise with them because the process of overwhelming them will still continue up to Sheraton; I do not know what time it will end. 

CAPT. LAKOT: Thank you very much, Commissioner Bintu and hon. Otto for that information. However, I still have fears along those lines because it has happened many times. 

At this point in time, I want to thank the Commissioner of Prisons and the staff of Uganda Prisons Services for sacrificing and letting Kiprotich go and do his training while they remained behind doing work on his behalf. Thank you, people. That is the patriotism we are looking up to. If it were not for these people sacrificing to remain behind to do the work on his behalf, maybe he would not have gone to do the training. (Member timed out.)

5.59
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I bring salutation and warm congratulations from the people of Mitooma to Stephen Kiprotich, to the people of Uganda and to the Pearl of Africa. I raise praise to our God who never lets down his people. 

Everybody had despaired. Red Pepper wrote that morning that, “Why Akii Bua’s gold medal will be the first and the last”. However, the mighty power behind this nation, whose motto is “For God and my country”, delivered the perfect gift for the Golden Jubilee. This is assurance that God will always be there to lift us even higher in the coming 50 years. 

Thank you, Kiprotich, for inspiring our young people to reach down for the hero inside of them without waiting for hand-outs from government. But government should learn to identify talents and develop them. Let us not go to the Olympics to train but rather to showcase our best skills and to win medals. (Member timed out.)

6.01
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank everybody that might have contributed to Kiprotich’s upbringing, from the time he was born to date. They did a very good job. 

I became so excited by Kiprotich’s victory because of the fact that he came from the continent of Africa, and from the African Continent he came from Uganda, and from Uganda he comes from Kapchorwa, which in many instances is like Buhweju. Kiprotich has shown that villages can produce people and bring them up and that villages are there to liberate and advertise Uganda. I appeal to the Ministry of Education to identify and concentrate on those rural schools because they have got the talents. Those children have got natural training. They run after rabbits, they run after birds, they run while grazing cattle and that is natural training. That is where Kiprotich, I believe, comes from. So it is an opening gate for those young people to gain confidence. (Member timed out.)

6.02
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the senior citizens, I would like to congratulate the golden son, Stephen Kiprotich. It is actually a Langi name. We, the Ba Dokolo, are very proud because your victory has brought alive the glorious memory of Akii Bua, Dennis Obua and many others. 

One thing that has not come out, and I will want to bring out, is that we are celebrating the Golden Jubilee this year and this son of Uganda won the gold medal on the last event. To me, this is testimony that God is coming down to liberate Uganda. (Applause) I have hope for tomorrow and I thank God that you represent the youth of Uganda. The very fact that you won this gold medal on the last day is a very powerful testimony.
 
The second point that I would like to make is that I would like the Prime Minister to translate his statement into a policy document. This is because we have heard so many statements made here about Akii Bua, the young lady who has also done very well for us, Judith Aya and many others; up to now, the pledges made by Government to assist the family of Akii Bua have not been done. The government promised to build a special stadium in memory of Akii Bua but up to now, it has not been done. So I hope that all these are not just empty promises.

I want to say that if you want Uganda not to wait for another 40 years, we should begin to inculcate the spirit of sports in our children and it must begin now. We must also have a budget for it. We should not just wait until a victory is scored and then we begin to make promises, some of which may not be fulfilled. 

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us an opportunity to thank our son in this special way. There is nothing else we could do except just pray for you, Kiprotich. I never used to watch sports but this time round I had to make sure that I watched sports that I could not even understand because I thought that maybe a Ugandan would just crop up with another gold. I want to thank you so much for what you have done and God bless you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 46 members have contributed to this motion. You know we have an appointment with honourable Mr Kiprotich at the Sheraton. So I would want to propose that I put the question first that we amend the motion as proposed by hon. Baka to say that we shall issue a form for members to write their contribution. So, I put the question that the motion be amended as proposed by hon. Baka. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the House do resolve to pay glowing tribute to Mr Stephen Kiprotich for the excellent performance in winning a gold medal in the 42-kilometre marathon at the 30th Olympiad. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, perhaps in future we may have to limit the time for the movers because I think we took one hour moving the motion. We may have to agree on how much time is to be used by the movers so that others can contribute. 

Honourable members, the House is adjourned sine die. We meet at Sheraton where there will be some “Kyamucation”. I thank you.


National Anthem (Three Verses)

(The House rose at 6.06 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)





 

    

