
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 31 August 2021

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting and I thank all of you for coming. I also want to remind the honourable members of the sub-regional groups that we had set aside to analyse the process of Emyooga that we should be able to start discussing Emyooga this week. So, the sub-regional groups should be able to provide my office with reports so that we come and discuss them.

I also want us to stand for a moment of silence for the people who have lost their lives in Masaka.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We want to condole with the team coming from Masaka. What is happening in Masaka is a very unfortunate incidence. I believe, with time, we are going to have that issue resolved. With the help of this House, we should be able to resolve the killings in Masaka.

It is not the first time it is happening; such things have happened before. All we need not do is to politicise it. We need to work together to make sure we stop those killings. We need to work together with the communities, the youth and everybody to own the problem as our problem, not an individual problem.

As I have already said about the Emyooga, we are going to have an open discussion on it without fear or favour. We will discuss the issues of Emyooga because that will help us in the subsequent Government projects. 

We have a programme coming up – the Parish Development Model – but if we do not correct the mistakes that are in the Emyooga, then the rest will be a waste. 

Therefore, be ready for it and we will have it done and that will be your baby as the 11th Parliament; that you did it and it is out of the 11th Parliament that the systems, guidelines and sanctions have been put in place.

I want to thank you very much and greetings from the Paapa, with all the blessings. (Applause) 
Let us go to matters of national importance.

2.18
MR HILLARY KIYAGA (NUP, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. I wish to draw your and the Government’s attention to the unfortunate event of a heavy rainstorm that occurred in one of my villages of Kavuga, Kalagala in Mpigi.

On 10th August, 90 people were left homeless and 15 houses completely destroyed, together with their crops. As protocol dictates, I advised the district Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) to write to the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, which they did on the 11th of August. As we talk, we have not received any positive message from the ministry in regard to the matter. 

My prayer, therefore, is to seek for the ministry’s indulgence in the matter by providing temporary shelter for these 90 homeless people. As we talk, we borrowed a small tent from the police station but we are in a pandemic. This is putting our locals at risk of getting more diseases.

Furthermore, Madam Speaker, the ministry could intervene - since their crops were completely destroyed - and help us with relief, in terms of food and fast-growing crops. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Hillary Kiyaga. Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees? (Laughter)

2.21
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, has, today morning, travelled to Karamoja to handle another emergency with UNHCR and UNFPA.

After this session, I invite hon. Hillary Kiyaga to come and we go together to meet the Commissioner for Disaster Preparedness and ensure that this matter is followed up and immediate action taken. After today’s plenary, please, come and we go to the Department of Disaster Preparedness in the Office of the Prime Minister and ensure we follow up that matter, if your letter has – [MR SSEMUJJU: Procedure!] - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural matter?

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the functions of the Government Chief Whip are outlined in the Administration of Parliament Act and our Rules of Procedure. Those functions include mobilising Members to attend Parliament. They do not include taking messages from Parliament –(Laughter)– to ministers.

The procedural issue I am raising, Madam Speaker, is whether hon. Tayebwa is also an alternate Leader of Government Business such that at one time, he moves away from his statutory functions under the law to begin taking messages to those who are absent.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tayebwa had actually mobilised the minister to come and he was reporting where the minister was. However, what is important for this case is that he has committed that the problem is going to be resolved. (Applause)

Hon. Hillary Kiyaga, can you make a follow up and give me feedback on the action that has been taken on that matter? We have of course realised that there is a gap but we cannot capitalise on that. What we need is our people to be served; that is what is important.

2.23
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, I appreciate your indulgence and the tacit commitment of my colleague, the Government Chief Whip. If I heard the honourable member from Mawokota County North well, it has been three weeks now and the presence of the Government has not been felt. 

Madam Speaker, you should probably give a timeline for action to the honourable minister. The honourable member who has agreed to be the bridge – I will not use the words of hon. Ssemujju to call him a “messenger” – in this matter to deliver in the immediacy because if it is shelter, it is immediate and if it is food, food is so many days late.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Hillary Kiyaga, after the House, the minister said you move with him. You should give me feedback by Friday on the action taken. It is not just taking the Member to the Commissioner. We want action. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify that I am a Minister of the Government of Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a fact; everybody knows it. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: So, for anyone to say I am limited by the Rules of Procedure in terms of my functions - I swore before the President and I am given assignments by him. I am ready to execute them and I will not be limited by any naysayer. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, everybody knows that you are a minister. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am really sorry – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I do not need a rebuttal, hon. Ssemujju. 

2.26
MS HELEN NAKIMULI (NUP, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national urgency. I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the health sector in Kalangala District is in appalling state; it is devastating.

Some of you may be aware that Kalangala District has 84 islands but it has only two health centres IV. One health centre IV makes referrals to another health centre IV. It is funny but it is true. 

Medical service in Kalangala is a nightmare. The National Medical Store just gives us a limited variety of drugs; we do not have enough drugs in our health centres IV. They are not equipped at all. Bukasa Health Centre IV is one of them. It has a theatre that was renovated by the UPDF but it only houses bats. It does not have any equipment; not even a scanner. 

When pregnant women get there, they are referred to Kalangala Health Centre IV, which takes about two hours to get there on the boat. As a result, many have died. Many emergency cases have arisen but have not been handled.

Another issue is of a parish called Bunyama, which has seven landing sites but does not have even a health centre II. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are your prayers? 

MS NAKIMULI: My humble prayers are: 

In the short run, the Government should at least equip all the health centres IV in Kalangala District. 

In the long run, the Government should give us a hospital to serve the 84 islands. 


Finally, it is my humble request that when a committee is constituted in Parliament, especially in the central region, it should at least consider benchmarking in the island districts because we are left out. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ministry of Health.

2.28
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, I see on the Order Paper in the “Notice of Business to Follow” there is a statement by the Minister of Health on the status of health care services delivery in Uganda and budgetary implications. The issue of Kalangala is also under that. We are ready. When we get time on the Order Paper, we shall come and respond to the matter raised by hon. Nakimuli comprehensively alongside other health-related issues in the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, you have been put on the Order Paper on the debate on hon. Katuntu’s report on issues that affect the health sector of Uganda.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: There is another statement, which you ordered, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that one is also inclusive of Kalangala.

MR TAYEBWA: Should we respond tomorrow? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nakimuli, the Government will give a report to your issues together with what they already have. 

2.29
MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the state of Kampala Capital City. Allow me to give a brief background of Kampala. 

Kampala Capital City is the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not sure we have all the time for your background. How important is that matter? Can you bring it during the Prime Minister’s Question Time?

MR BALIMWEZO: Madam Speaker, just recently, two very important people on a boda boda died in front of me because of the state of the roads in Kampala. This is the reason I was bringing a broader picture of this state of emergency. Therefore, I pray that you allow me to bring this matter to your attention. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Put it down in writing and the minister will respond to it. 

MR BALIMWEZO: Most obliged. 

2.31
MR ABDULHU BYAKATONDA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this COVID-19 pandemic, we are experiencing a number of losses in terms of jobs for workers. 

Recently, Uchumi Supermarket exited the country, leaving 560 workers without any compensation payment. Shoprite is actually on its way to exit Uganda, according to reports.

This matter requires much attention and a resilient plan so that we can help the suffering citizens who are already endangered by COVID-19. That is my prayer. 

2.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, if I can remember well, Uchumi Supermarket left before COVID-19; its exit was not about COVID-19. Nevertheless, there is a report by the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, which was presented, where we are going to have a comprehensive debate. As Government, we shall respond to the issues raised in the report. This is one of the issues. 

I just want to inform the House that Shoprite, which the Member has said has left the country, has been bought by Carrefour Supermarket. Carrefour Supermarket also needs workers. So, we are going to have workers employed anyway. We shall, however, give more response, when we go to the debate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I actually first expected you to talk about the workers of the Rural Electrification Agency (REA). 

We will have a debate on the report, which was presented by hon. Mpaka next week. Next time. 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS

MR ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This House’s Committee on Appointments has been undertaking some assignments on behalf of the entire House. It started with the ministers before handling judges and of recent, members of other statutory bodies. 

Under our Rules of Procedure, particularly Rule 170, the Committee on Appointments is mandated to report to this House although the report would not be debated. I and several members have been waiting for this report. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to be guided on when the Committee on Appointments will present, to this House, its report to help members of Parliament to go out and explain to their constituents how the different appointments have been approved by this House. I beg that this guidance be offered. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As per Rule 170, the vetting of the appointees has taken place for ministers, judges and commissioners but the work is not yet over. We will report when we finish; I will report as the chairperson of the committee.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the matter of national importance, which is very crucial and it concerns the plight of Ugandans who are in South Sudan.

From 29 August, Juba, the Capital City of South Sudan was blocked, the security personnel blocked vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles or anyone from moving out of Juba. Many of our traders are stuck there. And from yesterday and today, they are calling upon us members of Parliament, to ask the Government of Uganda to find a way of rescuing them.

Madam Speaker, aware that in the last one week, many of our truck drivers were robbed on the way and others killed and their property destroyed - as I speak, more than 280 trucks are parked at the Elegu Border Post in Amuru District.

Madam Speaker, I pray –(Interjections)– let me first present my prayers - that the Government should respond as fast as possible to rescue our people stranded in Juba. Right now, the situation is worsening; people are indoors and do not know what is going on. The security operatives are very rude on the streets; the lives of our people are in danger.

Secondly, the Government should organise our security team to escort the trucks that are stuck in Juba so that our business community can receive back their trucks in Uganda. The situation is not good - (Interruption)
 
MR SILWANY: Thank you, honourable member for giving way, and thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to add is that we are aware that some of the food we produce like Matooke and Maize is sold to South Sudan. What the honourable member is talking about is that from the night before last night, people from Uganda are making several calls to anybody they can reach out to. 

When they get to know that you are a Member of Parliament, they call you. This is because they are desperate. These people are stuck and they cannot continue living. You know most of our people in South Sudan live from hand to mouth. These are traders who are just beginning and some are engaged in petty jobs given the relationship between the two countries.

Therefore, what hon. Olanya is talking about is very urgent. I wanted to add that voice of urgency because the lives of Ugandans in South Sudan are at risk. We need to bring out the urgency bit; this issue should have been sorted out like yesterday.  

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, the East African Community is on fire because as I speak -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which fire do you mean?

MR MACHO: I mean business fire. Last evening, I received a call from one of the businesspersons in South Sudan -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: At least I am sure that it is not on fire. Can you use a better word?

MR MACHO: I withdraw it, Madam Speaker. Anyhow, what I am saying is that the Ugandan businesspeople who are stuck in South Sudan are in danger. I used the word “fire” is because they are being killed with bullets, which come with fire.

I, therefore, would like to inform the House that the only solution to this problem is by Uganda suggesting to the East African Community that partner states that are not cooperative be suspended from the Community. Up to now, Rwanda has a problem with us and the borders are closed. 

Now, for South Sudan, Uganda requested them to provide escorts to the trailer drivers but they totally refused. Therefore, this matter – Madam Speaker, I rest my case by saying that our people are in danger and some of these partner states are playing with us. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, we may not take that decision as a House now. Hon. Mulimba, I have seen you somewhere; we need a statement on that tomorrow. (Hon. Olanya rose_) I have already made a ruling on that. 

MR OLANYA: I was giving the last prayers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have already ruled on that; you can give the prayers to him. 

HON. OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER We need a statement tomorrow on what is happening to our people in South Sudan.

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr John Mulimba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the 25th of this month, I made a statement to this House in respect to the issues concerning the suffering of our traders and also individual Ugandans who are in South Sudan. 

One of the issues I raised is that the Government of Uganda is gravely concerned about what is going on in the Republic of South Sudan. Accordingly, a team had been dispatched to go and engage bilaterally -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What kind of statement did you make? Was it a qualitative or a general statement? Did you give us the figures of the people who are suffering or that kind of thing?

MR MULIMBA: Yes, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Is it in order for the honourable minister to defer the ruling of the Speaker? You have clearly said that we need a statement from the minister tomorrow. As a senior legislator, the minister knows how to challenge the ruling of the Speaker. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is not in order, of course. I made a ruling and told him that I want a statement tomorrow backed up with figures of how many people are involved and what is happening; a statement with evidence. You do not come with a sweeping statement like what you are making now. Therefore, come and present tomorrow.
2.43
Mr eddie kwizera (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance in regard to the salaries, allowances and gratuities of both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker.

Whereas Article 82(8) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the Speaker and the Deputy speaker shall receive such salaries, allowances and gratuities as may be prescribed by Parliament, to my knowledge, this provision has never been implemented by Government.

Aware that some office bearers are not catered for under the Salaries and Allowances (Specified Officers) Act. Cap. 229, my question is, why has Government not implemented Article 82(8) of the Constitution, aware that the Article requires the provision to be implemented by this Parliament so that our Speaker and Deputy Speaker are put in the Third Schedule –(Interruption)

Mr ssemujju: Madam Speaker, I am not a lawyer but we are told by lawyers that in a Constitution, you do not pick one Article and read it in isolation; it is read as one document. The honourable Member is raising financial issues, knowing the restrictions this Parliament has under Article 93. Is he proceeding well by inviting Parliament to violate Article 93 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda?

The deputy speaker: Thank you, honourable Member. First, as Speaker and Deputy Speaker, we have not had a complaint about our salaries and allowances. Secondly, this has a restriction on financial matters under Article 93 of the Constitution. This can only be handled by the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, if there is an issue on this, it is referred to the two above.

Ministerial STATEMENT ON ORGANIsED CRIME AND KILLINGS OF PERSONS IN the GREATER MASAKA REGION

2.46
The Minister of state for Internal Affairs (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker, I am here to report back on the heightened incidents of murders in Greater Masaka Region.

This honourable House and indeed the country have been alarmed by what has been happening in the Greater Masaka sub-region. I am here to report to the House about that matter and the measures being taken by Government to deal with the problem. 

At the onset of this session, you asked that we stand in honour of the lives lost and of those injured. I would like to add that we need to do more than that. We need to avenge their murder by finding the culprits and bringing them to book.

Rampant killings have indeed taken place in Lwengo District and also some in Masaka District, from the months of June to the other day. The country, thus far, has lost 26 precious lives as follows:

On 5 July 2021 at Kenangasi Village, Kisekka Subcounty in Lwengo District, a one Kaweesi Kasiim aged 50 years was murdered by unknown assailants. In this regard, a one Ssekandi Qurais was arrested to help in the investigations.

On 2l July 2021, at around 21:00 hours in Taga Village, Nkoni Subcounty in Lwengo District, a one Kabanda John, a male adult of about 60 years and a one Kalya Vicent of 43 years old were murdered by the same assailants at the same time. The following suspects were arrested in that incident: Ssewakambo Muhammed and Kibirango John Bosco who are now undergoing – Yesterday, they took statements before a Magistrate and were being processed for prosecution. 

On 3l July 2021 at around 21:50 hours in Nakateete Village, Kiseka Subcounty in Lwengo District, one Nkaka Francis, a male adult aged 60 years and Kaweesi Godfrey, a male adult aged 40 years were also murdered by unknown assailants. No arrests have been made so far in this regard but investigations are continuing to trace for the killers.

On 1 August 2021 at around 20:00 hours, near Katindo Trading Centre, Ndagwe Subcounty in Lwengo District, a one Mugenyi, a male adult of 35 years was murdered by unknown people. Kisekka Siraje and Ssewaje Derrick were arrested to help in the investigations in this matter. 

On 1 August 2021 at around 22:00 hours at Kisekka ‘B’ Village, Kisekka Subcounty in Lwengo District, a one Bwanika Joseph, a male adult aged 50 years was murdered by unknown people. No arrest has been made but investigations continue to trace for the suspects.

On 4 August 2021, at around 20:00 hours, at Katama Kyanjovu Village, Lwengo Rural Subcounty in Lwengo District, Ddumba Joseph Lutankoma, a male adult of 59 years was killed by unknown assailants. Namata Justine has been arrested to help in this regard.

 On 12 August 2021 in Malongo village, Malongo Subcounty, Lwengo District, a one Lubega Ramathan, a male adult of 60 years was found murdered and his body dumped in a kibanja of one known as Faizal.

On 15 August 2021 at Mpumudde Village, Byakabirizi Parish, Kyazanga rural Subcounty in Lwengo District, Kayemba Sowedi, a male adult of 29 years, was waylaid by unknown assailants and murdered. His body was found dumped along Kaweesi Road in the same village.

On l5 August 2021 in Byanjiri village, Kito Parish, Lwengo rural Subcounty in Lwengo District, the following people were waylaid and murdered: (l) Ssebwama Ibrahim, a male adult of 47 years. (2) Mande Ronald Katende, a male adult of 20 years. (3) Galiwango Paul, a male adult of 58 years. All were residents of the same area. 

	Two suspects have been arrested in this regard to help in the investigations. They were found with some exhibits of the victims; clothes with blood stains and some tools suspected to have been used in the murder. The suspects are Kaganda Tumwesigye Musa, a male adult of 26 years and Kabayo Henry, a male adult of 30 years. The two are residents of the same area. 

On 18 August 2021 at around 20:00 hours in Ndegeya village, Nakateete Parish, Kisekka Subcounty in Lwengo District, a one Kato Ssemwanga Godfrey, a male adult of 45 years and a resident of the same area was waylaid, hit and injured with multiple blows on the head by unidentified three assailants, who were hiding in a eucalyptus plantation in the same area. The victim was evacuated by the relatives to the nearest health facility in Kinoni Town Council.

Mbazira Richard, 60 year old resident of Kyabogo Village, Nkoni Parish, Kingo Subcounty, Lwengo District, working as a Deputy Catechist in Kingo Parish was murdered on 22 August 2021. On the night of 22 August 2021, in Kikungwe A Village, Butale Parish, Kimanya-Kabonera Division, one Mukasa Idirisa 80 years was murdered in front of his house. 

The assailants also killed three people on the night of 23 August 202l in Settaala Village, Senya ward, Kimanya-Kabonera Division of Masaka. These were hit and died instantly. The deceased include; Mugerwa Francis also known as Kiiza Nswa 60 years old, Kakooza Suleiman 54 years old, Kiyimba Tamukuze 42 years old. They are all residents of the some area though murdered from different spots.

On the night of 24 August 2021 in Kikaalo Village, Kyamulibwa Ward, Kimanya-Kabonera Division in Masaka, Tonny Lukyamuzi 74 years old was injured by unknown assailants. Thank God, he did not die. 

On the night of 25 August 2021, Nampijja Muhangaza, female aged 75 years old, and Yeye Peter, male aged 30 years, both residents of Kisale Village, Bisanje Ward, Kimanya-Kabonera Division Masaka City, were attacked and killed. 

On the night of 27 August in Kisaka Village, Kiteredde Ward, Kimanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City, unknown assailants killed one Mulindwa Madi, aged 45 years and injured Ssemanda Jimmy. 

On the night of 28 August 2021, in Bwasa Village, Kasana Parish, Kingo Subcounty, Lwengo District, a one, Kankundiye Joyce, 70 years old and her granddaughter aged six years old were hit and later pronounced dead at Masaka Referral Hospital. They were hit as they slept in their house. 

On the night of 28 August 2021, one, Nakata aged 80 years old, a resident of Kitenga Village, Parish, Kaddugala ward, Nyendo-Mukungwe Division, Masaka City was killed by unknown assailants. 

Again on the night of 28 August 2021, Kirembwa Henry, male aged 8l years, a resident of Kyoko, Kaganda Parish, Kingo Subcounty, Lwengo District was attacked and killed by unknown thugs. 

On the night of 29 August 2021, Lizina Vincent, male aged 75 years old, a resident of Mumundwe Village, Rwakibirizi Parish, Kyazanga Rural Subcounty, Lwengo District, was attacked and killed by unknown assailants. 

Madam Speaker, that is the list of details of the victims of these murders. 

There was also a second item on the security in the area regarding dropping of anonymous letters and I want to report as follows: 
There have indeed been incidents of dropping anonymous letters in the districts of Rakai and Bukomansimbi, within the months of July and August and the following are the occurrences:

On 3 July 2021 in Rakai District in areas of Kabingo Village, Luanda Subcounty, this letter was demanding money from Garura Charles on telephone number 0772343861 and also 0753737158 in the village threatening that failure to pay, he would lose his life or his children. His house was torched on 4 August but fire was put off by the community. The telephone number that demanded ransom money was 07555466982. The suspect known as Charles Mwebe was fortunately arrested and he confessed to writing the letter to his uncle to pay dowry for him. 

Also in Bukomansimbi District on 18 June 2021 in Kibinge Subcounty, on 16 July 2021 Kitanda Subcounty and on the 28 July 2021 in Kibinge Subcounty, all the letters written were demanding money and threatening some individuals, including the area LC 1 chairman of Kibinge Subcounty. 

On 5 August at Misanvo Trading Centre on a Boda Boda stage next to the police post in Kibinge Subcounty, Bukomansimbi, a letter was written and dropped threatening the police and demanding from them guns to purportedly start a land rebellion. Also in the said letters, 14 young people were named and identified in their multiple recruitment into rebellion. These were approached by security and interrogated but in the wisdom of security they were released; they are in touch with security. 

Analysis 

The murders are not motivated by proprietary gain since nothing is taken from the victims. However, the criminals in some few incidences use snatched phones of the victims to communicate to the relatives of the victims. Whatever the motive, the intended effect has been to cause fear, terror and apprehension in the public. 

They use the same killing method of hitting the victims on the head with blunt objects and the killing has been in large measure indiscriminate, except for the last ones, which were mainly targeting old people. 

The pattern of killing is also similar timing mainly between 20:00 hours and 22:00 hours at night by waylaying the victims and or attacking vulnerable people in their houses. 

They have been using motorcycles and foot for mobility, as testified by some of the survivors. 

Actions taken

Below are the actions taken:  

Lwengo District

Apprehension of a number of suspects has been done and their cases are being processed for prosecution. 

Joint operations with police in small squads, manning snap checkpoints and searching for suspects. 

Apprehension and impounding motorcycles and motor vehicles moving at night for any suspected individuals moving beyond the curfew hours in the area.  

Intensified intelligence for any related lead information. 

Foundation security mobilisation and formation of security committees in the affected communities, and

Reinforcement of the police with additional boots on the ground has been undertaken. 

Reinforcement with canine and other technical capabilities including forensic capabilities to boost investigations. 

Bukomansimbi District 

We have intensified joint motorised patrols to instil confidence in local community, especially in Kibinge and Kitanda subcounties. 

The four suspects were arrested and these are Gingo James, Ssemanda Daudi, Mawanda Musa and Kiganda Henry, who were all remanded to prison. 

Recommendations from the planning group doing operations 

They need adequate logistics to intensify the on-going operations within Masaka, Lwengo, Rakai and Bukomansimbi District in order to arrest the culprits and have them prosecuted. 

They are undertaking regular mobilisation meetings by different security teams, with the locals as a way of instilling confidence in the communities and also enhancing information collection.

Madam Speaker, it is also recommended that specialised investigation teams – and these have been detailed to the affected areas - be assigned to do case management properly and ensure those arrested are successfully prosecuted. 

We have had some confessions and need to send skilled people to ensure those confessions are again recorded before the magistrates in order to have them admitted in evidence when prosecutions take off.

Reorganisation of foundation security within the communities is being undertaken with all the critical strands of timely intelligence, collection, coordination between the operating forces, communication and rapid response or reaction.

Senior security leaders have been instructed by the National Security Council to go to the affected areas on an on-spot assessment and to work out an effective plan of action with the area district security agencies in order to decisively deal with this insecurity, bring the culprits to book and return normalcy to the affected communities. The recourse to this reprehensible immoral approach of killing Ugandans is shallow, untenable and will be defeated.

Deployment of additional security personnel to dominate the affected areas has been effected. This will help to restore communal confidence and prevent the escalation of the problem.

Madam Speaker, I want to report that something is being done by the Government to organise some compassionate assistance to those families that have lost their loved ones or had their people injured. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. We regret the unfortunate brutal killings. As Parliament of Uganda, we extend our condolences to the bereaved families in the greater Masaka upon the demise of their loved ones. 

We will do whatever it takes to ensure sanity returns to that region. I open the debate for 45 minutes.

3.06
MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to, first, thank the minister for the report he has presented. 

In his report, the minister talked about 26 lives that have been so far lost. In consideration of a German pastor who said, “First they came for the Jews and because I was not a Jew, I never said anything…” I would like you to allow me say something about the breakdown of our intelligence system.

Honourable minister, my concern is that we have an intelligence system right from the region: we have regional intelligence officers, we have the district intelligence officers, we have the Gombolola (GISOs) or the subcounty intelligence officers, we have the parish intelligence officers, we have the LC defence teams at every village, we have LDUs that enforce curfew; we have the RDCs in the same region, and we have the District Police Commanders (DPCs). Certainly, every subcounty has a police station or post. 

Therefore, when you tell us that we should run after the killers and bring them to book - why don’t we first talk about the breakdown of this system? How can we have all these officers - who are supposed to detect and provide intelligence services to Government before anything happens, fail to detect until we lose 26 people? As Government, I think there is something we need to discuss.

Part of the discussion is, can we look at where the intelligence teams have failed? If it is about resources, let us deal with them. If it is about the operational command, let us also deal with that too. Otherwise, I would say we are just covering something, which might eventually come to us. 

Honourable minister, I want you to help us understand where the intelligence system has failed to have identified these killers before they even started; that is where we need to start from. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This issue was raised by hon. Nanyondo. Can we hear from her first?

3.09
MS VERONICA NANYONDO (NUP, Woman Representative, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, thank you for the statement. In your statement, you stated that these criminals are not motivated by any gain since they do not take anything from the victims. You also added that the same methods of killing are used. Doesn’t it occur to you that the criminals are properly trained and have the heart of killing and could have come from the armed forces? 

Secondly – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That would be speculation. Members, I want us to discuss this matter objectively without putting politics into it. Let us look at the bigger picture; why are these people being killed? Let us not put politics in this thing. 

At the end of the day - they are killing people who maybe NRM, DP, NUP and whatever. As Parliament, we must come out with a solution without looking at politics. 

MS NANYONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Secondly, these murderers started by dropping anonymous letters. Now, they have upgraded –(Interruption)  

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. In this Parliament, we debate facts and one has to stand with the facts, even when they are out of this Parliament. 

Would it be procedurally right for the honourable member to debate in anticipation by accusing our men and women in uniform who stand for this country and then goes without withdrawing the statement? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Silwany, I had already ruled the Member out of order. I said that we should not debate in speculation. Members, the so-called armed people are not using guns. Therefore, let us debate the matter with the aim of getting to see how to help our people. Let us not put emotions in this debate and this is her maiden speech. You can continue, honourable member.

MS NANYONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was still commenting on the minister’s statement and I was saying that these killers started by writing and dropping anonymous letters to some homes. Now, they have upgraded by writing on the houses for the public and security officers to read and see.

Sad to note is – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: At what time do they paint the houses?

MS NANYONDO: We cannot tell; even the minister saw them, when he visited.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which houses were painted? Minister, you did not report to us that there was a painting –(Laughter)

GEN. MUHOOZI: I did not see any paintings. She can maybe substantiate her statement.

MS NANYONDO: Since it is information, the minister should note that they are now painting the houses. 

It is sad to note that when they write notes, they come. Therefore, should we assume that the matter has not been resolved - because people are being killed? Even though you were there, honourable minister - and other security personnel are still there, the murderers are upgrading. They drop notes and come in the night.

Madam Speaker, people are thinking of relocating from their homes. We cannot wait for a statement, when our people are still being killed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Veronica Nanyondo, this is why the entire security team is in Masaka. This is also why we are debating this issue. I am even going to send Members from the Greater Masaka to go with the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to find out what is happening.

3.14
DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard from the Minister of Internal Affairs but I want to seek clarity. Is the list that you are talking about exhaustive? Otherwise, I have not heard the name of Kakooza Abubaker, who was murdered in Ttakajjunge. I have the case number for the police report. I have also not heard the name of Ssebanakitta James from Kitanga, whose CBR is 445/2021. There are other two people that were also murdered in Kitanga.

Honourable minister, I have not heard from you that these people are now burning houses in the night. Three days ago, they burnt houses in Nkoni Parish - I saw you in Masaka. Honourable minister, I have just sent money to a Defence Secretary in Kiteredde Parish. He asked for this money to repair a police motorcycle. Imagine, they do not have logistics. You are aware that I have been to all those police stations but there are no logistics. We are wondering why you are not giving priority to logistics in that area. 

I have seen, in your report, the actions. You have talked about Bukomansimbi and Lwengo but where is Masaka City in the action area? I have not seen it. I have also not seen your actions for Masaka District, which is also suffering the same. I seek clarity on those areas.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to also get some clarification from you. Is Bukomansimbi part of the Greater Masaka? [Mr Abed Bwanika: Yes] You have answered it. Bukomansimbi is part of the Greater Masaka and the issue that is being raised in the report is about Greater Masaka, not the villages.

3.17
DR TWAHA KAGABO (NUP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Otherwise, it looked like it would never have happened. (Laughter)

Honourable minister, we appreciate the efforts so far that have been sent to Greater Masaka, more specifically Lwengo and Bukoto South, the area I represent.

Honourable minister, I want to inform you that the information you have given is not substantive, like my colleague, Dr Abed Bwanika, has mentioned. Let me inform you that yesterday, at around 13.00 hours, a 36-year old gentleman called Peter Kivumbi from Bunyere-Degeya, was dissected and left half dead and is currently lying in Masaka Hospital. 

I have just received information right now – this is in Kyazanga Mchomo. One of the vigilante teams that were put in place have just arrested a person with a panga and he has survived lynching.

Besides, Madam Speaker, I want to report before Parliament that whereas efforts have been put in place - we are aware that several arrests have been effected. However, we know that this is a societal problem. Among those arrested, we are sure that not all of them are associated with the crime that is taking place.

Security personnel have gone ahead to screen these people. Unfortunately, they are creating a circadian rhythm of problems and impoverishment of our people. The District Police Commanders (DPCs) and Officer-in-Charge (OCs) ask for ransom before releasing these people who have been screened and are found not guilty of the problems –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give us the name of the DPC or OC who has asked for money so that we take action?

DR KAGABO: Madam Speaker, I would not want to rub people the wrong way. Let us take the information.

Yesterday –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we must debate with evidence. 

DR BWANIKA: Mr Speaker, the OC of Nkoni Police Station, in Lwengo asked one of the people who went there to report a case of Kasaana for Shs 3,000,000 to release him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which police station?

MR BWANIKA: The OC of Nkoni Police Station in Lwengo.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Twaha, what is hard about you mentioning such? Which security reason? (Laughter) 

DR KAGABO: I would not love to rub shoulders with that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What security reason? You are here for your people. If you cannot speak the truth for your people, then you are not supposed to represent them.  Otherwise, the minister will take it up to ensure that he finds out whether it is true or not.

DR KAGABO: Our prayer is that once these people are screened, they should be taken to their homes because some of them are brought from far. Thank you –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, before my colleague takes his seat, I think it is not in order for him to mention that there is an officer soliciting for money without mentioning his name; the name of the DPC has not been mentioned. Therefore, can my colleague, hon. Bwanika, mention the name of the DPC so that this problem can be put to rest?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, there is only one OC in that police station. So, we are going to investigate that. 

3.22
MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I must thank the line minister for the initiative so far. However, a close perusal of the statement clearly shows that since July, when they started tracking the murders in Greater Masaka, no single person has been lined up before court. The report is clear about that. The reason is not stated in the report. Hence, giving – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you listen to the report well? Honourable minister, are there no people in prison? How does one go to prison without going to court? Can you make clarification on that? 

GEN. MUHOOZI: I think the assumption of the honourable member is that arrests started by the beginning of July, which is not true. As of yesterday, 11 suspects were going to appear in court. 

MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, I think my statement is clear, save for two people who were later on remanded. Right from the suspects who were arrested since the 5th of July, the reference numbers are there. No court case numbers are indicated anywhere in this statement.

This gives the confirmation of hon. Abed Bwanika and hon. Kagabo. Once a person is arrested and detained for all this long, first of all, it becomes illegal. This has been one of the grounds which lead to cases from police being dismissed. Once an illegality is committed arising from the detention of a person beyond the 48 hours, the case itself is finished. 

I wonder what the minister can say about that. As I wind up, so far the RCC in Masaka has been transferred. I do not know whether the minister has thought of changing the security system in Masaka to pave way for the new blood to come in and to provide security to the people. He has not mentioned anything to do with that. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how many culprits are in your custody? 

GEN. MUHOOZI: Madam Speaker, we have 69 people in custody. Aware that these are capital offences for which they are held, and the lengthy procedure of arraignment of people charged with capital offences, we are mindful of procedures. So, we use caution and charge to remand as we process the cases. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When were they arrested? 

GEN. MUHOOZI: At different dates, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When was the first suspect arrested?

GEN. MUHOOZI: I have to refer to my records. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You need to be mindful of the law. 

GEN. MUHOOZI: Yes, Madam Speaker. We are mindful of the law. 

3.26
COL CHARITY BAINABABO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is not true that the intelligence system has broken down. It is unfortunate that there are killings in Masaka. We are sad because these are Ugandans just like us. It is our business to secure Ugandans but security concerns all of us. Our operations are mainly intelligence-led and intelligence is got from all of us –(Member rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is her maiden speech. Just allow her to finish. (Laughter)

COL BAINABABO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the protection. I appeal to all of us, especially colleagues from the Greater Masaka Region - Let everybody who knows something about these killings cooperate and give us information. We need information from everyone who knows something because each crime has a motive. So, instead of blaming, I request that we volunteer information so that we can precisely deal with these killings. Thank you. (Applause)

3.27
COL DR VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech. I thank you for giving me a chance to say something because –(Hon. Ssemujju rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is her maiden speech. Dr Nekesa does not belong to – Let hon. Ssemujju say what he wants to say. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Internal Affairs, Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire, is a General in the UPDF. His deputy, Gen. David Muhoozi, is also a General in the UPDF. They are the ones running this sector together with two colleagues. The rest of us want to give them information so that they can act. The UPDF have presented a statement and they want to debate it. 

The procedural issue I am raising is whether the UPDF should present a statement here and then debate it. In fact, the President, who is the Commander-in-Chief, has said that the UPDF Members of Parliament must be a listening post. He said they are here to listen. One General of the UPDF presents a statement and other Generals jump up –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, they did not present a report as the UPDF. The report was presented by the Minister of Internal Affairs. The lady who is on the Floor is here in her own right as a Member of Parliament; she took an oath just like you did. Unless you amend the law that we should not have the army in the House – Dr Nekesa, can you continue please?

COL DR NEKESA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I am going to talk about security. Security is broad. Besides the security personnel with guns, as legislators here, we need to look at some of these things critically. Fresh in the memories, about three years back, we had the Kiddawalime and the heroine, Nakyambadde, coming up. That showed collective responsibility and acts of heroism.

Hardly three years later are similar killings coming up in the same area. We are talking about it as if it is a blame game or finger-pointing. I implore Members of Parliament here that however much we have people with machetes coming up in the community, as one of our Members said, these are criminal acts that are not welcome. They are affecting our electorates - all of us including Members of Parliament - the communities, individuals in the homes and the security system starting from those with guns up to those involved in intelligence gathering. 

As raised by one of us, security is a collective responsibility. We need to look at this issue critically and look at areas of security in broader lenses. We need to emphasise our work here by making the lives of the people of Uganda better. Insecurity could be at a personal level. 

Once we work hard –(Member timed out.) 

COL DR NEKESA: Madam Speaker, I request for one minute. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

COL DR NEKESA: I urge that we all concentrate on getting our people to understand security and to work harder to raise household incomes to get their economic sense of security, health and every other aspects so that they do not try to go and kill others to make statements about their poor economic status, insecurity or anger. Thank you.

3.32
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister who actually served in Masaka –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I am giving you only two minutes each so that the rest can also speak. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, it has taken Government and the security forces in this country, headed by Gen. Muhoozi, who worked in Masaka, a full month to go and make an on-spot assessment of the killings. 

What we need to hear are the remedies. District Police Commanders (DPCs) are given Shs 500,000 as operation funds per month. In districts like Kalungu, Masaka, Lwengo, the DPCs have only one vehicle. At this stage, we are supposed to deploy and the minister must be camping there with other security agencies, to solve this problem.

Madam Speaker, what we are saying is bipartisan and the people being killed are neither in the NRM nor NUP but Ugandans. However, the attention given by the Government must be seen to do something that is viable. Gen. Muhoozi, you were there. What did you see? By now, you would be providing people with whistles in their houses. In case they need pangas, give them the pangas to safeguard themselves. This is not a joke because those killing them use pangas. Provide pangas to our people to safeguard their lives.

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, what we are saying is that Greater Masaka must now be out of curfew because the people being arrested are the ones the security operatives find walking. 

What is happening in our region is that the police go to the bars in Masaka City and other places where people are drinking and they arrest them. I agree that you have to get suspects but Masaka must be out of lockdown now. Train people to guard themselves against these killings. 

However, it is very unfortunate that Government and the security forces have taken a whole month to go there even after hearing about these killings. Gen. Muhoozi went there after a month. He is lucky because normally army commanders who are deployed to head the Masaka Mechanised Brigade usually get promoted to become army commanders, including him. And Gen. Muhoozi knows how he became an army commander because Masaka held him very well and it is the route he takes while going to his home. 

My query to the minister and honourable members is, if this problem was somewhere else outside Buganda and Masaka in particular, would it receive the same attention?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Stop being tribalistic. The same thing has happened in Teso and Karamoja. So, there is nothing special. Issues of security require collective efforts. Let us join hands as members of Parliament and leaders and see how we get out of this.

Otherwise, when we start apportioning blame like it is because it is in Masaka, it is thinking in a very myopic way. 

3.35
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and also invite the Government to take this in good faith. The point that hon. Ssewungu raises is that there are areas in Uganda where people graze their cattle with guns. We all saw hon. Rukutana grazing with an AK 47-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot talk about hon. Rukutana here when he is not able to respond to you. Can you get hon. Rukutana’s name out of that?

MR SSEMUJJU: That matter was brought here and it is on the Hansard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but hon. Rukutana is not here to respond to your allegations.

MR SSEMUJJU: That is why I said that this matter is on the Hansard because it was raised here and hon. Rukutana made a response. Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, make your point without referring to a person who is not in the House.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I fear that the next statement I am going to make may annoy you again. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, I am not annoyed.

MR SSEMUJJU: I was born in Kyazanga, which is in Lwengo District. The minister makes reference to this place. This matter is emotional that while in other areas you will have people grazing with AK47, in our area people are being butchered and those, whose duty it is to protect them, are in Kampala.

Madam Speaker, in the last elections when there were protests here, the whole of my constituency was covered by soldiers; at every school and playground because there was need to protect power. 

I warned Gen. Kayihura that the moment he became a regime protection force and forgets about lives - if there were protests, Gen. Muhoozi would now be in Masaka deploying commandos from Somalia and deploying those in the mountains because in their mind, protection of the regime is more important than protecting lives. That is why they are not in Masaka. That is why policemen do not have fuel –(Applause)

If you are unable to protect our people then allow us to protect ourselves; everybody for himself - (Interruption)

MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Madam Speaker, you guided that this matter should not be politicised. Is it in order for the honourable member - first of all, hon. Ssewungu politicised it by and saying that because it is in Buganda they are not giving them enough attention. Actually, my prayer to you is that that statement be expunged from the record. 

Secondly –(Interjection)–  it is I on the floor. Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  By the way, hon. Enosi Asiimwe is also from greater Buganda.

MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Yes, I am from Buganda and I am speaking as a Muganda, for your information. Madam Speaker, is it, therefore, in order for hon. Ssemujju to politicise this matter yet you had already guided us on not politicising it? Let us all debate this issue as a concern for every Ugandan; whether it is in Buganda, northern region or the south. We all know that when it is insecurity, it is everywhere.

Therefore, I request that the two gentlemen should stop politicising this debate. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, as I told you, nothing can annoy me because we have also gone through the same in Teso. Therefore, it is not good for us to politicise this thing. As I have said before, it is a problem for all of us. It is not only a problem for people of Masaka; it is for all Ugandans. I mean we are here to lead Ugandans and not regions.

Otherwise, if it was for only Masaka, would we be debating it in the House? We would have left it to the people of Masaka. So, let us not politicise this issue but look for a solution for it. Let us jointly discuss this issue without politicising it.

Yes, the security was in your constituency, hon. Ssemujju. Maybe it was protecting you. That should not be an issue. Let us look out for the solutions. What do we do? You should be talking about solutions like, “Let us go to Masaka and find out what we can do for the people of Masaka.”

Otherwise, when you talk like that, the people in Masaka will begin to see you politicise this issue yet we are losing lives day in, day out. We are not here to incite violence in this country as leaders.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the other areas and I said -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Give us a solution and not lamentations.

MR SSEMUJJU: I am providing a solution. When there were problems in northern Uganda, citizens there were asked to form themselves into militia groups like the Arrow Boys, Amuka and they were given guns. If those who are holding guns are unable to protect our people, please go and distribute guns to the people in Masaka like you did with the Arrow Boys and the Amuka Militia and or people will be able to protect themselves. That is the solution I am providing. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you look at the way these killings are occurring, you realise they are targeting older people. This is a community problem. Mobilise the youth to take charge of the area. All we can do is to provide more funds. Youth should work together with the security to protect the area.

Once we get into that, you will not see any person coming to your area. 

3.42
Mr allan ssewanyana (NUP, Makindye Division West, Kampala City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, this is a point for clarity. In your last statement, you mentioned how you are going to inform Cabinet to organise some compassionate assistance to the families that have lost their loved ones and the injured people. One wonders what type of compassion assistance it is. Is it mabugo where someone dies and you give in Shs 50,000 in an envelope or is it compensating for the lost lives? 

This Government has a history that whenever it mentions compensating people who have lost lives in battles due to its negligence, they do not give them that money. Therefore, how sure are we that this time around these people in Masaka will be given some tangible compensation for their lost loved ones and very sure treatment to the injured ones?

To add to the information - because I was about to give information to hon. Ssemujju and I realised that I was the next person to speak, here in Kampala, even play fields have been taken over by security men and put their camp tents. One wonders why, yet we have an urgent problem in Masaka. Why don’t they take them to Masaka and they camp there for two or three months so that they solve that problem once and for all other than being here in Kampala where they do not have anything to do with security threats? (Interruption)

Mr macho: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleagues that I was born on the shores of Lake Victoria in Busia. The population of soldiers there is very alarming. As my colleague said, we have security officers camped almost everywhere in the city. There are more soldiers than the number of fish in Lake Victoria. To give this as evidence, last week, I witnessed when the Fisheries Protection Unit soldiers were burning nets and boats. 

Therefore, I would like to inform the country and request the General – the Minister for Internal Affairs - that those very many soldiers who are keeping the fish should go and keep the people of Greater Masaka. (Laughter)

Ms nanyondo: Further information. Thank you, hon. Ssewanyana. I would like to inform this House that even in 2017/2018 when these thugs attacked Bukomansimbi, His Excellency the President came there and promised the attacked families, one of which was Mr Lumala’s family who is a former police officer, Shs 5,000,000 each but they have never seen the money.

3.46
Mr joel ssenyonyi (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for finally going to Masaka and establishing presence there. Never ever should it happen in this country that people be killed every single day and it takes a whole month for the concerned to establish presence and eventually give a report. 

That said, I would like to give caution. I am glad the minister is a lawyer, I am told. Article 28(3A) of the Constitution of Uganda provides that anybody arrested or charged is presumed innocent until proved guilty or that person pleads guilty. I have seen the police at their conferences saying, “We have arrested these criminals about this particular matter and several others etcetera” and they treat them as such. However, who made you a court of law? These people are suspects.
 
The reason I insist on this matter is because many times when there is a situation such as this, security operatives will scamper and just arrest people. We have seen that happening when somebody is murdered. They will go and arrest Muslims as if it is them killing the people. Eventually, courts have set these people free.

Therefore, it is important that these people who are arrested, because I believe many of them should be innocent, are treated with respect and know that they have got rights accorded to them in the Constitution and that they are innocent. Let us not treat them like they are criminals but let the courts of law prove such. Thank you.

3.47
Mr derrick nyeko (NUP, Makindye Division East, Kampala City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the Shadow Minister for Presidency and Security. 

Over the weekend, I managed to go to Masaka in my capacity as the Shadow Minister. It is overwhelming. I am very disappointed by the statement by the minister. According to the people of Masaka, during elections, the police was deployed everywhere. In this incident, police has been withdrawn to 70 per cent. In a population of 3,000 households, you can only find three police officers. 

It is not the first time for this incident to happen. In 2016 and 2018, these incidences of bijambiya happened in Masaka and police stations were set up. It is so sad that at this moment, all the police stations that were set up in these villages are nowhere to be seen yet the lives of Ugandans are at stake.

Madam Speaker, what I also noticed was that there are few patrol cars and motorcycles. These motorcycles do not have fuel to function. They do not move around; so, if the honourable minister came to the Floor and assured us that they have beefed up security, what reasons do we have, as Parliament, not to call it selective for Masaka? What reasons do we have not to think that security is not doing enough? Has the commander-in-Chief failed to secure the people? (Interruption)

Mr zaake: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to my colleague is that the way the situation is in Masaka is very clear that the Commander-in- Chief, just like hon. Nyeko has said, is not in control. I can remind honourable members that he once said that he cannot preside over a country where people are killed and the people who have done that cannot be brought to book. 

Therefore, I think that we can help this Commander-in-Chief by retiring him. If he cannot retire, as Parliament, we can put him out. We can censure and help him because he made those statements that he cannot preside over a country where people are killed and nothing is being done. Thank you.

The deputy speaker: Hon. Nyeko, you gave out your time. Retiring a Commander-in-Chief is not done by killing people with pangas. There is a proper way of retiring a person and that is by the ballot.

3.51
Mr muhammad kivumbi (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I spent seven years as a Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs. I could only begin by saying that here we go again. It is like shifting agriculture. At every interval, a particular region of the country is visited by this kind of killings. In Masaka, this is not the first time. Two years ago, we had similar killings.

There are some worrying facts by the minister. If I am to corroborate the submission of hon. Bwanika and the minister, I get scared as a Ugandan that even the list of the numbers he has is not correct. That a Ugandan gets killed and the Minister for Security addresses Parliament but he cannot capture how many Ugandans are killed! 

Before we blame other intelligence collapse, how can you stand here in this Parliament and say that there is no information of Ugandans killed, yet you were in Masaka the other day? What more can we ask of you? You are the immediate Chief of Defence Forces (CDF). 

Madam Speaker, when I look at the dates of 5th when the killing started – today is 31st – going by his numbers, the difference between 5th and 31st is 26 days. The number of people killed is 26. That means every single day a Ugandan gets killed.  

However, the minister is here very relaxed. I have also seen army representatives and their mood does not capture the emotion that people are going through - the seriousness and urgency that is required to tackle this issue. It is despicable that subcounties and parishes do not have money for fuel for modest patrol by boda bodas. 

Two, the last time these killings happened – and I will beg to make this statement carefully – Gen. Kale Kayihura was the IGP. I stood before this Parliament –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I stood before this Parliament and informed this country that while we may look too far, the problem could have been at a close corner. Before we knew it, the President said there was “kawukumi”.  Before we knew it, people like Siraje Bakaleke were running for their dear lives. 

Therefore, when these issues happen, before we blame other agencies – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: [Hon. Ssewungu: “Information.”] Hon. Ssewungu, this is not a market where you just shout, “Information.” (Laughter) 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Before these things happen, could you, General, look quite near? You may think the problem is elsewhere when it is the kawukumi, whom over time, you have failed to eradicate from the police and security agencies. 

3.54
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the onset, I would like to say that the emotions being exhibited here should be properly understood and placed in their context. From the onset, my expectations were of a purely bipartisan debate about this matter in the sense that nobody would rise to challenge the emotions exhibited and only the Government would have reason to rise and explain the laissez-faire response on this matter.

What is politics? Call it a science, an art or craft. All said and done, it is an attempt to influence society to behave in a particular predetermined way. To define this conversation as non-political, let us speak to the issues in society. That is my humble appreciation of it. 

Therefore, are we dealing with witchcraft or politics? The honourable gentleman - general as well as the Minister of State for Internal Affairs - did present a statement, which we appreciate. 

On Thursday last week, Madam Speaker, I had a very emotional meeting in the Office of the Speaker with the Minister of Security, Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi, together with the colleagues from the Greater Masaka to try and appreciate the complexity of the matter and whether there was a convincing reason as to why the Government could not come on top of the situation. 

The general convinced us that he was immediately moving to align and work with all teams to come on top of the situation. Since our meeting last week, more than 10 lives have been lost. Just look at the report that the general has ably presented and forget about not being able to capture some deaths. Look at the dates; it is one day after another. 

I would like to inform this Parliament that I have been in Masaka for a number of days. I have met community leaders and sections of security. I would like to report unequivocally and without fear of contradiction to this House that the Government has a very serious confidence deficit from the people of Masaka. 

I would like to implore the General, who Masaka holds so dear because he worked in there, and they have warm feelings about you - that there is a huge deficit of confidence in security.

Over the last few weeks, since this matter came on the Floor of Parliament – because hon. Abed Bwanika only raised it the second time here –(Member timed out.) 

MR MPUUGA: Allow me have this completed, Madam Speaker, because it is very important that we get to understand where we are. I do plead.  

Madam Speaker, we informed the Minister of Security because Dr Abed Bwanika, hon. Kakande and other colleagues moved to meet with the community and security leaders. They were informed that, “We are hardly facilitated; we have no fuel; the motorcycles are grounded and personnel are non-existent.” This was very disturbing. 

That is the same information I was given 10 or eight days after meeting with security. What is the problem? That after 20 or 30 days, not a single minister has found their way to Masaka to even have a meeting with anyone and speak to the people. Instead, the people who speak for security in Masaka have been chiding and challenging the community about their troubles. This is actually why the confidence went down low. 

At the moment, they told the community that look, you people are in defiance of curfew, so, you will be killed. You people, you have your own issues. 

Madam Speaker, this is the House of Parliament and this needs to be properly recorded. The same people manning security in that subregion were the same people who tormented the communities during elections. Even if today you did take there Mambas - (Inaudible) - amount of motorcycles without having to find reasons why you must work with the same people, you are tormenting and hounding suffering people. There is a problem. 

I would like to suggest, in finality. The Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs has undertaken to recruit LDUs. Yesterday, in the meeting I held with the police leadership in Masaka and LC 1 and 2 leaders, the LC leaders complained that the people being recruited as LDUs are alien to the community. They said they see individuals that come and rent in their villages for a week and before they know it, they are their LDU recruits. Therefore, aliens are being recruited into LDUs. 

I would like to raise a red flag to whoever is recruiting LDUs that you think you are going to solve a security problem in the community, please watch your line on who you are recruiting. Involve the LCs in who you are recruiting.

Secondly, a conversation whether you actually need to recruit LDUs or more police constables; this should really be assessed. I want to invite my friends to rethink what they are doing; whether the budget available should go to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to recruit more police constables or you need LDUs, the way we know them. 

Thirdly, we would like to share the findings of the Government, when we had the same problem between 2017 and 2018. We are being asked to do this symbiotically as people but we do not have information about the findings of the Government over the past same manner of killings. So, how do we help?

Lastly, having communicated about the deficit of confidence in the organs of the State, as far as security is concerned, I would like to invite this House to consider sending the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to go the communities down there and look at the root of the problem by interacting with them and other stakeholders. 

My sense is that the community will open up to the committee of Parliament, so that we can debate their findings in a time so short that we can arrest the problem with a lasting solution, where the leaders of the people from Parliament, have made an input and have done their oversight. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition (LOP). Hon. Olanya, when your LOP speaks, it is assumed your team has spoken. 

4.04
PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Independent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for presenting this statement. I join those who condemn the killers of our innocent people. There is no Ugandan who deserves to be killed in such a manner. 

I come from a research background and so, I can hypothesize that with God, as an independent variable, strategic intelligence and quality investigation as intervening variables, you will have stability as a dependent variable in the greater Masaka.

I have listened carefully to the minister’s statement and I find a very strong element of strategic intelligence. Therefore, I would like to applaud him on that. Strategic intelligence is very critical. In such a situation, if you rush without evidence and intelligence, you are bound to make mistakes and so, I would like to advise you to scale up strategic intelligence.

Your statement says that you want to deploy additional troops in the area to boost the confidence of the people. This is a very good move and we should thank you, honourable minister, because our communities need to see confidence. 

I heard hon. Ssemujju talk about deployment in certain areas in Kampala; I think it must be for a purpose. In this case, additional troops, as suggested by the minister, is very important and I support it.

Finally, honourable minister, I would like to suggest that in your –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member is seriously emphasising strategic intelligence. Right now, in each parish and subcounty, we have very serious structured intelligence. We have Parish Internal Security Officers (PISOs), the Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISOs) and the District Internal Security Officers (DISOs). 

These days when you find 10 people gathered up somewhere, you must know that there is an intelligence person among them. So, is the honourable member in order to thank the minister for applying strategic intelligence, yet they have failed to apply the critical and tactical intelligence in this matter? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, I knew you wanted to speak. (Laughter) The honourable member is only saying that we need strategic intelligence to help us identify the culprits who are killing people. We do not need to rush. We need to close that deficit of confidence that has been lost. We need to have the people, who are going to see who is doing what, not what you are meaning. The Member is in order.

PROF. MUSHEMEZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. At Makerere University, I taught a course called “Strategic Intelligence.” There is what we call tactical intelligence, operational intelligence and strategic intelligence. 

However, let me wind up this way. When you look at the patterns of killings and you have studied patterns in terrorist situations, you realise that there is a correlation between people who kill without taking property and those who kill, when they want something. Minister, you need to look at that pattern and look at what happens in terrorist situations, as you carry out more investigations. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.09
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I want to stand with the people of Masaka, who have lost their loved ones. It is really painful that this can still happen in the 21st Century. It is unfortunate and we must all stand together.

If I recall very well, between 2017 and 2018, the President of this country came to this House and took us through the measures that would resolve the security situation in this country. One of them, if I may recall, was the use of modern technology cameras, yet today we are talking about recruitment of LDUs and soldiers. 

Madam Speaker, we have moved beyond this. We are moving in a world of technology, where I expected the minister to be telling us how they are going to install more cameras in Masaka and how they are going to sort security issues using technology because it is easier to trace a criminal using technology. 

If this is handled well and this Parliament approves a budget to scale up the camera presence and technology in the villages, the number of these criminals will automatically reduce.

I thank you for the report but there is a part that the minister came and talked about on the Floor. You talked about supporting the family – that Government has supported the family with something. 

Madam Speaker, could the minister unpack this “something”? What is this “something” that you were talking about, honourable minister, so that Parliament is aware and supports you. In case you want to get that “something” from maybe the Budget, we shall support you so that you have the budget appropriated and then we stand with the people of Masaka.

Madam Speaker, I end with this: when talking about matters of security, let us speak as Ugandans because this concerns all of our lives. Let us support the minister in any way we can with information so that this matter is resolved once and for all and the people of Masaka settle down. 
I beg to submit.

4.13
MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this chance again.

Colleagues have debated. I do not come from that region. Just recently in Kyazanga, where I have friends, I got some information. It would be better for us to assist the minister with such information but not condemn each other - whether Government ministries or whatever.

Madam Speaker, the minister is not –(Interruption)

MR SSEWANYANA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order; that the honourable member is standing and holding something we do not understand. Are we safe? Some of us are not used to juju. (Laughter) We might get blind from Parliament. Is he in order?

MR MUSILA: Very much in order, as a Rastaman. Madam Speaker, let me answer that for myself. (Laughter)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. John Musila is a leader of the Salvation Army. That is why you see him dressed like that. I have not seen what he is holding. He is also a Rastaman.

MR MUSILA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Wa gwaan! This is my talisman.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. John Musila, do not come with it tomorrow. (Laughter) 

MR MUSILA: Madam Speaker, I draw a lot of prowess from this thing. Secondly –(Interjections) – Let me answer for myself. Rule 82 also talks about traditional dress and this is part of my raditional gear. That is only diversionary for what I was going to say –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. John Musila, do not come with that stick tomorrow.

MR MUSILA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. (Mr Okupa rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is in order now. 

MR MUSILA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, let us conclude this discussion. The way you are talking, it is like there is nobody lying in the grave. You are taking this thing very lightly. We want to get a solution to the matters that are happening in Masaka. We are now starting like –

MR MUSILA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that protection. Indeed, I can see a lot of diversionary issues. We are here as well to advise, as a country, when we are debating national issues. We shall not debate them in procedures and points of order like that. The people of Uganda need genuine debate.

That aside, I was in Kyazanga and I wanted to add to the minister’s statement because he did not come up with very salient motives as to why these people are killing our citizens.

There are two things: one is political and the other one is socio-cultural. The political one is reminiscent of the 1960s – 1970 when the Kkondos were here. They also started within the central region here.

The purpose of it, is of course to discredit the present Government, have it maybe take drastic measures, possibly declare a state of emergency, which itself has other underlying issues.

Madam Speaker, the socio-cultural front - my friends in Kyazanga, where I have been for quite a long time –(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA: Madam Speaker, you have clearly said that we debate in a non-partisan way. For an honourable member to come here to draw conclusions and say there is a political motive and that people want to discredit Government - that they are working to ensure that a state of emergency is declared in the central region -  is not only being sectarian in his speech; he is also throwing deep conclusions over this matter.

Unless you furnish this Parliament with actual facts of a write-up of a rebel group and unless you know it, are part of it and you know their motive; are you in order to draw that conclusion that a certain group has a political motive? Do you know it? Have they spoken? Are you part of them? Are you in order, therefore, honourable colleague?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, at the beginning of this debate, we said we should stop being sectarian. We should stop bringing politics into this. Lives have been lost. Members in the Opposition, please sit down. 

We agreed to put politics aside in this debate. Let us look at a solution. Let us stop the blame game. If the issue is there is no money, as a House, we must provide money. If the issue is that there is no personnel, as a House, we must provide an order for personnel to be taken to Masaka. Let us stop that.

Hon. John Musila, we cannot debate in that way. 

MR MUSILA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have no connotations of sectarianism and I pray that the Member actually is –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

4.19
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the report that he has made.

Professor talked about the independent variables but he did not tell us the literature review. (Laughter) You may all recall that in 2017/2018, we had a similar situation of killings in Masaka region. 

So, what is the literature review, arising from that time? I thought the Minister of Internal Affairs should have taken us through identification of the problems at that time, before we prescribe very good solutions that we need for this matter. 

Madam Speaker, we have heard of issues of facilitation. I think this is a general cry everywhere. We are starting the appropriation period very soon. We would desire that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes here with a request for appropriation to resolve many challenges we have in terms of policing, not only in Masaka but across the country.

When you look at many police posts across the country, they are not well facilitated. Today, it might be Masaka; tomorrow, it might shift to another place. Can you, honourable minister, come up with a very good request for facilitation, in terms of your requirements, not only for Masaka but across the country?

Personally, in my constituency, I have been invited, time and again, to pay rent for a police post. Now that –(Member timed out.)

4.21
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, when you lose a family member, neighbours come and condole with you but the pain of losing a family member remains yours. This is the problem for the people of Buddu. What are the solutions you are suggesting?

I heard Prof. Mushemeza talk about intelligence. Sometimes, these things go beyond an academic classroom. We are talking about lives. It is true we need to invest in intelligence because if you invest in intelligence, you can pre-empt the problem. Whether we put there a thousand soldiers from the Local Defence Unit, that is purely for scaring. What is the problem with our intelligence?

I expected the Minister, Office of the President (Security) to be here because these are the people we charge everyday with the duty of providing Gen. Muhoozi with intelligence from which he can act. We have a whole elaborate security system. This is an indictment on the intelligence of this country. It is not about the UPDF or the police but internal security.

Therefore, until we address the challenges within our internal security, we are going to have this problem. We come after crimes have been committed and lives are lost. 

What happened in 2018? Maybe the Minister of State for Internal Affairs was not in that ministry at that time. He needs to look into his files or ask his predecessors for the report about the bijambiya of 2018. If we do not have a report on that, we are certainly going into the unknown again and yet we have, over and over again, asked – 

We had this report, honourable colleagues who have just joined this institution. We had this debate for almost a week in the last Parliament. We thought it had ended. Now the ugly head resurfaces. What are we going to do? Even after this, are we not going to have the same problem?

Really, my prayer is to the Minister, Office of the President (Security) to up his act. This is not politicking. You cannot do politicking with people’s lives. Nobody scores a political point. Why should anybody play politicking because somebody has died? We are talking about lives of our own people. If we need investment, let us invest in security and intelligence. 

This is not even about strategic intelligence and so on. It is about raw information. I am a son of the former Director General of the National Security Services of this country. I am a son of security and I know these things. If you do not invest in intelligence, you are wasting time. Even tomorrow, we will face the same problem. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Katuntu. It is actually raw data not information. 

4.26
MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we discuss these matters today, I seek that we do not just look for a drug for the symptoms. We need a cure for the disease. We need a vaccine to prevent this from happening because this is not the first time we are hearing about this. 

I thank Minister Muhoozi for the report he has presented. There are however three patterns in these incidences that we are observing. The first is that more than 90 per cent of the victims are male. We have seen patterns before where the victims have been female. We therefore do not just need strategic intelligence. We need strategic interventions on this group of people.

The second pattern is that more than 60 per cent of these persons are above 50 years of age. Again, that is indicative. I would have expected the intelligence to gather this data.

The third pattern is that all these incidences have taken place between 20:00 hours and 22:00 hours. These are times when there are isolated incidences. Do we have phone intelligence to be able to support this?

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I request that for us to exhaustively address this issue, not just for today, but also for tomorrow, we have a select committee to assist in this –(Interruption)

MR BATUWA: Thank you, honourable member, for granting me the opportunity to give information. I would like to inform the House that there is a difference between the police and the military. The difference actually speaks towards solving such a problem. The military people are trained to counter external forces and collective enemies whereas individual or isolated cases are better handled by the police.

In Uganda, we have militarised the police so, we have to discuss effectively whether we have bettered the police or made it worse. It is at that point that I interest the House that maybe we get the view of the senior police people on how they would counter such a problem, because it looks more of a police issue than a military one. Thank you.

MR OPIO: Madam Speaker, as I was concluding –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opio, you have used up your time. 

4.29
MR FRED KAYONDO (DP, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This House should know that the people of Masaka who lost their loved ones are watching us. They are grieving while they see this Parliament taking orders and procedures over the matter that took the lives of their loved ones. 

You made a wise ruling, Madam Speaker, and said that when we stand here, we should look for solutions. Last week, the Speaker said, “If you stand on this Floor, you should speak from an informed point of view”. I took a drive to Masaka personally because I wanted to stand before you and speak from an informed point of view. The police in the area are incapacitated. They are demoralised. 

If we are going to act as Ugandans, allow me to inform the minister that we have so many police officers guarding the property of private people instead of being deployed to go and calm the situation in Masaka. Take an example of my constituency – (Interruption)

MR MUGOLE: Madam Speaker, whereas this debate is bipartisan, having listened to the Leader of the Opposition eloquently put a proposal that we should have a select committee to go and handle -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  There was no proposal of a select committee and hon. Mugole, I am chairing the House and I will make orders as the Speaker. 

MR KAYONDO: Madam Speaker, I was making a proposal that we have so many police officers who are guarding private property of the “big men” in this country. For Example, in my area Mukono South in a place called Buziranjovu, there is a piece of land that belongs to a Muzungu; he has a whole station with over 15 police officers guarding his land. We have so many of this kind in this country. If we can have personnel –(Member timed out.)

4.32
MR MWINE MPAKA (NRM, Mbarara South Division, Mbarara City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to what my colleague talked about regarding intelligence. You cannot have security effectively do its job without a good intelligence system.

In 2019, the GISOs took the government to court over unpaid salaries. In the Attorney-General’s defence, he said there was no evidence that ISO had ever hired the GISOs; therefore, automatically dismissing the existence of GISOs.

We very well know that at the district level, one of our key resources for intelligence is the GISOs. Through you, Madam Speaker, I believe it is high time Government brought a report to this House on the status of the GISOs in this country. I beg to submit.

4.33 
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The area of Kabonera has always had issues. When we were investigating human rights violations, the people in Masaka testified about a lot of terror that they underwent during elections and now, the killings are on. Remember they had happened in 2017 and 2018. In my submission, I would like to say something about the issue of intelligence. There is something wrong with our intelligence if up to now, we have not - (Interjection) - allow me to use my time well because the Speaker will say that I have given you my time. Please! 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let him clarify.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, honourable member, for yielding the Floor. It is still your time and I would like you to speak to the very issue you have hinted on regarding the committee you chaired that highlighted gross human rights violations; what happened to that record? We have been looking for it on the Floor of Parliament; no report was given. At what stage are we? Where did we end with that report? You seem to have the information by yourself and a few members.
 
MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition. You are aware that we concluded and that is one of the reports that we did not present. I propose that we can handle that issue from another forum but for now, it is the issue of Masaka -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We can reinstate the report if it is of help to this country.

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Therefore, I was submitting that the issue of intelligence leaves a lot to be desired. Yesterday, I saw RDCs being transferred; what has the minister done about his intelligence system; the ISOs, DISOs and GISOs? What is it? If they cannot provide information, what action has been taken?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the recommendations are very good but at this point in time, I get a little bit uncomfortable with recommendations. Maybe he would have said that they are going to do this or that they are requesting for support because they are going to deploy but to whom is he recommending? The minister is the one in charge and he is part of the government. Therefore, I would prefer a little more action-oriented submission than the recommendations. 

Lastly, on the issue of security right now in Masaka - when you go to the mandate, the police are charged with the mandate of keeping law and order. However, as of now, issues have gone beyond mere maintaining law and order; it is a matter that we need to handle together so that we get rid of the insecurity totally in Masaka.

Regarding the curfew, Madam Speaker, I would actually suggest that curfew needs to be implemented as it is. Where do people with machetes pass to go and kill people between 8.00 and 10.00 p.m. or whatever the time when nobody is supposed to move beyond 7 o’clock? I thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. When you talk about action-oriented measures where they are asking for money - hon. Angura was saying that we are going into a budgeting time, this is an emergency. We cannot wait for the budgeting process; we need money to be provided for this activity as we plan for the rest of the country. We cannot wait for the budgeting time on that.

4.38
MR SIMON OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue that we are discussing relates to human security. Now, on human security, the first line of defence is the people; the person or the human being. That is why a certain gentleman, Che Guevara, said that you must have constant vigilance, constant mobility and constant suspicion on anything around you so that you can be able to provide yourself with the required human security.

Now, if the first line of defence or security is the people or population, let us take for example, security to be like a lake. In a lake there is water and in that water there is aquatic life. In other words, let me take particular interest in the fish. There is fish in the water. Now, let us take water to be the people, and let the fish be the criminals –(Interjections)– listen carefully for this is a very important point. If the fish - I request for just 20 seconds –(Member timed out.)

4.41
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg your indulgence to start from a point of how best we can improve our debate and have a cohesive House.
When I meet my side of the House, I emphasise to them that when colleagues from the other side are speaking - of course we do have a few issues but we usually request them that, allow your colleagues to speak. Reduce the points of order, procedure or anything that is disruptive. They might not be perfect - we have very many points of order or procedure to raise but we believe that for the flow of debate, it is always good for a few issues to be left. That is why I begged your indulgence, Madam Speaker. I believe when –(Interruption)

The deputy speaker: On what issue are you raising a point of order? He is raising his issue. Why don’t you listen? Hon. Ssewungu, sit.

Mr THOMAS tayebwa: Madam Speaker, I am concerned about this matter because we have colleagues who raise 10 points of order in a session and 10 points of procedure –

The deputy speaker: Can you get to your point now. We have understood.

Mr THOMAS tayebwa: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I looked at my colleagues, especially the Leader of the Opposition and hon. Kivumbi and their passion and empathy on this matter. It is a matter, which touches me deeply.

I would like to clear only two things. The way we are created is different. When you look at Gen. Muhoozi – and I have known him over time; he is like that. Gen. Muhoozi might not be good at sharpening his voice but he is good at sharpening his brain. He might look as if he is not all that –

The deputy speaker: Is that a solution to the issues in Masaka?

Mr tayebwa: No, Madam Speaker. 

The deputy speaker: Let us discuss issues of security. Leave Gen. Muhoozi. Nobody has commented about him.

Mr THOMAS tayebwa: Madam Speaker, I am raising that matter because two things came up – (Interjections) – it is the Speaker who allows points of order, not you ordering me.

Two things came up; one, confidence in the Government and, two, saying that our officers do not have compassion. These are people on my side. Therefore, I believe it is very important to talk about my colleagues.

The deputy speaker: Give us solutions to the insecurity matter in Masaka. Do not talk about Gen. Muhoozi. We know him, maybe more than you do.

Mr tayebwa: Madam Speaker, we are very passionate about this matter and concerned, like any other person. 

Going to the issue of recommendations, I have seen these as a matrix of action on the side of the Government. Can we interrogate them further? For example, I propose that the Minister of Internal Affairs meets the political leaders from Greater Masaka so that they can appreciate the situation and move together. The moment we say that people of Greater Masaka have lost confidence in Government, yet it is one they must be with for the next five years, then who are you saying they have confidence in? 

If we share this and as a community, we listen to you - because I have not seen it among recommendations that the minister is engaging political leaders from the areas, I believe that would be very important.

Finally, colleagues, when issues –

The deputy speaker: Let me make an amendment to your prayer that the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Security go to the ground with the leaders of Greater Masaka; and not just meeting in air-conditioned places here. They should go on the ground and assess the situation.

Mr THOMAS tayebwa: Thank you for improving my proposal. Finally, colleagues, when we get to the time of appropriation and we are looking at this sector, I request all of us to support the Government’s proposals on improving the situation of the sector because the ministry is raising the issue of logistics. The moment we look at that deeply - our security forces coming in to protect us and do not bring in issues of elections of what happened - I think we shall proceed well. Thank you.

The deputy speaker: Hon. John, on what issue is your point of procedure?
 
Mr musila: On rule 82, especially on dress code. I am very uncomfortable because one of the honourable members of this House is not dressed appropriately for this House. The one sitting near hon. Karim - the way she is facing this way, I am wondering how, especially for the young Members - if I can be like this to the young Members?

The deputy speaker: Where is hon. Karim?

Mr musila: She is directly here, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

The deputy speaker: She is now sitting properly. Can I have the minister? Hon. Ssewungu, go back to where you were seated.
 
Gen. muhoozi: Madam Speaker and honourable members, we have listened carefully and heard the concerns of Members. They were many and they spoke with their hearts. I would like to commend them for this candid discussion. This is an important matter. Voices were raised and understandably so.

I would like to start with hon. Bwanika, who noted the discrepancies in the particulars of victims. We shall compare notes. 

However, if you put yourself in my shoes, it is not a very pleasant experience – coming here to read names of victims, one after the other. Therefore, hon. Kivumbi, I did not enjoy it, even if it was one name. The bottom line is that we need to scratch our heads hard and get solutions -

The deputy speaker: General, update your list, working together with the team from Masaka so that the record in Parliament will be a correct one.

Gen. Muhoozi: Yes, I will. Hon. Enock raised issues of intelligence and many people amplified it. On gaps in intelligence, we went even into details of strategic, tactical and operational intelligence. I think we need all of them. This matter is intelligence-heavy. We have invested a lot in strategic intelligence - those things of cameras and other technical means. Whatever we have, I would like to assure you that we have deployed in Masaka.

However, like hon. Katuntu said, we need to do more at tactical level. It is very key - and also protection of information sources. There were issues we noted when we went there and we shall make improvements on the effectiveness of intelligence. 

Hon. Nanyondo talked about paintings on houses. I did not see any but if I get more substantiated information from her, we can follow up on that matter. However, for her to allude that maybe it is rogue elements within us, I think she took it too far. We do not have evidence to say that the security is responsible for these killings; it is not. 

Hon. Abed Bwanika, we shall refine the record and get back to the House. Yes, there were issues of operational logistics, inadequacy and mobility such as fuel. We are addressing this in the interim. Going forward, we are looking at stopping the killings in the immediate term but also addressing some of the other bigger issues in the medium and long-term.

Dr Twaha talked about extortion. We shall follow that up. If you may, hon. Twaha, provide me with information. Otherwise, I do not want to act on a mistaken identity; I need proof. It is fair that you provide me with further details and trust me to follow through so that we get in touch and see the actions taken, especially on the O.C of Nkoni Station, who extorted Shs 3.0 million, which the honourable member mentioned, in order to release one of the suspects. 

Hon. Kiwanuka, I thought I had put your issue of minding due process at rest in the committee, yet it has followed me through. Yes, we shall mind due process. I would like to promise you in the case of those arrested so that all the legal requirements are complied with. 

Hon. Ssewungu talked about self-help; that people should pick pangas – I think that would be an abdication of duty by the Government to say that “now, you take over.” I do not know if hon. Ssewungu has any association with Interahamwe. However, we are not there yet. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the honourable minister finish his submission?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the General is my friend and if I give him information, it is in good faith. 

THE DEPUTY: No, let the General finish his submission. 

MR SSEWUNGU: It is in good faith – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: General, can you continue? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, let me give him this information? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can he continue? 

MR SSEWUNGU: He would like the information. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I do not like it. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Okay, I will give it to him outside the Chamber for the good of this problem.  

GEN. MUHOOZI: Hon. Ssewungu also mentioned the issue of curfew, as a constraint. Yet, other Members are saying that it is actually a plus. If you are not a security agent, then what are you doing out there? It is one of the issues we want to refine our thoughts to. Even if it is a waiver, it should be organised so that we allow out only the LCs that are going to work with security at night.

Hon. Ssemujju and hon. Ssewungu again said that if it was not Buganda, the response would have been faster and more robust. I would like to say that is incorrect. This matter is not a tribal issue, like many Members have said. This is a national matter of concern and we have given this area as much attention as we would give any other area. Therefore, I implore Members not to tribalise this matter of Lwengo, Masaka and other affected areas. 

Hon. Ssewanyana said “Is this compensation or compassionate assistance?” Madam Speaker, What is the worth of a human being, even if you are to compensate them? I do not think human life can be computed in monetary terms. What I was thinking is some –(Interruption) 

MR MPUUGA: You probably need to clarify as part of the reassurance you made at the beginning the money, the Government would like to extend to the affected families. Otherwise, we have two challenges. One is that the problems are different. We have the sick. On Saturday, together with hon. Bwanika and hon. Juliet, we visited the families that had survivors. They were nursing septic wounds and we had to mobilise money to help them go to hospital. 

We have the sick, the dead and those whose houses were burnt down. What is the timeline? May we also know the figures to understand the depth of how compassionate the Government is? The timeline is also very important as part of the assurance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition, the issue of the timeline and the amount will be determined by our committee.

GEN. MUHOOZI: Madam Speaker, I have been advised by the Government Chief Whip that you have directed and guided that I summarise. This is not to prejudice the mention of the honourable members, as they asked the questions. 

In summary, we shall work on the details of the victims and resubmit them to the House. We shall also work on logistics and we have already begun where they were inadequate. We have sent motorcycles, vehicles and fuel to support the operations. We have reinforced the boots on the ground and we have also enhanced intelligence collection aspects of this operation. 

I think the trust issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition are an overly judgemental statement. Otherwise, I think there are people who are willing to support the Government in this matter. Even the community is willing to give information to resolve this problem once and for all. 

Community policing is the way to go. We cannot be everywhere and going forward, this will be part of the medium and long term plan. We want to embark on training some people within the community, vetted by the community who will work with the vigilante teams to support the foundation on security. The nomenclature on whether they are SPCs or LDUs does not matter. However, I think the most important thing is to improve the first level of response at the village level.

In regards to assistance or compensation, I think we shall segregate the cases of those that were injured and are in hospital, as well as those that lost loved ones and see what the Government can work out to give to the concerned families. We shall follow due process. 

Self-help has no place in our law enforcement and I would like to say that the Government is still able to provide security to the people and their property. 

There are lessons we learnt from this including motivation. But for starters, we would like to deal with those responsible for these killings; whatever their motives are. Of course, intelligence and investigations will unearth whatever motivations drove them into doing what they did. 

We have done the search and deployed all the capabilities available; the technical ones. We have improved logistics, done arrests and investigations are going on. The culprits will be prosecuted. 

Madam Speaker, I am sorry for the way I wrote the recommendations but some of these things are already being undertaken as actions. That is what the Government is doing. Let us work together to resolve this matter once and for all.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Can I have the Prime Minister?

5.01
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to join the Members to condemn the killings going on in Masaka and the neighbouring districts. As far as Government is concerned, the minister has said it all. 

However, I want to assure Members that the killings going on are a security matter and so, it is not good to politicise them like it has been said before. We need to handle these killings in a sensitive way that should not put the people in Masaka to think Government is just playing with it.

Yesterday, His Excellency, the President talked about the same issue and assured us that some kind of support would be extended to the affected families.

He however, said that we should not intervene; people should not go and gather at the scenes of crime because there is need to let the police gather the evidence from those scenes. If people gather in those places, the evidence gets tampered with – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, the scenes of crime should be protected, not so?

MS NAKADAMA: Yes, the scenes of crime should be protected.

As the minister was saying, we should work together. Members of Parliament should appeal to their people not to gather such scenes of crime. We need to protect the scenes of crime. 

I do not have much to say but just to assure Members that Government is on top of the situation. Government is working hard to ensure the killings do not continue and every life matters.

Otherwise, security personnel are working hard to see that the killings are stopped. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members, for this debate. After listening attentively to the debate from both sides, we realise that the insecurity in Masaka is a local community organised crime network that must be cracked down by the leaders and locals of the area. It is us to lead the security operatives in those areas because we know these areas more than them. This matter can be handled when the political leaders work together with the security agencies.

I am ordering the political leaders in the greater Masaka area to get back on ground and work with the security forces to ensure we get these criminals. Let us not leave everything in the hands of the security agencies. Let us work together with these security agencies. Let us have one command centre and control, where all the available information can be provided and shared instead of bringing piecemeal information to Parliament. Once we work together as leaders of the people and security, then we will bring this to an end.

A special budget must be put to this activity. Government, we want a special budget to be put to this activity. We do not want a situation where they will say there is no fuel in the motorcycles or vehicles. 

The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs together with the ministers of Internal Affairs, Security and Defence an veteran affairs, go to the ground, on behalf of this Parliament, and find out what is happening and report back to this House on the actions taken within two weeks. 

We want action not lamentations. We want to see action that has been taken - not having another 26 people killed within 26 days. This issue can easily be handled, especially at the community level. The killers are not armed with guns, and because they do not have guns, you can be able – I liked what somebody said that curfew must be brought back; stringent measures should be put in place. If you are moving in the night, what are you looking for? Who are you? Everybody should be in their homes. 

The pattern has been identified; they are looking for the old people, who cannot defend themselves. Get vigilantees to ensure nobody goes to their respective villages. If you do not belong to that village, why should you go there? We had the same issue in Teso and when we formed the Arrow Boys, the problem was solved.

Finally, let us not politicise this issue. Let us be mindful of our voters. It is not anything that is arranged for a particular area. Let us protect people outside there. I wish once more to thank you for the debate. We expect a report from you but security can be giving us regular reports on what is happening.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON COMPENSATION OF VICTIMS OF THE LORD’S RESISTANCE ARMY (LRA) AND NATIONAL RESISTANCE ARMY (NRA) INSURGENCY IN VARIOUS PARTS OF THE COUNTRY

5.09
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, after doing wide consultations, on the Government side, we are requesting that you allow us and the Attorney-General to meet the members of Parliament from the affected areas to agree on a clear way forward. 

We request to come back in two weeks and report to this House. The Attorney-General is not around and has requested me to –(Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Welcome back from Rome. We receive the greetings and blessings from His Holiness, the Pope. 

While presiding over the House the other week, you directed the Deputy Attorney-General to amend this particular motion because I raised it on this Floor and drew the attention of this Parliament to the fact that insurgency and the compensation of victims should not be restricted to LRA. I really support that our fellow citizens up north really deserve the compensation. I support it 100 per cent.

I also felt it was prudent to save the time of Parliament in the sense that every other time, we just keep bringing in compensation. Why can’t we have a consolidated motion that puts into consideration places like Kasese? 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that I raised the matter of the ADF. In 2016, they went and murdered 10 citizens in Kitooro Subcounty. Their crime? They were serving the NRM Government. Their families have never been compensated. The same ADF went to Kiburara, burnt the schools and tractors but there was no compensation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins, you have now gone to the substance of the matter. The report that the Government Chief Whip is talking about is that the Attorney-General is requesting for two weeks for him to have a meeting with affected persons and leaders from the affected areas, which two weeks I am granting. 

The Attorney-General should come and report back. He should have a meeting with leaders from those affected areas and come and report to this House on the action taken, not on the issue of compensation anymore. 

We want to know how many people have been compensated and from which region, since the money was provided. In two weeks, we expect that.

MR ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what issue are you raising a point of procedure?
 
MR ODUR: When I look through the records of this House, especially the Hansard building up to this motion, it appears to me that there was an issue with the LRA compensation. It appears to me that there was also an issue with the cattle compensation as a result of the Karimojong insurgency.

When you look at the records critically, we have issues of compensation that are arising out of court awards. There was a Civil Suit No. 027 in Soroti. Hon. Okupa and the rest were there. There is also a High Court Civil Suit arising from Lira where court also made a pronouncement.

The way the motion is worded here will give leeway to Government to come and only address the issue of the LRA compensation and yet the issue of compensation in the North; Lango, Acholi and Teso also involves the issue of the Karimojong compensation.

The reason I seek your indulgence is to guide Government so that when they come, they look at the issue of compensation broadly but also not restrict ourselves to what is on the Order Paper about the LRA compensation only. If we do that, we are going to miss the point, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you look at the Order Paper, it says, “Compensation of victims of the LRA/NRA insurgency in various parts of the country”.

MR ODUR: Yes, but the basis –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know why you people are speaking. I have made a ruling to that effect. Can we go to the next item? Hon. Elijah Okupa has a case on that one. It is a known fact so he knows.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE MERGER OF MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES

5.15
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech. (Laughter) Therefore, I deserve protection.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Muruli -

MR MURULI-MUKASA: This being my maiden speech –(Interruption)

DR BYAKATONDA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. Without prejudice, I have worked with my senior colleague as a member of the National Negotiating and Consultative Council in the Ministry of Public Service.

The ministry in question is the custodian of all laws; the Employment Act, the Workman’s Compensation, the Labour Union Act - There is a key Act called Public Service (Negotiating, Consultative and Disputes Settlement Machinery) Act. 

The framers of this Act intended to ensure that such matters like mergers are negotiated. Under section 3, there is what we call the Consultative Committees. Under section 4, there is what we call the National Negotiating and Consultative Council.

The framers also put items –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter here. Are you on procedure?

DR BYAKATONDA: I am on procedure, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is on procedure. 

DR BYAKATONDA: Madam Speaker, the point of procedure is –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr, why don’t you first listen to the minister?

DR BYAKATONDA: No, it is a procedural issue, Madam Speaker, which can actually result into a lot of legal litigations. I am giving a procedural issue so that the matter can be well guided.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What procedural issue are you are giving him? You have not heard from him.

DR BYAKATONDA: Madam Speaker, the point I am making is that first, under the Public Service (Negotiating, Consultative and Disputes Settlement Machinery) Act, the matter was supposed to be subjected to consultation with the labour union.

The merger should be derived from consultations, which is under – It says, “The principle and procedures –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why are you pre-empting what the minister is going to give you? 

DR BYAKATONDA: Madam Speaker, it cannot be subjected to discussion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, can you present?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your elevation to that very important post. Congratulations, indeed!

The House required me to present a progress report on the implementation of the rationalisation of Government agencies and public expenditure. That is exactly what I would like to do now.

Madam Speaker, Cabinet, on 22 February 2021, under Minute 43, took a decision to merge, mainstream and rationalise Government agencies, Commissions, Authorities and public expenditure to facilitate efficient and effective service delivery. 

In order to effectively implement the decision, Cabinet approved an implementation roadmap for the implementation process to be spread over a period of two years; that is 2021/2022 up to 2022/2023. As of today, we have covered just over one month.

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform this august House that the main objective of the reform is to eliminate structural and functional duplications and overlaps, wasteful expenditure and realise resultant short-term and long-term savings in line with the approved implementation roadmap.

Implementation of the recommendations on the Rationalisation of Agencies and Public Expenditure (RAPEX) is in line with Chapter 20, Objective 2 of the Third National Development Plan (NDP III),
which underpins streamlining Government architecture for efficient and effective service delivery to align with new programme planning, budgeting and implementation.

Out of 157 Government agencies which were reviewed under the rationalisation exercise, a decision was taken to merge, mainstream and transfer the functions of 77 agencies and 80 to be retained. 

Since then, 80 of the institutions have been fully privatised, bringing the number of the institutions to be merged, mainstreamed and transferred to 69. This is clearly shown in Annex I attached to this statement.

What is the problem and devil that we would like to cure? I wish to state that the high growth rate of Government agencies in Uganda has continued to create jurisdictional ambiguities and drain the national treasury at the expense of effective service delivery, overstretch the capacity of Government to sustain agencies, cause salary disparity between agency employees and the traditional civil servants, leading, in some cases, to wastage of resources, which would, otherwise, be committed to providing other critical public services in the sectors of health, education, infrastructures and et cetera.

A situational analysis of Government agencies in Uganda established that some agencies were created without clear justification. Others had their mandates overtaken by events while others were pseudo Government projects, which operated in a similar manner as agencies. 

Whereas the 1995 Constitution provides for a definite number of agencies, commissions and authorities, boards, local councils and other statutory bodies, I wish to inform the House that a multitude of public agencies were later created by statutes, Acts of Parliament, Executive Orders and in some cases, administrative arrangements. 

It is against this background that His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, in his letter dated 17 July 2017, raised a number of concerns on the several mushrooming agencies and demanded for clear practical recommendations to rationalise public institutions to ensure efficiency of Government.

I wish to report to this august House on the main achievements so far with regards to this exercise:

Cabinet sub-committee, the inter-ministerial technical committee and secretariat to drive the implementation process have already been constituted and they are operational. 

Preliminary documents to be used as reference points for the implementation process have already been prepared and approved. For example, the action law plan, the work plan and the budget; the stakeholders’ engagement plan, the communication strategy, the implementation guidelines, the issues log, the change management strategy and report on the effects of rationalisation on local government.

Institutional review and reorganisation for some institutions without legal impediments has already commenced. The team is fast-tracking the review and the reorganisation. For instance, the Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Education and Sports and 11 agencies under the Education and Sports Sector, the Amnesty Commission, the Rural Electrification Agency whose legal framework, as we talk now, expired. 

Stakeholders’ engagement meetings have been undertaken for 68 institutions and 18 sector ministries. This has been detailed in Annex II.

Commencement of the following reviews is underway. Madam Speaker, let me report where implementation has commenced and is on schedule. 

Review of the legal and policy framework for the affected institutions.
System review and business process re-engineering.
Implementation of approved structures.
Validation of staff to be re-employed and compensation of body of staff.
Undertaking job evaluation and harmonisation of the salary structure across the service.
Review of Government structures for the affected institutions.
Development of an administrative reform model for the public service for the next ten years.

This is the plan which we have:

Phase 1: 2021/2022 will focus on a comprehensive review of the 18 Government ministries and 77 agencies, which were affected by the merger, mainstreaming and transfer of functions. This is ongoing.

Phase 2: 2022/2023 will focus on the remaining six Government offices and ministries and 80 agencies, which were recommended for retention but require institutional review and restructuring to enable them adequately respond to the current service delivery demands.

Both Phases 1 and 2 will be implemented with a view of achieving full implementation of the Cabinet’s recommendations on the rationalisation of the Government agencies and public expenditure, creating a lean and efficient structure of Government, and undertaking job evaluation aimed at harmonising pay across the service.

This exercise is envisaging challenges and associated risks. I wish to state that there are anticipated challenges and risks to the implementation of this reform and they include:

The legal and policy framework within which the affected institutions operate and the likely implications on the implementation of rationalisation.

National Obligations: international protocols, running contracts and agreements between Government of Uganda and other countries, which may have diplomatic and legal implications.

Challenges associated with management and transfer of assets and liabilities of the affected agencies.

Loss of jobs and redundancies arising out of the implementation of the reform.

The planned mitigation measures by the implementation team are: 

The composition of the implementation team is robust enough to include expertise from the human resource management, legal, labour sector for labour laws and relations, institutional reviews, diplomatic relations, defence, finance, and local government among others to provide the technical relevant support and advice in these areas.

The plan is to appoint affected staff in vacant positions across the service, and also pay gratuities to those who would not get a chance to be fixed anywhere. 

The exercise will also focus on harmonising pay across the service to address the issue of pay disparities. 

Madam Speaker, Annex 1, as I said, contains all the agencies that are going to be examined during this exercise in the various sectors; in the accountability sector, trade and investment, justice, law and order and the recommendations, which Cabinet made.

Part of Annex 1, which is attached to this statement, also has the programme for sector engagement which, so far, the secretariat has undertaken that and the next annex - the last one – details the actual road map of how we shall move from 2021/2022 up to 2022/2023 and up to the end of the exercise.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister, for the report. Honourable members, this is a report on rationalisation and it is open for debate.

5.31
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My colleague on the other side - I welcome you back. He is the Minister of Public Service and I am honoured to serve this country as the Shadow Minister of Public Service.

Madam Speaker, I do not know how much time you will give me but what will destroy this country is not an atomic bomb or a ballistic missile somewhere -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You remove the mask so that hon. Zijjan can hear you. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, I was welcoming back my elder brother, the Minister of Public Service; I am honoured to shadow you, my elder brother.

Anyway, I was making a fundamental point that what will destroy any country anywhere in the world are not the atomic bombs, the ballistic missiles or a man-less drone; it is the inability to pay attention to the quality of a country’s human resource system.

Madam Speaker, the fundamental ailment this country is facing and the greatest challenge this country is being confronted with is the inability of the central Government to bring up policies that are anchored on evidence and research. It is only in Uganda where a policy as fundamental as merging institutions comes to the Floor of Parliament without a comprehensive study by scholars.

Madam Speaker, the institutions that the minister wants to join together are interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary. Therefore, a country that cares for its human resources should have first paid particular attention to constituting an interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary team of scholars: the legal professionals, the scientists and so on, to generate knowledge and you have people or scholars or professors - if I were in this Government, I would have asked and tapped into the human resources - the best scholars - that we have in this country - and they are quite many, both from the humanities and sciences - with sciences looking at generation and humanities in terms of application and utilisation.

Madam Speaker, we are the Shadow Government and we stand for a leaner government. We should be -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, please, conclude.

MR KATUSABE: The shadow minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I have to put a summary or aggregate, this Parliament will never be forgiven if you allow this motion to pass. We shall never be forgiven. This motion must be sent back to the drawing board.

A research team consisting of eminent scholars in this country should undertake a study to guide this House on how to proceed. There is principle and process – and this is my last submission. What we are dealing with - if we are to go by what my elder brother has just submitted - will be focusing on a product. It is meaningless to focus on a product and ignore the process because it is the process that determines the product.

Madam Speaker, what the minister or where the minister is taking us, he wants us to focus on the destination yet he knows that what determines the destination is the journey -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can you conclude?

MR KATUSABE: Therefore, my conclusion is: let me ask colleagues in this House to agree to avert or reverse a catastrophe. This motion should be rejected, thrown back to the committee and –(Applause)- I appreciate your support - get back to the drawing board, get feedback from the scholars and then we move. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.38
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you very, Madam Speaker. It is good to have institutional memory. In the last 15 years, the Government has been coming here year after year, creating these institutions. We have been creating them by law.

The Executive has been coming with Bills; we have taken these Bills to relevant sectoral committees to debate them and the Government has justified their existence, now for 15 years. We now see the Government moving away from its policy, without resorting to the people it told to create these institutions.

Now, the stakeholders - as the minister is saying - are not even in this House. Honourable minister, what is your justification? We need to go law by law because you have no discretion to repeal a law without recourse to this House. This is legal common sense. 

You must come back here and say, “on the creation of the Uganda National Authority, we were wrong. The justification we did give was not informed by policy consideration, economic consideration or even common sense and, therefore, we ask you….” Actually, you would say: “Please, forgive us” (Laughter) Yes, because it is wrong.

When I listened to the honourable minister - he thinks these institutions were created were just about public service; the employees. Of course, it is not.

We have different ministries creating different statutory institutions and all of them are for different reasons. The first point of stop should have been this House; consultations with the relevant committees of Parliament and then, you can go ahead and consult other stakeholders.

Madam Speaker, some of them have gone ahead to close them like the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) - (Interruption)

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you, my dear colleague, for giving way. Honourable members, this Parliament is under test. Just like my colleague has said, the Cabinet sat and made their own decision before they could even think of what to do next. 

I have a letter here from the Minister of Public Service written to the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation, Dr Musenero. One of the paragraphs states, “Considering the uncertainty facing the staff of the former Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, it is important to conclude the structure and submit to Cabinet for discussion.” 

What does this mean? Madam Speaker, I was formerly employed there. Today, they may come here to convince us here and we take whatever they are saying as the golden truth but this is a scramble and partition of ministries and authorities. Whoever thinks he is like a god, is lying. As we talk today, the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation has deployed her guards at the ministry. There is a pregnant lady known by the name Lydia, who has been beaten by the guards. We have lost two members of staff –

MR KATUNTU: May I regain my Floor? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we get the information about the pregnant lady?

MR KATUNTU: The Speaker has directed that I get that information.

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you. This is important and I am saying it out of – For the time I have sat here, something was dribbling in my brain. We have lost two important people in that ministry; one is by the name Kasadha and another called Barnabas because of this uncertainty, which the minister – I want to thank this minister. He is not part of it. He was writing to the honourable minister, Dr Musenero, about what she has caused to the staff in the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation without understanding and any due diligence of what she is doing.

I know this ministry was created five years ago to foster science in this country. Hardly had the ministry gone a few miles than the so-called gods in heaven managed to reach maybe the powers that be and convinced him or her that the ministry should be closed. Otherwise, there were reasons such as duplication that yielded closing the ministries. Who is duplicating science? 

Agenda 2063 and Vision 2040 clarify very well that the critical pillar to transform this nation like China, Malaysia and whoever has done, will be science. Now when you come here – Madam Speaker, I am bleeding. When you come here because of selfish –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to clarify that no one is arm twisting me and I can never be arm-twisted.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, listen to this. Since the Executive came and convinced us that it was relevant, we even formed a Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation. Some of you are even members of the committee with chairpersons. Now that committee, by a stroke of a pen, has been rendered useless; some of you are no longer members of a committee because you have no sector to oversee –(Interjections)- let me make my point. Madam Speaker, if you can give me a little bit of time because I need to explain to colleagues where all this has come from. 

When we went for privatisation, we had institutions like Uganda Electricity Board, Uganda Posts and Telecommunications and so on. We sold all the statutory authorities. I wish hon. Muruli Mukasa could listen to this. We sold all those statutory institutions; what we used to call parastatals.

The Government met a very obscene bill to pay off the former employees of Uganda Electricity Board, Uganda Posts and Telecommunications and many others. Therefore, before we come here – I thought the rule says that when one person is speaking, everybody should – thank you, colleagues. The problem is that we have not done thorough research. We do not know the bill the public is going to meet because of these mergers.

As a result of these mergers, the public is going to meet a very huge bill. Hon. Muruli Mukasa, before you take steps, it is my prayer that you give us the cost implication of that process before you seek our support. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is information from the minister.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is an impression being created that the Government has closed the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. That is not correct. What is simply being done is to move the ministry under the Office of the President but it still remains and has a minister in the name of Dr Musenero. This was an administrative move; it is not about closing the ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation is now under State House; it is existent but moved to State House?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, it moved to State House for the purpose of managing the finances of the ministry but under the control of the President –(Interruption)- I am still clarifying. It is being facilitated by the State House, through the Office of the State House Comptroller. Therefore, in terms of the vote, where money for this ministry is placed, it is under State House – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week, there was a motion in this House in regard to that ministry and the Rural Electrification Agency (REA). It was sent to the Budget Committee. So, the committee should report on it. 

What Members are raising is the rationalisation of other agencies. He raised an issue of what is happening in the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation but that will be answered in the debate that will come from the Committee on Budget. (Members rose_) Hon. Katuntu wanted to clarify. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, it is good hon. Lugoloobi is the one who pays the salary. Is he paying all the employees under the Ministry of Science and Technology? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we get a response to that? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: As it is now, all the employees are going to receive their salaries. The motion that is before the Committee on Budget is to move the money from the Vote we appropriated the money into an existing Vote in State House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question was very clear: Are all the employees of that ministry being paid salary? Yes or no? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: No, they have not yet been paid – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, please calm down.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, may I clarify? Following the pronouncement of the President that that Vote is closed, payment could not be effected by the Ministry of Finance through that Vote, until we get a resolution of Parliament. That is the resolution that we are looking – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the motion that you laid in this House and is before the Committee on Budget reads, “FURTHER AWARE that in accordance to Article 113 of the Constitution, His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, abolished the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation.” 

That is in your motion. 

“…and transferred its functions to the Office of the President serviced by State House Comptroller under Vote: 002.” 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, before my grandfather died, he used to tell me that there is a tribe somewhere that gives birth to its children and kills them. With all due respect and good knowledge given by hon. Katuntu - from building institutional memory, when I was still an RDC in Budaka, I used to see Parliament deliberate and I admired to be a Member of Parliament. One of the most important things that Parliament did that time was to legalise entities and authorities. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda has become a benchmarking country; there have been a lot of entities from other countries coming to benchmark on how we have successfully managed to maintain best performing entities. The Rural Electrification Agency was one of them. The World Bank and the IMF have been fighting to give us money because of their performance. 

These entities have created jobs for Ugandans and made NRM popular - which has made hon. Lugoloobi sit at the back bench – Madam Speaker, I do not know why when people sit on the back bench, they start to have a different language – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the front bench. 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, in his submission of the motion, he stated that the President abolished… Why do you use the name of the President? Why don’t you, as a Minister in charge of Public Service, stand as an entity –(Interjection)

Before I receive that information, the minister’s submission was that they have already established a secretariat. Some ministries have already moved. How do you get a Minister of Science and Technology and put him as an undersecretary? 

I would like to let the Minister of Public Service know today that this 11th Parliament is not a rubber stamp. I, therefore, reject this motion. You should give an answer to your voters as to why you want to kill jobs –(Interruption) 

MR AOGON: Thank you, hon. Macho. Madam Speaker, I am appreciative of what is happening here. How I wish we always debated matters before we act with impulse! I would like to liken this matter to what happened in terms of cutting the budgets of MDAs by 40 per cent without having a due process of considering impact. 

I would like to give information here. In Kumi, there is a small stretch of road from the town to Kumi Hospital. It is too dilapidated to be worked on. UNRA’s answer to this is the budget cuts. They say that they cannot do anything until January next year. There is somebody who lost a life because the ambulance could not make it to the hospital. Is that the where we want to reach because of this impulse decision-making? 

Madam Speaker -    

5.57 
MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi County South, Bukomansimbi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I am in support of this motion but again it shows the Government’s weakness of not critically analysing decisions before putting them in place. In the long run, they regret after wasting the taxpayers’ money. For example, what budget have they made to compensate these people that have running contracts? Again, it will be the taxpayers’ money being wasted. 

I think it is better for the Government to scrutinise – I am speaking to the minister this time – this motion to avoid wasting the taxpayers’ money again. Thank you very much. 

5.58 
MS ASINANSI NYAKATO (FDC, Woman Representative, Hoima City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring Article 92 of the Constitution to the attention of this House. It is on restriction on retrospective legislation. It reads, “Parliament shall not pass any law to alter the decision or judgement of any court as between the parties to the decision or judgement.” 

Madam Speaker, I have a matter with me here on one of the agencies that the minister wants to merge, a court application for judicial review by Engineer Charles Lutama v. the Attorney-General. It talks of the illegalities of Rural Electrification Agencies. This matter awaits ruling. 

I also have a ruling which was passed on 25 September 2020, challenging the instrument on which the honourable Minister of Energy had been operating and effecting illegalities within the Rural Electrification Agency. Merging REA should be subject to court decisions and if Parliament goes ahead to merge the REA vote, it would have rendered the pending rule useless. As Parliament, we shall be sabotaging the powers of the Judiciary.

Parliament, in the case of REA, which is also one of the agencies which needs to be merged under the statement of the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It does not need to be merged; it has already been merged.

MS ASINANSI NYAKATO: The information we have from the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is that when she came to the members of the Committee on Natural Resources to resolve that Rural Electrification Agency be merged with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is retrospective application of the law.

MS ASINANSI NYAKATO: Madam Speaker, it means that the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development has been contradicting herself. The information she brings to the committee is totally different from what she brings before this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam, you cannot lay on the Table court documents. Keep them; we shall continue referring to them in the committees and other places. Government Chief Whip -

6.01
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give some clarification:

This is just an update. You guided earlier that regarding issues to do with REA and the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, when the report comes from the Budget Committee, we shall discuss them extensively –(Interruption)

MS AISHA KABANDA: Madam Speaker, is the Government Chief Whip in order to water down the matter by saying it is simply an update while they have actually gone ahead to effect it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have not heard what he has said yet.

MS AISHA KABANDA: They have laid off people already. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First listen to what he is saying then – 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister and I should go on record that no merger of Government agencies has been approved by Government. Allow me to finish. Cabinet set up a Cabinet subcommittee, which is studying the proposals. This subcommittee is going to receive a report from its subcommittee, which will be discussed by Cabinet and the final decision made by Cabinet will be presented to this House. 

I felt this information might be helpful so that we inform you that no decision will be taken by Government on the merger of these entities whose legal instruments were by an Act of Parliament. No merger will take place without coming back to this House.

MR ZIJJAN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification because I feel like the Government Chief Whip is contradicting the author of the information. The honourable minister spoke here and said that a decision was made. He is on record for having said a decision was made and now, the Government Chief Whip is saying there is no decision made. 

Is one of the two telling alternative truth for not needing to say “lying” because the Speaker said we should not say that people are lying? Can we get clarification for the alternative truth?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First get clarification from hon. Aisha Kabanda.

MS AISHA KABANDA: Madam Speaker, I am wondering what is the effect of the transfer of a vote from where it is resident to another ministry, if it is not a merger. I seek an explanation.

More clarification I seek is what informed their decision on which authorities to take. If we had been consulted, some of us would have advised that they take NFA that has finished our forests. They have instead left it and taken other authorities. What has informed the decision to merge some entities and leave the others?

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, mine specifically goes to my very dear friend and colleague, the Government Chief Whip. Can you clearly clarify to this House whether REA is operating normally the way they have been doing so that we are sure that they have not been merged? Thank you.

MS KAAYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to get clarification on the practical meaning of rationalisation because we feel it is sugar coating. The issue is merging and the related challenges. We were not comfortable for the motion to be dropped to the Budget Committee because the issue does not only concern money and shifting the votes. Rather, the issues relate to the chain of command and staff structure. 

For example, we currently see that all the issues that we have been complaining about REA; delayed metres and delayed wiring of stands in the communities are as a result of REA’s budgetary vote being frozen. They are telling us that the remaining contracts shall be effected when we accept REA to be merged.

We are also looking at issues to do with Government expenditure. The minister has assured us that this is done to reduce Government expenditure on the operations of all these agencies. However, Madam Speaker, we are afraid that the cost that the Government will incur in offsetting the litigation that the different staff from these closed ventures are coming up with is going to be tough and we need to be vigilant on this. 

We are also seeing some selfish interests. The public outcry has always been that we have dismantled ministries, weakened them but –(Member timed out.)   

6.10
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish the ministers can stop disturbing hon. Muruli Mukasa such that he gives his attention to the submission of Members. 

Minister, in paragraph 2 on page 1, you have stated that you wish to inform this august House that the main objective of the reform is to eliminate structural and functional duplications, overlaps, wasteful expenditure and realised resultant short-term and long-term savings, in line with the approved implementation roadmap. May you inform this House how much you will save by merging?

Secondly, on page 2 – 2.2 – you said the situation analysis of Government agencies in Uganda established by some agencies were created without clear justification. Others had their mandates overtaken by events, while others were pseudo Government projects which operated in a similar manner as agencies.

Would you like to apologise to this House and the country that you formed these agencies without clear justification? I hope it is not without clear justification that again, today, you want to come and do ad hoc mergers without a clear process. 

Again in 2.3, you state that whereas the 1995 Constitution of Uganda, as amended in 2005, provides for a definite number of agencies, Commissions, Authorities, Boards, Local Councils and other statutory bodies, you wish to inform the House that a multitude of public agencies were later created by Statutes, Acts of Parliament, Executive Orders and administrative arrangements.

Could you list each agency which was formed, those by Statute, those by Acts of Parliament, by Executive orders and administrative arrangements? 

In 3.1.3, you are saying institutional review and re-organisation of some institutions without legal impediments has already commenced. May we know these without legal impediments that you have commenced?

On page 3 – 3.1.4 – you say that stakeholder engagement meetings have been undertaken by 68 institutions and 18 sector ministries and you attached the list. Why did you leave out Parliament? Parliament is a very key stakeholder. I thought you would have engaged Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I wish to recommend that at the end of it, this statement should be referred to the Committee on Local Government and Public Service for closer scrutiny, for us to be able to move in a consistent way.

Finally, I was surprised when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said they are paying salaries. Because of the ad hoc way it was done, since May, staff of Rural Electrification Agency and the Ministry of Science and Technology have not got salaries to date. It is because of the ad hoc way of doing things.

For how long shall these staff continue working without salaries? How I wish this merger of Umeme was to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to save Ugandans from high costs; I would have really appreciated. 

I know there could be reasons why Government wants this. It is because some of these ministries or agencies and bodies had also ended up operating like procurement entities. If I look at UNRA today, I thought by now it would have developed a powerful road construction industry. How many engineers are there today?

I want the honourable minister here to tell me a single tarmac road UNRA has constructed, if it has not only been doing procurement. When we passed this law, we thought that by the end of it, we would have developed a strong construction industry in civil and mechanical works but nothing like that has happened.

I think that is what we need to address. Have they lived up to the mandate, other than taking it back where you had removed it? 

I conclude by asking the Leader of Government Business that when are we also merging the ministries because they are so many? Some are redundant, doing duplicate work. When are we merging the ministries? Thank you.

6.14
MR HILLARY KIYAGA (NUP, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The purpose for which we are here is, one, to monitor Government funds. Secondly, it is about service delivery.

There are entities we want to merge but when it comes to service delivery, they have been perfect on ground and serving the common person like – like the Rural Electrification Agency.
We want to know what went wrong before we come up with the merger; in what ways are these entities guilty of misconduct in terms of service delivery.

Again, when you look at the challenges and risks, we have legal implications. Government has lost a lot of money, due to legal implications. What costing did you put on this?

Another thing is when we talk about unemployment, we are going to put down many people. How many people are going to be affected and what is this effect on the society? These are some of the – (Member timed out.)

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Having a lean and effective structure of Government is what we all desire. However, how are we going to achieve this?

Most of these agencies were created through Acts of Parliament. As far as I can remember and the record can speak for it, when these Bills are being brought before Parliament, there is always a justification which is well stipulated. I am surprised by the submission of the minister that some of these agencies did not have justifications.

Madam Speaker, I request that the honourable minister apologises for this because we are a House. If we pass a Bill here and it is assented to by the President and then the minister comes and says, “We have passed something without justification”, what does this mean, as far as Parliament is concerned?

Allow me to talk about page 3 of the minister’s statement, when he says, “Allow me report on the areas where implementation has commenced and is on schedule”. He goes ahead to say, “Cabinet has already started work for one month and some days” and yet at the same time, the Government Chief Whip alluded that Cabinet will not do anything without coming to Parliament.

So, Madam Speaker, this is confusing to me. Which is which? Who is fooling who? According to this statement, Cabinet has already commenced its work without even coming to Parliament and yet we are a very key stakeholder and it has legal implication – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not being fooled, as you have said. 

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, allow me to finish. I would like the minister to also help me understand because as Parliament, we have been asking for the creation of the Salary and Remuneration Commission.

I would like to get clarification on this; whether the Cabinet subcommittee will now take on the resolution and recommendation that this Parliament has been asking for. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.19
MR NABOTH NAMANYA (FDC, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are here; the minister has tabled a document. This Parliament should not be used for the first time.

Madam Speaker, for agencies like the Rural Electrification Agency, since 1954 up to 2000, we had only 6,000 kilometres of rural connection. As I speak now, in a period of less than 18 years, we can authoritatively say that REA has moved up to around 48,000 kilometres. My constituency is 500 kilometres, from where I am standing now. You will find electricity lines from here up to Rubabo, near the border with Congo. 

The minister is here –(Interjection)- I will allow the information later. Let me finish this. The minister has told us that there is no merger. They have already replaced Rural Electrification Agency with Rural Electrification Programme (REP). 

As I conclude, Madam Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The message has been got. 

6.21
MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, it is really absurd that we get to know from here that several stakeholders have been consulted, yet as parliamentarians, we have never been called for such. As we move on, we need to really get involved.

That aside, I wish to know, through you: where does this leave a key agency like Uganda Road Fund (URF), with its legislation which was already passed here? Recall that as parliamentarians, it is through the URF Act that we get to the roads committee and it is where, as Members of Parliament, we get to know, fully, issues concerning the roads in different districts. Therefore, I beg that we do not support this matter.  

Finally, being in the neighbourhood of Wakiso District, we had a project under REA in Mukono Municipality - Kyansaleka-Nyanja-Bukerere Project. It was ongoing and surveys were done in Mukono Municipality, but as I inquired –(Member timed out.)

6.22
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF SCIENCE, INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY (Ms Gorreth Namugga): This is my maiden day. As you have heard from the minister, the Ministry of Science, Innovation and Technology was abolished. At times I sit and ask myself: “Now, where am I? Sometime back, in the previous – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you - 

MS NAMUGGA: We have a motion on reallocation of funds from one Vote to another under the Ministry of Science, Innovation and Technology. I would like to bring to your attention a few issues under this very ministry –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Namugga, we are going to discuss that when that motion comes in the House. That is why we referred it to you. We are speaking on a general merger issue, not specifically on the Ministry of Science, Innovation and Technology. So, for now, we are looking at the merger aspect in general. 

MS NAMUGGA: I was going to submit on the merger because it is also implied that it was merged. I was looking at where the docket of Science, Innovation and Technology has been taken. As of now, it is under State House. If we are looking at efficiency and service delivery, is State House the best placement for the Ministry of Science, Innovation and Technology? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those are the arguments you should bring in your committee. 

6.24
MS AISHA NALULE (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is regrettable that the minister chose to update us selectively. He chose not to tell us that there was an earlier court ruling that directed that there should be consultations. Those consultations have not been made yet.

He chose not to tell us that some of our partners are not comfortable with these mergers and there are letters to that effect. He chose not to tell us that, actually, service delivery has been affected because of this uncertainty. For example, REA had already secured $400 million to make free connections of electricity to our people. For two years, the project has failed to take off because they do not know how to implement it and where it should be implemented.

I do not support the fact that this matter should only go to the committee. This is an opportunity for us – because most of us are saying things are not going on well - to make a holistic approach. We would rather say that all committees go, sit and make recommendations as to which authorities need to be merged. It is because when we look at this, we shall restrict ourselves to the proposals. For example, as of yesterday, the people in my district sat and resolved that UNFA should not go back to Butambala because of the effect – so, I would rather we look at the matter holistically. We should look at the Government departments that must be merged and save the ones that have been effective like REA, which they want to take away from us. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Whichever committee that will handle this issue will involve all the stakeholders. So, it may not be that we subject it to all the committees. We cannot also take it to the Committee on Local Government but whichever committee we will form will have to interact with all the committees.

6.26
MR RICHARD SEBAMALA (DP, Bukoto County Central, Masaka): The minister acknowledges that they still have legal and policy challenges and international protocols. Under his challenges, it surely shows that the ministry is not ready. You still have a lot of challenges with these mergers that are not – for example, UEB was disentangled into UEDCL, UETCL and generation. Twenty years later, some people from UEB have not yet been paid. You still have a case in court. Now, you want to take all these agencies and merge them back to the ministry.

I believe we should make a committee of the whole House, we discuss these entities one by one and we see the way forward. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We cannot have that committee. 

6.27
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sit on the Committee on Presidential Affairs. On this committee, we have been interacting with most of these agencies. Honestly, if you look at them critically, some of them have crosscutting mandates. They are even conflicting in the execution of their functions and mandates.

Therefore, it may not be now but we need to take a close study of them. Honestly, some of them need to be merged. It may be a question of when to do it and the procedures. Without feeling we need to protect our relatives’ jobs, let us look at this issue from that national perspective of duplication of resources and economic wastage. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, when you look at these agencies, as hon. Ssasaga has said, most of them have duplication but there are very sensitive agencies that have even sold you politically. They have sold this country and everybody admires us because of them. Those are the agencies we are saying, “togikwatako” - do not touch. 

If there are those that we feel – we are not against the merger. We are saying we must make an analysis of the institutions, law by law and agency by agency.

6.29
MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I thank you. Let me start from a common ground. From an ideological standpoint, we believe in a linear efficient government across the board. That is the paradigm, where we come from. And we believe, for some time, that Government agencies and institutions have been growing bigger and bigger and draining the resources of the country. 

Therefore, there is an urgent need to rationalise; that is not a debatable issue. The question is the methodology. Thirty five years ago, this country embarked on what they called barter trade without research. We went on for a few years until the whole thing was bungled. 

We have made various Government interventions on spot and all of them have backfired. For once, if we want to help this country, let us do a thorough job; let us sit down. Uganda is not on the run. We are all not dying this year or next year.

However, what normally happens is that they create an artificial crisis. Like now, you issue an instrument haphazardly; ban REA and all of sudden, you say, hundreds of people are not paid yet, the crisis is self-created. 

As you do kujenga na kubomowa as an approach, which you have chosen over the years, you must be very careful not create artificial crises and you come to Parliament as if the house is burning.

Secondly, even in life, it is one thing for you to give birth to a child but it is another to take away the life of that child. The minister is saying he issued an instrument to create this and therefore, they can issue another one to destroy it, as if life belongs to them.

Therefore, Parliament this time must make a firm standpoint. (Interjection) I enjoy that hon. Lugoolobi is now the minister in charge of planning in the finance ministry. We have spent five years in the Budget Committee debating these issues and it is up to now that we have the right people in the right places.

Let us, for the first time –(Interruption)

MR SILWANY: The information I would like to give is that what hon. Kivumbi is talking about is very right. When we were in the Budget Committee, hon. Lugoloobi, you will remember that we disagreed on this. I brought it to you but you did not support that we go into a speedy merger.

Therefore, today, for us to say that we are on the run is wrong, much as I agree on the principle of having mergers to utilise the resources of this country effectively. However, remember that you disagreed with us but today, you have changed. Time does not change but people change. (Applause) 

MR ZIJJAN: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give - and I agree with him that the question is not whether or not to merge as of now; the issue is the procedure.

A few months ago, there was a pronouncement that some public servants had been retired in the public interest. It turns out a few days ago, that the authority that pronounced that statement had to walk back on their pronouncement and said that their retirement in public interest has ramifications and therefore, they should be compensated. Therefore, the issue is in acting too quickly without doing thorough research. That is the information I wanted to give to the honourable colleague. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: As I wind up, Madam Speaker, you have touched something very critical. I know REA is coming here and people have arguments about UNRA. However, look at REA - I have had political arguments in my constituency with REA but for the first time, they have put light in the villages, where there was darkness.

When you look at the Electricity Act, you realise that it is formed anchored on the Rural Electrification Fund, which we had to actualise through REA, as an instrument. Therefore, as we tinker with some of the arguments, let us look at the broader mandate.

Look at UNRA; we can make arguments about UNRA and say it has issues to do with procurement, but how many kilometres of tarmac have been created. Therefore, as we roll back to the mother ministry - the bureaucracies associated with the ministries and patronage in the ministries, you do not want to create super ministers, where all of sudden, you are the minister, so powerful, that is equal to light or energy.

Madam Speaker, the way forward I am proposing is that we need to have a committee, at your discretion, that will look at agency by agency, rationale, cost implication, human resource implications and therefore, arrive at a decision that will help the country. Otherwise, haphazard approaches have not worked. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon. Kivumbi and maybe UNRA is not the best institution to refer to. Personally, I had not known tarmac until UNRA came into place. Therefore, UNRA would be one of the first institutions I would say should not be merged.

6.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I have been observing the demeanour of my old friend, the Minister of Public Service and I thought his conduct was indictable. For all his experience, he was trying to end the political life of a young member, the Government Chief Whip by the manner of his actions and content of his documents before this House. That is a very indictable conduct, honourable minister.

That said, I fully associate myself with the representation by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. Principally, we are for a linear and efficient Government. One of the questions that force Members to debate in mistrust - honourable minister, the first motion before the 11th Parliament was to expand the size of the Government. That was the first motion before the 11th Parliament and Members debated saying they needed more ministers to deliver services. Then the ministers now come to say they want to reduce the Government expenditure. Are you honest?

Honourable minister, we want to put you to scrutiny to determine your honesty and sincerity. By the way, we shall break down entity by entity. In fact, I was shocked that the honourable minister was not aware that before this House, the House Speaker made an order and sent one of the entities you want to merge before a House committee and we have already moved. Now, this House is awash with information as to why you are in hurry to conduct some mergers.

Principally, we want to reduce the cost of doing business (Member timed out.) May I have a minute, Madam Speaker? Can we have a much more rationalised and structured way of going about it? Probably, we need to cascade the nature of merger and not do the enemas without due consideration to the aftermath.

Madam Speaker, probably, the Minister for Public Service will have to reconsider his choices or probably, in the public interest, he should withdraw his speedy statement because it does not help the cause for which we desire to have a reduction in public expenditure and does not serve that purpose.  The minister would do this House justice to reconsider and say, “I would be right back.” Thank you.

6.39
MS ESTHER MBAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has alluded to a decision, which was taken on 22 February 2021 of retaining, merging, mainstreaming and transfer of functions of some agencies. I would like to inform this House that I was part of these decisions. While taking the decisions, we never agreed to shift Uganda AIDS Commission from the Office of the President to the Ministry of Health or Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation to the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation.

Can the minister tell us whether there was a decision, which was taken after the one we took on 22 February 2021? I submit. 

The deputy speaker: Honourable minister, take that question seriously. 

6.41
Mr david karubanga (NRM, Kigorobya County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for this statement. Like the previous speaker, hon. Esther Mbayo said, I was also part of this process. I would like to give information that indeed - because I have heard honourable colleagues saying that this House was not informed - we made statements on the Floor of Parliament and gave modalities. If you check the Hansard, we have these records. 

Although I was part of the process, of course I know the Rural Electrifications Agency (REA) took a different route through a statutory instrument, which was not through the Ministry of Public Service. I now stand here as the chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure where I have two ministries with serious mandates to deliver as per the National Development Plan (NDP) III. One of those is the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). 

As the chairperson, I am worried if we took the route the Rural Electrification Agency took that was not smart - you have an agency undertaking projects of such a magnitude with many stakeholders - the donor agencies, contractors and workers and you just distort the whole –(Member timed out.)

6.43 
Mr Robert mwesigwa (NRM, Mbarara North Division, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This being my maiden speech, I would like to congratulate you, as my colleagues have done before.

I stand here to support this motion but with caution and amendment. Rationalisation and merging is very good. They have given the examples like the Free Zone Authority with 20 members; you do not know what they do but it is an Authority or an agency.

However, from an entrepreneurial point of view, when you have a cash cow, you do not dare to rationalise. Why would one make Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) a department under Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF)? In Africa today, Uganda is the number one coffee exporter. We produce more than six million bags of coffee. Whereas Ethiopia is the number one in production with eight million bags, they have more domestic consumption, which we do not. (Interjection) The minister is advising me that it is already nine million bags, which is a cash cow. Why, for God’s sake, would one dare place such an Authority under MAAIF?

Kenya dared in 2014 and made the same mistake with their coffee board. They had to repeal the Coffee Board Act and bring into effect an Authority, which I would now like to recommend.

Honourable minister, I would support merging especially the electricity companies and forming one Authority. Similarly, we would have one Authority that would also cater for cocoa, which we are now saying is a line of economic transformation in our Parish Development Model. If you make coffee a department under MAAIF, will you make another for cocoa and then for cashew nuts tomorrow? 

I recommend we have an independent Authority for such crops especially coffee and we do not kill our cash cow. I beg to move.

6.46
Mr tonny ayoo (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for presenting this progress report in the implementation of merger of entities. 

I would like to understand something from the minister: Since July 2017 when the President wrote and requested that Government should look into merging some of the agencies, it has taken five years until today to implement that decision. The way you want to implement it now is just because the President had written. Madam Speaker, the minister should know that we are going to get into a very serious crisis with this matter. 

I expected the progress report today – if I look at the challenges that the minister has put down here on page 4, one of them looks at the legal and policy framework within which the affected institutions operate and the likely implications on the implementation of the Rationalisation Act.

The second is about national obligations, international protocols, running contracts and agreements between Government of Uganda and other countries, which may have diplomatic and legal implications, among others. 

I thought the progress report of the minister would be looking at, first of all, legal implications - issues that require attention of Parliament. They could put in place a transition roadmap that by this stage in this sector, this is what we intend to do; this is how we are going to do it and this is going to be the positive effect. 

However, as we speak here, hon. Musenero has moved to the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and caused havoc; closing staff out, reducing their benefits without meetings, chasing staff away and putting up police. Is this a Government takeover or a normal process that somebody would have known? 

When you get to REA, we have got a lot of donor funding with the aim of use and I thought we should put up a transitional roadmap. Looking at these entities in detail and the ministry they are going to be merged with, what preparations have we made so that some of these activities can be taken? 

In conclusion, we are not against merging but I urge the minister to prepare a clean document and present it to Parliament. We should discuss these agencies one by one. We may even agree that certain entities or agencies should be merged and others should be left, especially those that are critical to this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I would also like to remind you that this is not a motion. It is a response to an issue that was raised by hon. Kabanda on the matter of UNRA. It is not a motion but we also asked for a status report of what the Government is doing because we are seeing mergers coming up. We had overheard what was happening in innovation, REA and that kind of thing. Therefore, when we are debating, we have to be mindful of that. 

6.50 
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I entirely respect hon. Muruli-Mukasa and hon. Lugoloobi. I get worried when I see this issue of merging coming up at this time. For those who have not been around for a period of time, the issue of merging happened sometime back. We had cooperative unions in this country and when this Government took over power, cooperative unions were removed. We are now seeing the Government coming back with SACCOs, which are almost similar.

At the same time, we saw decentralisation in local governments. It started working very well in 1997 but when you see it now, it is as if we are centralising in one way or another. We had chief administrative officers recruited by these local governments but now they are posted from the centre. 

I would not have any problem with merging but if we look at the work that UNRA is doing vis-a-vis the work being implemented by the Ministry of Works, there is a total difference. I would like to cite an example. We inspected UNRA roads like USMID and others, since I am a member of the Committee on Local Government and they are good roads. 

There is a bridge in my district being constructed by Omega Construction Company but of course it is supervised by the Ministry of Works. If you compare the works there, they are totally different. 

Madam Speaker, as we think about merging, let us look at it critically, especially when we look at agencies like REA, ERA and UEDCL. I can agree with you when you say that UNRA and the Road Fund should be one entity but if we say we are completely merging and are taking it to ministries, I entirely disagree. 

When you go to the Ministry of Science and Technology, you will notice that those workers were laid off –(Member timed out.) 

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that yesterday, I almost slept in a police cell because of breaking curfew time. As we speak, it is 6.53 p.m. Will you inform security today to allow us to move freely? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are an essential worker. 

6.54
DR EMMANUEL OTAALA (NRM, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I chair the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, which is one of the committees affected by this merger. I would like to begin by thanking the minister for his paper that has updated this Parliament on the progress made so far. 

I would like to state that my committee appreciates the process of rationalisation of ministries, agencies and departments but we are concerned about the process of how this is being done. First and foremost, this Parliament will appreciate that sectoral committees have a duty of scrutinising policy issues and the mandate of various ministries and agencies. 

In my area, the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources – Whereas the Government has moved on to reallocate funds from REA to the Ministry of Energy, in accordance with the law, our concern is that there are sticky issues that my committee needed to resolve. 

In other words, whereas they are doing a noble cause of rationalising ministries and agencies, the whole process is being done in a haphazard manner. We are concerned about the policy issues that have not been –(Member timed out.)  

6.56 
MR DICKSONS KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the Government should take it that we are not against the merger per se. We understand that this merger is in line with the objectives of NDP III and we are all concerned about efficiency. The challenge that we face is that the Government seems unprepared, and it is rushing to do things in a manner that raises a lot of concern. 

Honourable minister, in your statement, you talked about issues of change management strategy. You must be aware right now that there is a lot of speculation amongst some of these agencies and staff that I am afraid everything seems to be on standstill. Honourable minister, what is the transition arrangement as you do this merger? What study was done? 

Hon. Katuntu talked about the process through which these agencies were created. I would have expected the Government to take a reversal process, and these agencies go through the relevant committees so that there is proper justification and study. This would enable us to get the merger done.

I would like to end by raising a number of implications of this process, as it is being rushed: 

We are going to have budget absorption problems because as you look at the energy sector, the projects are on standstill. The contractors are not being paid so there will be budget absorption problems as the year goes on.
   
There are also delayed contractual obligations. Who is going to meet the costs? 

There is also uncertainty amongst the staff in these agencies and this will lead to a lot of low morale and inefficiency. 

I would like to end by asking the Government to be better prepared and work with us, as Parliament, so that this process is properly appreciated and the agencies that are performing well, like UNRA and Uganda Coffee Development Authority, who have built a culture of performance, are not just taken off like that. 

6.58 
MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The intention to merge these agencies is based on a Cabinet decision - I rise on a point of information, before I give my opinion. 

It was based on NDP III Chapter 20. I want my honourable colleagues from the other side, to first go to NPD III, Chapter 20, and read it carefully. You will understand the basis of this decision by Cabinet. We need to appreciate that NPD III was done by the best brains that we have in the field of development. I believe that their decision was informed.

Madam Speaker, based on that decision, it also had a background –(Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, I rarely talk about my academic capability. I also think that it is not something that I would afford to let go if somebody really tries to draw my attention to something that is a statement of fact. 

What he is talking about is purely outside the scope of what we are trying to submit. Unless, he did not get me well and if he is someone that really wants to – I am sorry because the professor was talking about independent and dependent variables. A research is different from the citation are making.

If you can give me one minute, I would be interested in knowing the study process or the research process, including the tools and the methodology that were deployed in that research. I would also be interested in knowing if a publication was made and a citation -[Dr Otaala rose: Order_] 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Otaala, can you sit?

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, are we procedurally moving right when a Member just brings a copy and pastes yet it falls totally outside the scope of the subject matter? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Enosi Asiimwe, can you continue with your submission?

MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Again, I would like to inform my colleague that I am referring to the statement by the minister. He clearly told us that the decision by Cabinet was based on NDP III. However, considering the time I have on the Floor, I cannot take you through that and that is why I had referred to it.

With the little time I have, I cannot take you through the procedures of how the research was done, but I wanted to draw your attention to it. 

Madam Speaker, it is no doubt that the decision to merge these agencies was a well-thought out decision. Certainly, merging these agencies does not take out the Government commitment that we made to the people for the next five years. In my view, we cannot have our cake and eat it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you looking at Ugandans for only five years?

MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Yes, Madam Speaker. My argument is that we have manifesto to – (Interruption)

7.03
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. When I hear this debate and issues being raised here, and we are quoting 2021, I get disturbed. 

In the budget process of 2017/2018, the Ministry of Public Service brought a structured salary system to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, where the salary was rationalised and people were supposed to get increased salaries. When we questioned the ministry at that time, where they were going to get money, they said that one of the sources of money would be merging of agencies and ministries. By then, this process was supposed to run for five years from budget of 2017, 2018 up to 2021. By now, it should have been implemented. At that time, what we questioned the ministry about was whether this going to be done in line with the law? For all these five years, it has been quiet to date.

Anyhow, I am not against the issue of merging because there have always been changes in management systems. You will remember in 1992 upwards, World Bank and IMF brought –(Member timed out.)

7.05
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think honourable members are not against the merger, rationalisation and mainstreaming. 

Our problem is the speed at which these activities are running. It is very fast yet it would be proper, if it pleases you, that committees are given opportunity to scrutinise these issues well and come back and inform the House. If you looked at when UEB was disbanded, the supply of power across this country was at 1 per cent. However, REA that came in as an agency, has reached 23 per cent and it continues to grow.

Therefore, what informed the decision of the merger maybe good but I think the time to study and give us an opportunity to analyse and discuss this well, is what might be the challenge. 

7.06
MS AISA AGABA (NRM, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is on the merger. When you look at electricity via REA and we look at the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, you realise that while the ministry has its own accounting officer, REA as an agency on the other hand, has its own accounting officer too. 

Now, when we engage REA as an agency to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development whose accounting officer is the undersecretary - this person is very busy under the ministry of energy and he is going to look at petroleum, minerals, policies and procurement. When we lobby for electricity connections in our areas, he will have a meeting with us, leave our documents on the tables and will not work. I do not think that person will be efficient enough. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.07
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitagwenda): Thank you very much –(Interruption) 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, this debate is very interesting. However, I would like to interest Members in the kind of debate, we are lobbied into. We are debating the statement, not the motion. I am scared about what we shall do at the end. Where are the resolutions for adoption? Otherwise, the question should be about the path, procedures and methodology. 

Madam Speaker, through your seat and powers, I move that you redirect our action as a House and you rule so that the Government goes back to point one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us leave the few Members, who have not spoken to do so before; I will make the ruling that you have requested for. But okay, what is your procedural matter?

MR AOGON: The procedural matter is: is it proper for us to continue with the debate, where there are no resolutions to be adopted? Those who are saying no, tell me what you are going to resolve?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Madam Speaker, I am not against the merger but like Members said, it is has been hurriedly done. Firstly, some of those authorities were established to cure certain underperformance within those ministries. 

They said that they consulted different stakeholders; who are the stakeholders in this country? I believe the service consumers are the stakeholders. For instance, have they asked the people of Sheema about how REA has performed? Have they asked the people of Sheema about how UCDA has performed? Have they asked the people of Sheema? Those are the things that we are looking at. We need a bottom-up approach, not a top-bottom approach.

Secondly, honourable minister, do you know why people are crying and saying that UNRA and URA are not performing? They have performance contracts. You have civil servants who know that they are permanent and pensionable. They do not bother about performing. That is why there are very many inefficiencies.

There was that proposal for performance contracts in your ministry. How far have you gone with it so that people know that when they merge, people are going to perform - not just knowing that I am working in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development until I die? 

7.10
MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with the merger but I would love to request the House to consider the disadvantages of having them the way they are and the advantages of merging them.

I agree that we need to merge others and there are others which are very useless for our people that we should even abolish them completely. Otherwise, it is very good to listen to each other because when you listen, you get to know that certain things should be done like this and that.

For now, let us look at the gains when we merge, other than simply saying we merge them. We may be going into a bigger loss than we have now. 

7.12
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I want to say that Parliament is the arm of Government that does the legislation and processes all the Bills.

Madam Speaker, the minister - in his statement - talked about progress on implementation and indicated that they already have an approved action plan and workplan that commenced in June 2021, implying that they are going ahead with the process of merging. We have seen some institutions falling victim.

Madam Speaker, I want you to direct the minister to halt any action until this House has critically looked at these institutions and come up with its advice to the Government.

Secondly, the honourable minister talked about eliminating structural and functional duplication and wastage of resources. If we are talking about wasting resources, who is actually wasting the resources? You have ministers and you have presidential advisers in charge of those same ministries. So, why don’t we first deal with those ones?

Even last week, we saw presidential advisers being appointed, Madam Speaker. If we are talking about wastage of resources, let us also look at that arm.

Lastly, I know you have not given me adequate time. I want to suggest that in order for us to actually have efficient service delivery in this country, we need to consider the principles of corporate governance. 

You cannot get UNRA as an institution and say that it goes back to the Ministry of Works and Transport. Why were these agencies created? Was it not because there were inefficiencies that resulted in the creation of these institutions? 

I want to suggest, Madam Speaker - if it pleases you – that let us, at the end of it all, have a select committee because when you send us to our various sectoral committees, we also have interests. We may not effectively come here and give a clear guide.

Therefore, I want to propose, if it pleases you, that we have a select committee to handle all these issues and bring a report to the House and then we can debate and advise Government accordingly. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.15
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Mr Zijjan rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure on what? Can we get a response from the honourable minister, please?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the honourable members for the very useful advice, which they have given to the Ministry of Public Service, that is undertaking this exercise of rationalisation. 

Madam Speaker, indeed, as you guided, this is not a motion. This was a status report on what so far, the Ministry of Public Service is doing. 

What we presented here is the preparatory work – the groundwork that is going on – in order to eventually realise the issue of rationalisation of agencies and also curtailing Government expenditure. It is preparatory. 

This exercise will not leave out any stakeholder. I remember I made this point the other time when I was going to present the same statement - also, let me apologise that, that time, the statement was not made just because it had not been uploaded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just for clarification; before you took a step on REA, which stakeholders did you consult? 

MR MURULI MUKASA: The Rural Electrification Agency’s case was a question of the ministry. It was an internal matter of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development – (Interjections) – Yes, it was an internal ministerial matter.

Indeed, looking at the way REA was constituted –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As Minister of Public Service, would you really allow those internal matters to affect the operations of the country? As far as we know, it was internal and political fights in the institution that caused REA to go. Let us not hide from this.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, I am just learning about the political aspect now – (Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Honourable minister, can I give you information? - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She was a minister there.

MS OPENDI: I was a minister in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. I want to inform this House that never did we sit, as policy makers in that ministry, to discuss this issue of REA. (Applause) So, do not say it was an internal matter.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the minister that at the time that Cabinet – which we respect and I respect in particular – you know that we are partners in governance of this country. We are not porters at all. 

An internal statement cannot determine –(Interruption)


MR ZIJJAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 19(3) of our Rules of Procedure, which provides that “Sittings shall, subject to the directions of the Speaker, ordinarily be between 2 O’clock in the afternoon and 7 O’clock in the evening”. Right now, it is 19:18 hours –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you want feedback from the minister or not? If you are – By the way, these rules are under the custody of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. It is under my directive that we either continue or stop. So, if you feel that you are tired, the doors are open.

Honourable minister, can we have a brief summarised statement. One thing you should really thank the House for is that they have given you information and the feelings that they have about the whole process. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, we have got a wealth of good advice and information from this august House. In this exercise, we are going to draw on this wealth to make sure that the programme goes on very well and in the right direction. It also gives us the desired results we want.

I also would like to underscore that no stakeholder in this exercise will be ignored and Parliament is a very strong stakeholder in this exercise. At an appropriate moment, certainly, Parliament will come in and we will draw on the expertise and the wealth of Parliament to drive this exercise to its logical conclusion – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let him finish. One thing I can tell you, honourable minister, is that Parliament is not going to work at the tail. And because we want to be involved in the whole process, we are going to have an ad hoc committee that will look at the operations of these institutions and do a cost-benefit analysis, agency by agency. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, there is no contradiction in that because even before we came to this, that kind of analysis had been done. However, there is no problem. What we are doing here is for the good of our country. 

Certainly, when we get some other good people to take a fresh look at what we did, that will be very welcome as long as that we have lean Government, we avoid all the duplications and the overlaps and we provide service delivery to the best of ourselves and countrymen and countrywomen. There is no problem. We would appreciate that. 

Even the secretariat has drawn up a programme of engaging all these agencies, so that we have thorough discussions and reach some conclusions aimed at providing the best service we want. After that, certainly, we shall come here. There are agencies which require changes in the law. There is no way we can just merge without coming back here –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do not say, there is no way you can just merge. Hon. Esther Mbayo talked about institutions that have already been merged. A former minister has talked about REA. Let us really not – 

I am now giving my ruling. I thank the minister for his time, the research he has done and all that he has presented. I want to guide the Minister of Public Service to work closely with the Attorney-General to ensure that all the legal implications are sufficiently considered, especially because of the agencies which are created by Acts of Parliament.

The Minister of Public Service should ensure that all the staff, who are affected by these mergers that you have done without our authority, should be paid their benefits. As you will appreciate, this issue needs to be studied item by item. Each institution will be analysed separately and not in a lump sum. 

Ordinarily, each agency would go to a sectoral committee but because you are in a rush, we are going to form an ad hoc committee that will report to this House in one month. We are acting under rule 191 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. We do not want to do things in an ad hoc way. We want to do things as per the rules and the law. This is because most of these institutions were created by Acts of Parliament. As you come to report, we will also have our report as Parliament. 

7.25
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, thank you, for your guidance and order thereof. The incessant denial by the minister and the absence of action, bearing in mind that there are already issues before this Parliament, leaves us in doubt as to the intent. Where do we leave a situation, for example, where the minister referred to a very serious matter as an “internal matter of REA” or where the minister is acting upon the Statutory Instrument 29 of 2021? It is under challenge; employees have not been paid. 

The second statutory instrument was vacated by court and there is a Statutory Instrument 29 of 2001 that could be used. Wouldn’t it be proper, Madam Speaker, if you so ordered that the ministry reverts to statutory instrument 29 of 2001 so that employees are paid and the contracts remain going until normalcy returns? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will get that from the committee. 
Lastly, the Minister of Public Service should not implement any rationalisation until Parliament has received, debated and approved the report of the ad hoc committee. 

I now adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.27 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 1 September 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)
