

Tuesday, 4 August 2020

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to thank you for the work you have been doing. I had the opportunity to go to a few parts of the country over the weekend and there were a number of issues that were brought to my attention. 

In Fort Portal, there is a complaint that Umeme metres are defective and that they consume money at a very fast rate. I would like to ask the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to take an interest in the performance of those metres so that the citizens can be advised on how to handle them. If they are defective, they should be withdrawn.

In Lira, I was informed that there is a concern that the Akii-Bua Stadium has not been completed. The last work was done in 2017. I would like to interest the Minister of Education and Sports in the issue of the Akii-Bua Stadium. Equally, the Muhinga Stadium in Fort Portal has also not been completed and it is a cause of concern to the population. 

In West Nile, the people continue to complain about power. They said that we have given them a city without power and there is nothing they can do. I really hope the minister can come to this House and explain to them what is being done about power in West Nile. This is a perennial complaint. I do not know how many years we have complained about this issue and yet, it has not been resolved. 

Today, I also had a petition from the National Union of Creative, Performing Artistes and Allied Workers on the failure of Government to implement the Copyright Act. Government was supposed to establish a commission to guide that industry. That Act is more than 15 years old and the commission has not been established. 

It is also true that the creative industry, as a sector, has no minister. On more than one occasion, I have received complaints from the musicians, artistes, fashion designers, film actors and writers. They do not have a political head and when they have problems in the industry, they do not know where to go. Sometimes they go to Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development or the Speaker of Parliament. The matter is of grave concern. 

I would like to propose that the Government establishes a ministry in charge of that sector so that there can be someone to speak for them in Cabinet. This will also provide where they can go to solve their issues. For now, however, instructions come from the National Environment Management Authority, KCCA and the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC). 

There is a particular concern that the regulations recently issued by the UCC, which were laid before this House, contain very oppressive prescription that I would like the Committee on Information Communication Technology to examine and handle in the same way that we supported the telecom sector to rectify the excesses that were embedded in the regulations. I hope that the committee will look at that. 

Also, from the Government, I really would like to hear when the Copyright Commission will be appointed. Of course, I will write to His Excellency the President, to request that he appoints a minister for that sector. 

Honourable members, our colleague, hon. David Mutebi, of Buikwe County South lost his mother. I would like us to stand up for a moment of silence and to also keep him in our prayers. 

(Members observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were a few matters of national concern. There is a matter, which hon. Masika has continuously brought to my attention that we have never had the opportunity to listen to. Can you use two minutes, hon. Masika? 

3.01
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for your communication. On the matters you picked from upcountry where you visited over the weekend, as the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development looks at the defective metres they are installing in people’s homes, they should also look at the issue of defective transformers. We have had a problem of transformers. Day and night, transformers are blowing. 

Therefore, as the ministry looks at the defective metres, let them also look at defective transformers that were supplied in various areas in this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development should examine the issue of the transformers together with the issue of the defective metres and advise us.

3.02
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance concerning saving local chicks by the farmers in Uganda and even beyond. In Uganda, we always lose billions of chicks because they die without reaching maturity because they are neglected. If a local hen hatches 10 chicks, most of the time, the hen remains with one or two. We lose billions without any help.

I have a formula that I learned from somewhere whereby if these chicks are hatched and collected in baskets - even if they are in hundreds - you get a red-hot paint and spray on the chicks and the mother hen’s head and back. Once they are released in the wild, the snakes, eagles and other predators will not touch them. Instead, the eagles will run away upon seeing them because this is not usually the real colour of the chicken. 

This has been discovered in the encyclopaedia that a mute frog has got a red round spot. If it senses a snake, it hides and displays its red spot. The snake will then crawl away. This has been tested in my constituency. I have given the people the formula and all their chicks grew to maturity. If we all do so, Uganda will raise millions of chicks. If the farmers raise 10 million chicks and you multiply that number by Shs 10,000 – A mathematician can tell how many billions we can get.

So, this is a formula for all members of Parliament. Go home and test it; you will see the results. In a very short time, Uganda will be harvesting billions of shillings from local chickens because the eggs of the local chickens are more expensive than the other breeds. The chicken itself is very expensive compared to the ones we rear indoors.

I have more formulae to inform the nation for our people to safeguard the local chicks so that we can harvest billions. Tomorrow, I will be here with another issue of national and international importance. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you for that information, hon. Masika. Let us hear from the Government Chief Whip before I make my ruling.

3.05
The Government Chief whip (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Masika for his statement to the nation.

However, I would like to request him to write down this very good concept so that we can pick it up and help the local governments. I know that Members are ex officio members of local governments. 

Even our own Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries can pick it up and see how we can save Ugandans from losing money.

This is a period we use to raise matters of urgent attention. For him to come and address the nation here without a written concept, I think that his very good intended duty will not have been fulfilled.

I am standing here to request him to put pen on paper and write down this very good concept so that everybody else can benefit. I pledge to work with him and co-ordinate this with the Leader of Government Business.

The Speaker: Thank you. Hon. Masika, if you could put the idea in writing, we would arrange that you address the House in our conference setting, rather than in the plenary so that all Members get to hear it. We can then pick it up through our committees.

3.06
Mr kenneth lubogo (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I am raising emanates from the President’s speech the last time he addressed the nation on the situation of COVID-19 and what was happening around the country.

The President informed the country that scientists were studying how churches and worship centres could operate without exposing our people to the risk of COVID-19. Wherever I have moved and the many people I have met – I have also been approached by religious leaders who believe and correctly so, that these worship centres are better organised than markets and the malls, which are operating. 

They believe that people spend less time in churches than they do in long distance vehicles like buses, which move five to six hours when carrying people in that enclosure.

They also believe that they can split their services; some people can attend at a particular hour and another group at another.

They also contend that many of them have registered congregations. They know their schedule. Therefore, it is easy for them to regulate the attendance of these people to their respective worship centres.

The question that was posed to me that I would like the country to get from Government is, what has been the finding of the scientists on the study they have made on the worship centres? Is it riskier than down town and the markets so that people should not worship their God? Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable member. I hope Government can address this sooner than later because the outcry continues. I do not know whether there is still justification but Government will tell us. 

In connection with that, I received a call from a lady asking me when the sellers of non-food items in the markets will be allowed to work. They have not been working for almost six months now. 

I hope that the Government Chief Whip can respond to this and make a pledge to take the matter on the churches and the other category to Cabinet. There are also the cinema people.

3.09
The government chief whip (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Lubogo for raising this matter.

I have been talking to the Archbishop of Church of Uganda and other leaders like Bishop Lwere and Bishop Kizito Lwanga over the same issue. What I would like to correct is what hon. Lubogo said in his conclusion that the people of Uganda cannot worship; we are worshipping but the need for opening the worship places is understood by everybody.

However, the fact that churches and mosques are closed does not mean that you should relax from worshipping because God is everywhere. In fact, people have been innovative during this trying moment to use science and I think it will not go away - they are even collecting offertory through mobile money.

There is much more to benefit from if we interact physically with our church leaders. I know that the President will soon come out to give us direction, bearing in mind that Kampala is changing. We are registering deaths from COVID-19. We receive genuine pressure to let people appear physically in their places of worship.

Madam Speaker, I will continue to raise it with the President and the Prime Minister who chairs the National Task Force, where I am a member, so that we respond to the cry of many Ugandans.

However, I thought that I should remind ourselves to always pray from wherever we are. I make the undertaking to continue pursuing this. 

About people who sell non-food items, the Minister of Health will come and tell us the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), which we need, to guide those people to make sure that we reduce the numbers of people in the market. 

There must be some guidelines, which the Minister of Health worked out. I will remind her to come and brief us so that we can join her and advise our people who work from those places. Thank you.

3.12
Ms sarah wekomba (Independent, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance concerning the people in the resettlement camp in Bulambuli who were relocated from various places in Bugisu Region.

Government committed itself to paying an allowance of Shs 200,000 to these families. In the first phase, Government moved 97 households to Bulambuli Resettlement Camp. They paid Shs 100,000 to the heads of the families; the father and mother got Shs 100,000 each. That was way back in 2019. 

They paid them for the months of May, June and July yet this money is supposed to be paid per month. However, right now, nothing has been paid to them since that time. In the second phase, Government moved 136 households. They have also not got anything for upkeep. 

The people of Bulambuli Resettlement Camp are so grateful that the Government came to their rescue. This money helped some of the families to start up some businesses and pay for basic necessities for their homes. The women were empowered. However, during the lockdown, Government did not extend any assistance to these people in the resettlement camp. Water has become a problem and there is no power. 

Therefore, I request Government to perhaps pick on a programme, like SAGE, through which they will be paying these people quarterly. I request that people in this resettlement camp are probably also put on that payment so that their upkeep is facilitated. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not know which minister will respond to this because it concerns both the Office of the Prime Minister as well as the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We should probably ask the Prime Minister to advise us on what will happen to the people in the resettlement camps, how they will access SAGE and other allowances. Please, come back to us in a fortnight. 

I have reviewed your matter, hon. Chekamondo, and noticed that the issue you indicated is not exactly a national issue. 

3.15
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter I stand to raise was discussed by this entire House after the Committee of Public Service and Local Government presented its report. 

The matter concerns women councillors representing districts. After your tour yesterday, Madam Speaker, a few women councillors intending to contest noted that every sub-county must be represented by a male and female councillor. The case here is different. Two sub-counties are still urged to be represented by one woman councillor contrary to what is everywhere.

These ladies, after seeing you on television yesterday, came to me with this petition very early in the morning, requesting me to ask the concerned ministry to correct that error. Their request is that, like men are represented by one man in every sub-county, the same should apply to women in conformity with the resolution that was passed by this Parliament. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on that one, I would like to appeal to our committee that was reviewing the Local Government Act - because when the Bill was returned, we noted it only dealt with qualifications. Our presumption is that this area is safe and they should finish the report. We should quickly return the Bill to the President to sign it so that it becomes effective. Therefore, our committee should move very fast on that issue. Thank you very much.   

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO.24) BILL, 2020

3.18
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? (Members rose_) -Okay, it is.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I wish to lay the Bill on the Table as well as the certificate of financial implications from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development clearing the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No. 24) Bill, 2020. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The Bill has been read for the first time. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO SUSPEND RULES 24, 128, 129(2) AND (5), 210 AND 133 (4) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT, 2017

3.19
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): With your permission, Madam Speaker, I beg to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to suspend a couple of rules in order to allow for the Bill to be carried. If it is allowed, can I move the motion for the suspension of the said rules? 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed with your proposal. 

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to suspend rules 24, 128, 129(2) and (5), 210 and 133 (4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2017 under Rule 16 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2017. 

The motion reads thus:

“WHEREAS during the Constitution making process, the people of Uganda emphasised that one of the main principles that should govern the composition and functioning of Parliament is participatory democracy and inclusiveness, and leaving no one behind – “ I would like to emphasise here that the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) compel a participatory country to leave no one behind. 

“---AND WHEREAS the Legislature should be composed mainly of representatives directly elected by the people, due regard should be made for the representation of older persons;

AND WHEREAS rule 128 (1) and (2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament 2017 provide as follows:

    (1) Whenever a Bill is read the first time in the House, it shall be referred to the appropriate committee appointed under the provisions of these rules; and

    (2) The committee shall examine the Bill in detail and make all such inquiries in relation to it as the committee considers expedient or necessary and report to the House within 45 days from the date the Bill is referred to it;

AND WHEREAS rule 129(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2017 provides that ‘subject to these Rules, the second reading of a Bill shall not be taken earlier than the 14th day after the publication of the Bill in the Gazette unless this sub-rule is formally suspended for this purpose’; 

AND WHEREAS rule 201 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2017 requires a report of a committee to be signed by the person and initiated by at least one third of all the members of the committee and shall be laid on the Table; 

AND WHEREAS rule 134(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2017 provides that a committee of the whole House shall consider proposed amendments by the committee, to which the Bill shall refer and may consider proposed amendments on notice, where the amendments were presented but rejected by the relevant committee or where, for reasonable cause, the amendments were not presented before the relevant committee; 

WHEREAS Rule 24 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, 2017 provides for the quorum of Parliament to be one third of all the members of Parliament entitled to vote on any question and the Speaker is required to ascertain whether the Members present in the House form quorum for the vote to be taken; if she finds that the number is less, the Speaker shall suspend the proceedings of the House for an interval of 15 minutes and the bell shall be rang;

WHEREAS it is difficult to comply with this rule due to the current health precautions and outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic;  

AND WHEREAS in the past, older persons were not included among the special interest groups represented in Parliament to participate in the governance of Uganda, there is now urgent need for Parliament to enact a law to facilitate the Electoral Commission in organising for the elections of older persons;

AND WHEREASR rule 16 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, 2017 provides that;
‘(1) Any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that any rule be suspended in its application to a particular motion before the House and if the motion is carried, the rule in question shall be suspended.

(2) This rule shall not apply in respect to rule 5, 6, 11, 12, 13(1), 16 and 97’;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that rule 24, 128, 129(2) and (5), 201 and 133(4) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, 2017 be suspended under rule 16 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, 2017 and the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No. 24) Bill, 2020” be read for the second time without the procedure as prescribed in those rules.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is it seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by several Members. Can you justify?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I thought at the last meeting, you made a ruling to the effect that this matter comes by way of a Bill, amending the particular article of the Constitution. I do not know whether that position still holds or that ruling has since been vacated. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the provision in the Parliamentary Elections Act is the same provision in the Constitution. Therefore, we can proceed. Hon. Ogwal, please, justify.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this Parliament is fortunate that the remnants of the people who participated in the constitution making process are still around and I am part of those remnants. 
Therefore, I rise to say that during the constitution making process, we were congested with too many urgent matters that we dealt with the most obvious when it comes to special interest groups. That includes the youth, the women for affirmative action, the workers and persons with disability. 

Little did I know that the elderly are suffering quietly with bitterness. Little did I know that it needed the legal empowerment, for the Government to focus on the welfare of the elderly. 

Madam Speaker, I am saying this not because I have reached my age, which is a blessing God has given me but I am speaking on behalf of millions of people, who have reached the age of 60 and above, who are elderly and require special care and there is no legal framework and no special lobbyist groups and clubs that they can resort to, to explain their unique situation.

The most obvious is that even those who are younger than me, when you walk from the reception coming down, the staircases are too long to the extent that you feel something is pulling you downwards. Definitely, when you reach the age of 50, 60 or 70 if you are lucky like me, somebody should have thought of some facilitation, where an elderly person like me would hold on to a bar and move downstairs or upstairs. However, I believe that if we have some legal framework in place, even Parliament will be more sensitive.

Madam Speaker, this Bill speaks for itself. It was an oversight and fortunately enough, I am here and I stand as a testimony that this is a special interest group that ought to have been taken care of right from the start. It is important that the House should not be polarised because of this –(Interruption)  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, if I got hon. Cecilia Ogwal right, the elderly start from the age of 60 and above; I also know that that is the age stated by the United Nation. If that is the case, I think the elderly are the most represented because if you look at the Head of the Judiciary, Head of the Executive and the Prime Ministers, they are all above that age. Therefore, the elderly are highly represented. 

Is it procedurally right for you to say that the elderly, if you are to start from the age of 60, are not represented, yet they are the ones representing all the three arms of Government? 

Secondly, if that is the case, why did we have to put SAGE to start at the age of 80 years because possibly that is where the age of the elderly would qualify? However, if you say 60 years old, I think that they are highly represented. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not digress from the subject. The SAGE issues are different. However, conversely, there are many Members of this House who are below 35 in their own right. Therefore, you cannot use that argument against the elders. (Applause) Please, conclude. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, hon. Okupa is very sensitive about this matter and he knows that his uncle, who is my husband, has reached that age limit. They keep calling him all the time to check how he is doing and that is how much the young generation must care for the elderly.

The message we have here is that there must be serious focus on how the elderly should be handled. Even when we talk about the age – I have spoken on this Floor several times. You have also added your voice on that. Even for SAGE, we are not happy that the cut-off age is 80 because like in my area, it is very rare for someone to reach 80 years.

I believe that with this legal framework in place, the Government will now reconsider moving the cut-off point to 65 years as it is in Karamoja.

I beg to move and I plead with my colleagues to please support the elderly. Please, support your parents, support the people around you in your constituency who need special care. We can only give them special care if we have a legal framework. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there a seconder? Seconded by hon. Sebunya, hon. Bichetero and hon. Waluswaka.

3.35
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for bringing the motion to allow the elderly to be represented in Parliament. 

The number of members of Parliament in the august House notwithstanding, the elderly are being elected right from the village level. That means they are elected at the village level, at the parishes level, the sub counties and town councils as well as at the district level. The only missing link is being represented in Parliament. That is the gap that was left and we think that this is the right time and place to allow them to be represented in the august House. 

Apart from that, the elderly have unique issues, to the extent that at least, every Member of Parliament carries a burden of looking for the pension of the elderly people. We are always looking for the minister to solve the pension issues. There was a time we released Shs 180 billion and we thought we had solved the problem of arrears in pension but it was not enough. There are many pensioners still crying out to Government because they were left out and their money has never been paid and yet, there is no focal office to which we can address these issues. Even when we go to the Ministry of Public Service, at times they refer us to the district, claiming that they decentralised the matter. When you get to the districts, they refer you back to the ministry.

We need people to focus this matter of pension and of SAGE. SAGE is at the moment benefitting only the elderly at 80 but that is a temporary measure because of the resource envelope that Government has. We always agree because we have many things to do. We, therefore, need somebody to sit here in Parliament to focus on that. 

The elderly in other countries have special homes. We are urbanising at a terrible speed. The bazukulu can no longer keep the elderly. They need houses in which we can collect them in urban areas and focus on them, feed them and give them proper health services. 

Recently, when they were distributing food around this COVID-19 time, I saw very old women in mizigo with bazukulu that cannot look after them. The bazukulu needed the jjajjas to look after them but after some time, the jjajjas can no longer look after themselves.

We need houses of the elderly to be built and we need somebody of that age to focus on their matters.

The pension itself is not enough. We need to focus other resources and that can only be comprehended by the elderly in Parliament. 

As I conclude, we gave chance to the youth, the physically challenged, soldiers and majority of the women are here on affirmative action. Therefore, it is high time we gave chance to the elderly to come and articulate their own issues and their unique ways. Thank you.

3.39
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of representation here in Parliament is a critical one. 

The old people are the ones who have paid a lot more tax than some of us who are young. The worst scenario is when these people retire and their pension is sometimes “eaten” by mafias. No one is there to speak for them. (Applause)

During my mobilisation tour for the upcoming campaigns, the elderly were happy with this Parliament that the proposal is coming. 

Age is wisdom. In Butaleja for example, if an elder tells you something or advises you, it is for the betterment of society and yourself. When we have these elders here, I think our behaviour – you saw how people were fighting during the age-limit Bill. With our elders here, that will not happen again. When Members are elected as elders, they will be respected. 

I would like to request that we put the issue of the elders in force here at Parliament such that they are also represented. 

I, therefore, request that the issue of the elderly be passed and since campaigns have started, I request Members that this issue be handled now such that the elders know that they are in the race and they compete favourably. Thank you. For God and my country.

3.41
MS VERONICA BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this Bill. There is a saying in most of these interest groups that nothing for us without us. The representation of the elderly people is very important. They come here and join us in this struggle for the development of the whole country. They are that hidden “encyclopaedia” that supports us in this Parliament. 

The number that is prescribed is so small that it has no dent on our budget and our numbers. I, therefore, support that this interest group of the people be approved and they join the Parliament of Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that a question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that rule 24, rule 128, rule 129(2), rule 129(5), rule 201, rule 133(4) be suspended.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO.24) BILL, 2020

3.43
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No.24) Bill, 2020 be read for the second time, under rule 129(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No.24) Bill, 2020 be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it supported? (Members rose_) Okay. It is supported by several members. What is your justification?

MR BYARUHANGA: The main objectives of this Bill are:

    a) To provide for the inclusion of older persons as a special interest group in Parliament, under Article 78(1)(c) of the Constitution;
    b) To provide for five representatives of older persons in this Parliament;
    c) To operationalise Articles 32(1) and 78(1)(c) of the Constitution; and
    d) To provide for the manner of election of representatives of older persons in Parliament by an electoral college.

Madam Speaker, in the past, older persons were not included among the special interest groups represented in Parliament to participate in the governance of Uganda yet during the Constitution-making process, the people of Uganda emphasised that one of the main principles that should govern the composition and functioning of Parliament is participatory democracy and inclusiveness. – Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was very clear on that.

The salient provisions in the Bill make provisions for:

    a) Amending section 8(2) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 to include, in the composition of Parliament, five representatives of older persons, at least one of whom shall be a woman elected from each of our four regions;

    b) The electoral college within the region of representation and all members of a district council for older persons within each region shall constitute an electoral college for the election of representatives of older persons in Parliament for that particular region;

    c) The qualifications for election of representatives of older persons are at least 60 years of age and also qualified to be a member of Parliament in conformity with Article 80 of the Constitution and section 4 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005;

    d) The election of the representative of older persons for each region be done by the Electoral Commission; and

    e) The election of the female representatives of the older persons.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No.24) Bill, 2020,” be read a second time.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.47
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWDs Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the second reading of this motion. The elderly have already been in existence. I am a member of a special interest group and I know that we have a ministry in charge of the disability and elderly but the elderly have been missing. It has been more pronounced with people with disabilities.

I would like to say that the elders out there have a lot of challenges. I would like to support the motion because it is bringing on board their representation. You can be here – for example, I am a woman but it is on rare occasions that I talk about issues of elderly women. I talk more about people with disabilities because that is my area. 

A 60-year old person in the village does not look like the 60-year-old in an executive position. There are challenges. For example, many of them have very many grandchildren to take care of whose parents may have died of HIV/AIDS and all those other things. Sometimes, these people have not been respected in many areas. When they come to functions, people look at them as people who have already been written off yet, they have a lot of ideas to give us.

Madam Speaker, when you go to Karamoja, the elders are given high respect but in many parts of Uganda people are beginning to lose respect for the elders. I think that when these people come to Parliament, they will be able to come up with policies that support the elderly. For example, there are common illnesses that attack elderly people. Some of them even move into disability. I think that is what hon. Cecilia Ogwal was talking about – and moving on the steps becomes a problem yet they may not be disabled. Some of them are not even able to read and understand.

Madam Speaker, there is an issue of forgetfulness. There are specific issues for which we need to get representation. I would like to encourage that we get to know how many of them will be women. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.50
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the Bill that has been presented by the Government to include the representation of elders in this Parliament and I would like to talk more about planning. 

In Uganda right now, the population structure is sitting on its base. However, in 20 years to come, the structure will change and it will stand on its head. That means that we are going to have more elderly persons in Uganda and, therefore, it is imperative that we plan early for the elderly – those who have worked and those who have lost energy and need to be supported.

The role of Parliament is to make laws for the good governance of this country. If we are a Parliament that thinks about the good governance of this country and our people, this Bill is very important.

I suggest that all members of Parliament support this Bill because we are all going to age. Currently, we are almost going in that bracket; we need to plan for the elderly people.

I have moved in my constituency and realised that we have serious problems with the elderly. Most of them have lost land because they have given away that land to their children. They have nowhere to farm. Most of them have lost energy and cannot dig or do anything that can generate income and yet, they do not have any source of income. 

Madam Speaker, when we pass this Bill, I am of the opinion that we come up with another Bill that will handle the issues of the elderly.

When I was the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, I visited the Parliament of Singapore. At that time, they were discussing a Bill concerning the elderly: how to look after the elderly, the responsibility of the children to look after their parents. I got to know that there, it is mandatory for the children to look after their parents and there are sanctions. When you have parents and you do not look after them, you are prosecuted under the law.

Therefore, I support the elderly to be in this Parliament because it is the right thing to do. I beg to move.

3.53
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion. I would like to talk about some few challenges that the older persons are facing in the rural areas.

Last week, I had a tour in my constituency and I found that one of the problems, which my people have is the National Identification Card registration. They made a mistake because some of these older people did not know their ages. One lady came to me and said she did not know, at the time of the registration, whether she was 18 years or 19. She, however, looked to over 80. 

Madam Speaker, many of the older people who are there are still having challenges. For the case of men, some of them who, by good luck or by chance, had several wives or families, are about to die because they have so much responsibility. I would ask Parliament to reduce their responsibilities as they come to represent their colleagues because they might not have energy to move around if they have wider areas to take care of. 

I would also urge Government to make sure that they find a way of paying these people as soon as possible. Most people in our country, for instance in the north, rarely make it to 80 years and because of the LRA war, a 55 or 60-year-old person appears to be 80. Therefore, we should support this Bill. Thank you.

3.55
MR MUHAMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course, this is a catch 22 scenario. By prescription, law and practice, at the lower levels of governance, the elderly people have been represented. When you talk about discrimination, it would appear that they are only discriminated in representation at parliamentary level. 

However, there are two things to caution. As we open the pandora box of groups to be represented, we must walk the talk as the future will come calling. Before us, there is a court ruling that we all know, that has called upon the people in the diaspora to start voting. Are we now going to start talking about the issue of representation of Ugandans in the diaspora, in this august House? There will be a question about a special interest group that contributes to our national budget remittances and whatever else we can talk about. 

Therefore, the best thing to do is to plan for the welfare of these persons. On the issue of talking about one elderly person representing an entire region, let us say northern Uganda; when is he going to reach out to all these elderly people? I know we want their voices and no one says no. If we are to ask – now at the moment that the Head of State is elderly; the Vice President is elderly; the Prime Minister is elderly; 60 per cent of the Cabinet is elderly - where are the elderly not represented? Is it because those that are occupying these positions have failed to perform their duties that the elderly persons are now lamenting? 

That is why I said we are in a catch 22. We already set a precedence that has thrown a rope onto us because at the lower level, they are represented. At Parliamentary level, it will look discriminatory for them not to be represented. The question should go to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and the Attorney General. What pandora box are we trying to open today? Shall we start discussing all other people; the police, the prisons, people in the diaspora? Before you know it, the farmers, salon owners, musicians to mention but a few, will ask to be represented.

Therefore, let us envisage a situation like we talked about in the constituencies. If we are talking about the issue of affirmative action, then we might not close this window. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is wrong to legislate in anticipation. Let us deal with what is here now. I do not know why people think they are going to remain in their ages. It is not possible. 

3.59
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion of having a Member of Parliament representing the elderly persons in Parliament. Today, when you are in the villages, there are situations like this time of COVID-19 where the elderly people who have experienced such things before come and tell you how they handled them. So, using the history of events that have happened in the past, the elderly people give guidance to the new generation. 

Madam Speaker, in most young families, when a woman has just delivered a first born, if an elder is not there to advise the young couple, sometimes, they end with problems because they do not know how to manage such situations. 

The reason we have famine today is because we did not respect the elders. They have been giving us ways of creating food security. When they talked of food security, we ignored the food crops the elderly used to grow those days to supply our country and homes with food all the time. For example, the people have ignored foods like millet, dried cassava and dried bananas that were peeled and kept. They have ignored even the vegetables that used to feed us well. 

I think the elderly persons, given the situation that they go through with their needs – surely, it is the elderly who can put their heads together and improve this country. I beg to support this motion. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear the motion.

4.01
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I rise to move a motion that the debate closes and the question be put. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that a question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the Bill be read the second time. Let us go to the Committee Stage.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO.24) BILL, 2020

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: On clause 1 (e), Madam Chairperson, I propose that for older persons, there should be at least two out of five. That will be in compliance with the constitutional provision of 30 per cent representation of women.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, that will mean that we say, “…at least two of whom shall be women.” I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3

Dr lyomoki: Madam Chairperson, in clause 8(h)(b), I have a problem with the phrasing. What does “All members of a district council for older persons” mean? I thought that we meant the representatives in the district council for older persons who would form this Electoral College.

If we say, “All members of the district council,” it is as if we have a district council for older persons. I need clarification on what that phrasing means.

The Chairperson: Honourable minister, is there a council at the district?

Mr byaruhanga: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It should read, “All members of a district council for each region shall constitute an electoral college for the election of the representative of the older person in Parliament for that region.”

The Chairperson: No. I think they are supposed to be elected by their peers. It should be, “All members of the council of older persons -”

Mr byaruhanga: “All members of a district council for older persons within each region” –

The Chairperson: It is not the district council. There is a council.

Dr lyomoki: Madam Chairperson, at districts, we have representatives of elderly persons in the district council. We do not have a district council for older persons. Therefore, there is a mix-up. 

Mr akol: Madam Chairperson, there are two different representatives at district level. There are those who are two in number representing the people who are elderly at the district level, which is a different one. Then we have the council for elders. Therefore, it should be clear, which one we mean when we talk about this.

The Chairperson: Do you mean the ones who are elected to represent their peers?

Mr kasule: Madam Chairperson, we would say, “the elderly at the district council will be the ones to elect in that region.” Two members per district in the region will represent the college that will elect the elderly persons.

The Chairperson: Where is the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development? 

Ms asamo: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am aware that there are five members at the council who come right from the village to build the council, in the case of the persons with disabilities. They are five and they are the ones who form the Electoral College –(Interjections)- Yes, there are two councillors elected from the village. They are the ones who elect the district council. Therefore, that is the group, which should elect the elders.

Mr Johnson muyanja: Madam Chairperson, the elderly are not only represented at the district level. In a district like Mukono, the elderly are fully represented at the municipality, sub-county and town councils or divisions.

Therefore, the best idea would have been that all the elderly that represent administrative units - they have the divisions and there is no way you are going to neglect the division or the municipality when they have elderly people there.

The two should come from a sub county, division and in case of a municipality; a district and form the elderly team to have their representation. Thank you. 

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I would like to propose that we stand over this clause and ask our Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the Minister of Local Government to consult over it. We can complete it tomorrow. Is that okay? – so that we can agree.

Please, move for the House to resume. I would like the committee to examine this area - who comprises the voters? It is important.

Motion for the house to resume

4.10
The government chief whip (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

Report FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.11
The government chief whip (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clause 1, with amendments, passed clause 2 and stood over clause 3. I beg to report.

Motion for adoption of the report from the committee of the whole house

4.11
The government chief whip (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the Minister for Local Government and the Minister for Gender, Labour and social Development should consult quickly over this matter. We shall complete it tomorrow or on Thursday.

Dr Lyomoki: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request that the committee also considers this in handling the same Bill. We have introduced that out of five, two should be female. We have four regions, which means that they should guide us in terms of elections. 

When they were four and one, it was simple for other regions to have general elections, whether it was a woman or man –

The Speaker: Fortunately, we had not dealt with clause 8(h)(a). Therefore, the committee will guide us.

Dr lyomoki: They should also analyse that before they come. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EVALUATION OF COVID-19 GUIDELINES AND RESPONSES 

THE SPEAKER: When will the Prime Minister come to this House? We have not seen his face for some time. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It was your ruling in this House about two weeks ago that the Minister in charge of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes to this august House to talk about the issue of taxation on apparels on raw materials imported by our traders. Since then, we have not heard a response. Last week, when you asked for the responses from the ministers, most of them were not here. 

Now that he is here, my prayer is that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gives us a position on how far the issue of taxation on materials and apparels has taken course. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is some progress on that area; not from the ministry’s side but my side. Next week, I will be going with the Commissioner, Domestic Taxes to visit this industry and see the samples of the items in issue. Thereafter, I shall update you. 

Next week, I am going with the Commissioner for Domestic Taxes to see the young people that petitioned. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON COMPLAINTS BY INDIVIDUALS WHO WERE REPATRIATED FROM VARIOUS COUNTRIES WHERE THEY HAD BEEN STRANDED DUE TO THE COVID-19 LOCKDOWN AND QUARANTINED AT SHERATON HOTEL FOR THE OBLIGATORY 14 DAYS YET UPON EXPIRY OF THE DAYS, THEY WERE UNJUSTIFIABLY RETAINED FOR AN ADDITIONAL 3 DAYS AND WITHOUT TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE EXPENSES INVOLVED

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Health here? They are not here. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION ON 3RD MAY 2018 ON PAYMENT OF MONIES OWED TO UGANDA SOUTH SUDAN TRADERS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on this one, I have summoned the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Attorney-General, the Minister of State for Finance and the Secretary to the Treasury to come and meet in my office on Thursday morning to conclude this matter. We will give you an update on Thursday in the afternoon. 

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER SECTION 7(2)(A) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT CAP. 243 FOR ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES OF BUSHENYI–ISHAKA MUNICIPALITY

4.16
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament under section 7(2)(a) of the Local Government Act Cap. 243 for alteration of boundaries of Bushenyi–Ishaka Municipality. 

“RECALLING that Bushenyi–Ishaka Municipality was created by this august House and it took effect on 1 July 2010 and that the District Council of Bushenyi under Minute 22 of 28/19, on 9 November 2018, resolved that Ntungamo Parish, which is currently in Igara East Constituency in Igara East County joins Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality from Kizoba sub county because the town has grown beyond the existing boundaries and the district council has expressed willingness to expand the municipality boundaries;

NOTING that the district council can alter the boundaries of the municipality with the approval of Parliament; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:  

    1. The boundaries of Bushenyi–Ishaka Municipality be altered to include Ntungamo Parish from Kizoba sub county to Nyakabirizi Municipal Division in Bushenyi – Ishaka Municipality. 

    2. This correction takes effect from 1 July 2020.”

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the boundaries of Bushenyi–Ishaka Municipality be altered as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER SECTION 8 (3) OF THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS ACT, 2005, FOR REVIEW OF THE REPRESENTATION UNDER ARTICLE 78 (1) (B) AND (C) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

4.18
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, as you may recall, on 15 July 2020, I presented a motion to this House for the review of the representation of special interest groups in Parliament in accordance with Article 78(2) of the Constitution and section 8 (3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005.

Under section 8, a district or city woman representative and special interest groups of the Parliamentary Elections Act 2005 provides as follows: 

Section 8(1) reads, “As required by Article 78(1)(b) of the Constitution, ‘there shall be a woman representative in Parliament for every district or city.’”

Clause (2) states, “there shall be the following representatives of special interest groups in Parliament for purposes of Article 78(1)(c) of the Constitution:

    a) For the UPDF, there shall be 10 representatives; at least two of whom shall be women;
    b) For workers, there shall be five representatives and at least one of whom shall be a woman;
    c) For the youth, there shall be five representatives and at least one of whom shall be a woman; 
    d) For persons with disabilities, there shall be five representatives at least one of whom shall be a woman.” 

Debate on the motion took place on the same day on 15 July 2020. However, due to lack of quorum, passing of the motion was deferred. I, therefore, request that you proceed under Rule 62(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2017 to put the question to the House. Thank you. 

4.21
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the same day when this motion was moved, we, the representatives of workers, youth and persons with disabilities stood on this Floor and moved that the number of each of these interest groups be moved from five to 10. 

We had earlier on written a petition to your office. We had even written another petition to the ministry responsible and we had justified that proposal on the basis that this House has continued to increase. At the time when these interest groups started - for instance the three interest groups operate together with the women – at that time, the women at the district were 39 and we had 39 women representatives in this House but the number has increased to almost three times. 

The proportions of these groups have continued to increase. The youth are now more than 70 per cent of the population and the workers have increased from about 4 million at that time to about 17 million now. 

Initially, we used to have only representatives of labour unions. In the electoral colleges, we have the non-unionised workers; so, we have a bigger electoral college and it is the same with the persons with disabilities. Therefore, we had requested that, that number be increased for each of these groups to match with the UPDF, who are now 10 and have been 10 ever since that time.

Not only have the district women representatives increased in terms of numbers but also other constituencies. Last week, we increased the number of constituencies by 46 counties and this has been happening when we create municipalities and cities. It means that we have more members of Parliament from those areas.

Lastly, the committees in this House have also increased. It has been very complicated for representatives of these interest groups who are only five to participate in committees because we usually send one person per committee. Therefore, it becomes very hard for us to be in the other committees because we are only five and we cannot participate in the committees that are more than 10 in this House.

If the number is increased, these interest groups will be effective in their representation, relating to the issues of their constituents.
 
Madam Speaker, I, therefore, would like to move that the last phrase of that resolution be amended by increasing the number - in respect of representatives for workers, youth and persons with disabilities - from five to 10 representatives.

There is a question I raised about the elderly, which will be discussed by their committee. We propose five representatives of the elderly and we have said that out of those five, two should be women. Now, there is going to be a challenge because they will be left three, yet we have four regions. The challenge will be which region must elect a woman. 

We are will also have a challenge when it comes to the issue of the representatives of elderly persons because it will be difficult to have the two women, unless we increase the number to six so that the balance remains four and therefore, is in tandem with the regions.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you suggesting that women cannot be part of those other four? No.

DR LYOMOKI: They can but it becomes complicated. The general ones can either be a woman or a man –(Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, if the Member of Parliament is thinking that complying with that requirement would be difficult, it would, therefore, be appropriate to suggest that all the five representatives be women; then your problem would be sorted. We are talking about affirmative action and women representation is still very low in Parliament and at the districts. Therefore, it is appropriate that all the five representatives be women and the men can wait.

THE SPEAKER: I wanted to remind the Deputy Attorney-General, on the issue of the UPDF. Before we adjourned last time, we had amended UPDF women representatives to three and it has to be at least three.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, may I respond to – 

THE SPEAKER: No, you will respond later. Let us hear the comments of the Members.

MR KAFUUZI: Okay.

4.26
MAJ. EVERLYNE ASIIMWE (NRM, UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Constitution provides for 30 per cent and since the members of Parliament for the UPDF are 10, and you have rightly said that it was amended, I would like to capture that three out of 10 should be women. At least, four out of 10 UPDF representatives should be women. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.27
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, last time, we talked about at least three out of 10. I would like to request that we maintain what we discussed that time. “At least three” does not mean that we shall have only three. Therefore, we should maintain at least three women representatives out of 10 UPDF representatives. (Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to give the Government Chief Whip information. In a couple of years, we have observed that the female army representation have been very active on the Floor of Parliament. I do not see why you should disadvantage them. 

Madam Speaker, if they are 10 and they are humbly asking for four, why would you deny them the four? They are more active on the Floor of Parliament. Madam Speaker, you are my witness and you know that the lady who has been recently promoted - I am very grateful that she was promoted; she has been very active. 

Therefore, the female UPDF representatives have been very active on the Floor of Parliament and we must increase their representation in Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, at present, they are three; Brig. Flavia Byekwaso – whom we congratulate, Capt. Everlyne Asiimwe and Capt. Susan Lakot. Therefore, we should improve.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, the person who has presented their cause is part of the UPDF and they have their own whip. Therefore, not to defer from what hon. Cecilia Ogwal has presented, we should be seen to promote these women in the UPDF. By consensus, we all agree on four. 

However, on the issue of increase of numbers as put forward by hon. Sam Lyomoki, I do not agree. We should look at the cost of public administration. Let us find a way of accommodating the women. Like we have said, let us accommodate the three out of the five and find a way for the one who represents those nationally and those from the different regions.  

Therefore, we should balance the boat –(Interjection)– Yes, we must find a way to include these women but not to increase the numbers because the cost of public administration will go very high. We should know that we are also in the process of increasing the number of representatives for the elderly. The cost will be very high. Thank you.

4.30
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I would also like to say something in relation to the percentage of women in the UPDF. There are some things that we need to consider because the Electoral College that sends representatives of the UPDF has certain aspects that they consider. 

Secondly, equally the ratio of women in the UPDF – if we have a number that may be difficult for their electoral college to choose from, we may hit a dead end somewhere. I propose - because they have said that the female representatives are very active, it could be true that they are active but activeness does not reflect the number that is represented. We could have three active representatives and it could be sufficient.

On hon. Lyomoki’s issue of having 10 representatives of special interest groups – the workers, youth and persons with disabilities, Madam Speaker, let us be sincere. I am the Member of Parliament for the youth in my constituency. If you asked these members of Parliament, we represent the views of the youth and we are handling the issues of the youth. 

Therefore, when we increase the numbers, tomorrow, somebody may propose increasing the number to 20 and the other day, they may propose increasing the number to 40; everybody will come with a different figure. Let us maintain the number of special interest groups to five representatives as we move on. We can revise that number when Uganda maybe gets to a population of 80 million people.

4.32
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, on the issue of the number of the UPDF, you are all aware that the female representatives have been very active here. Not only that; they have been three in number of three and if we are improving their representation here – we have seen how they are operating and debating here. We should actually increase their number to four; that should be our position. We should do something for the women in the UPDF since they are doing well in the House here and we have no reason to maintain them at three. I wish Members could support this position. 

4.34
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker thank you. Hon. Rwakajara, where have you been? 

I would like to support the popular view that we increase the number of the UPDF female representatives to a minimum of four and the question should be put on that matter. Leave alone participation in the House but even in the committees. In the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we have hon. Lakot; she has been very active. We have seen Maj. Asiimwe not only in the House and the committee but also when it comes to going for field work, they will always be there. 

It is not surprising that most of them have been promoted since they came to Parliament. All the UPDF female representatives have been promoted; that shows that they have been very active. So, no one should resist the proposal that we increase their number to a minimum of four UPDF female representation. 

Finally, on my brother hon. Lyomoki’s issue that he has brought here – it is unfortunate that this time I will not be on your side, hon. Lyomoki. I have always supported you on the issues of workers but today, on this one, let us go with the numbers that we have been able to have. 

I do not want to mention that you have not been to Kasilo or Serere since you were elected the Workers’ Representative; I do not know whether it was because the number was small. The woman MP, the representative of people with disability and I have been representing the workers. We are adding that number to cure that position, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I support the campaign to improve the representation of women in the UPDF but I have looked at the Constitution and the Parliamentary Elections Act; we are still caught by the two. That is what is in the Act and the Constitution -(Interjection)– then amend by bringing a Bill to amend the Parliamentary Elections Act in that area. 

Secondly, I do not know whether hon. Lyomoki has a certificate of financial implication for those workers because we gave you time. 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am amending a motion brought by the Government. So, I do not need to have a certificate of financial implications. 

THE SPEAKER: What is the import of the motion? 

DR LYOMOKI: I was just amending the motion that has been brought by the minister. 

THE SPEAKER: When you double the number, what happens there? How do you deal with Article 93 on that issue? 

DR LYOMOKI: Technically we can increase, as long as the motion has been brought by the minister. We have done that in the past. 

Madam Speaker, if you rule that this motion is deflective, then that means that we shall never increase anything. When the minister brings anything, it means that Parliament can never move on it. As long as the motion has been brought by the minister, Madam Speaker, we can vary, whether by increase or decrease. 

The Certificate of financial implications and the motion provision relates to who introduces the motion but not whether you can, as a Member of Parliament, debate on that motion and vary certain figures. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it introduced on behalf of the Government under Article 93? Unless the Bill is introduced on behalf of the Government – “…proceed upon a Bill… imposition of taxation, charge on the Consolidated Fund…” How would those additional five members be paid? 

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Speaker, mine was not a motion. It was an amendment to a motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The motion belongs to the Government. Let them tell us. 

4.38
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, when we presented the motion, I remember clearly the argument raised by my senior colleagues, hon. Lyomoki and hon. Safia Nalule, that the numbers for the disabled and the numbers for workers should be increased to make them proportionate to the average number of members of Parliament. 

However, we did not manage to get a certificate of financial implications for that increase and because of that, we are unable to pursue the required increase. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the motion be adopted as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT BILL 2020 AS RETURNED BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3)(B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT 

4.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, on 25 July 2019, the Government introduced in this Parliament, the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2019 as part of the Electoral Reforms Bill. 

The Bill was accordingly referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the purpose of the Bill is to amend the Local Government Act Cap.243:

    1. To provide for the creation of local government and magistrate units at least two years before the due date for the next general election; 
    2. To provide for the demarcation of electoral areas; 
    3. To prescribe the manner of conducting campaigns;
    4. To bar persons not ordinarily resident in a local government area from contesting for councillor for that area;
    5. To provide for the procedure for commencement of polls at each polling station; and
    6. To align the Local Government Act with the provisions of the Constitution as amended by the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018. 

On 4 March 2020, Parliament passed the Local Government (Amendment) Bill and was thereafter referred to H.E. the President for assent. 

The President, in accordance with Article 91(3)(b), withheld his assent to the Bill and duly returned it to Parliament for reconsideration. 

Madam Speaker, the content of the President’s letter to your good self, dated 25 June, 2020, is well within the knowledge of this House. For those who were not there, largely, the President was concerned about prescribing academic qualifications for LC III chairpersons of town councils and district councillors. He was also concerned about clause 7 of the Bill, which amended section 116 of the Local Governments Act by introducing education qualifications for district councillors. 

His Excellency reasoned that the amendments to section 111 and 116 of the Local Government Act has the effect of disenfranchising the people of Uganda by limiting them on the choice of leaders they can elect into positions of leadership. 

On the amendment of section 7 of the Local Government Act, the President reasoned that section 7 is sufficient and should not be amended since the local governments are created based on people’s wishes and requests, thereby making the proposals to section 7 redundant. 

Madam Speaker, as part of our methodology, we invited and interacted with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda and hon. Elijah Okupa, who moved those amendments during plenary. The committee was guided by rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda in considering the concerns of the President and we would like to report as follows:

Since the report is uploaded, I request that I only go to the main issues. 

i) 	Imposition of education of education qualifications on chairpersons

The proposal to amend clause 6 of the Bill to introduce education qualifications for chairpersons of municipal councils, town councils and division councils was introduced by hon. Elijah Okupa during the debate at the second reading of the Bill on 4 March, 2020. 

The proposal in clause 6, amending section 111 of the Local Government Act, introduced education qualifications for any person who seeks election as a chairperson or mayor of a municipal council, town council or division council other than a chairperson of a sub-county, of a minimum education of Advanced Level standard or its equivalent. 

The committee notes that this amendment had not been referred to the committee and neither was it the subject of any formal consultation by the committee during the consultations the committee undertook on the electoral reforms. 

I should also note that among the witnesses we interacted with was the Minister of Local Government, who came with the technical team: the permanent secretary and the commissioners.

We observed that currently, under the Local Government Act, there are no education qualifications for councillors generally in the local government. For chairpersons, the Local Government Act, in section 111(3), imposes education qualifications for the district and city chairpersons of a minimum qualification of A’ level or its equivalent. This means that chairpersons of a municipality, town, division or sub-county are not required to have any form of education qualification as is provided for under section 111 (4) of the Local Government Act. 

The committee further notes that due to their limited functions and jurisdiction, the proposal to impose education qualifications of Advanced Level is unrealistic. The committee further notes that the imposition of education qualifications of Advanced Level – similar to qualifications required of a person seeking office of President, Member of Parliament, district and city chairpersons whose functions are broader and complex than those of municipal councils, town councils or division councils – is unjustifiable. 

The committee is aware that chairpersons of municipal councils, town councils or division councils are assisted by competent and highly educated civil servants in form of Town Clerks, City Clerks and Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) who are required to possess a minimum qualification of a university degree and not less than 10 years’ working experience for the CAO. This means that the LCV and the CAO assist lower local governments in implementing their roles as well as supervising activities of the lower local governments. This makes the imposition of education qualification on the chairpersons of these units mentioned above redundant.

The committee, however, observes that the imposition of education qualification is not in itself discriminatory as reasoned by the President. Whereas Article 21 of the Constitution requires that all persons are equal before the law and it specifically bars the discrimination of a person on the ground of sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability, the imposition of education qualification on all persons without differentiating between them on grounds of sex, race, colour and others as numerated above is not prohibited by law.

Recommendation

    a) The proposal to introduce education qualifications against chairperson of a municipal council, town council or division council should be rejected as explained above.
    b) For clarity, education qualifications should only apply to district and city chairpersons as currently prescribed in section 111(3) of the Local Government Act. Clause 6 of the Bill should, therefore, stand part of the Bill without any amendment.

ii) 	Imposition of education qualifications on district and city councillors

The proposal to amend clause 7 to introduce education qualifications for district and city councillors was introduced by hon. Elijah Okupa on 4 March 2020 during the debate. Originally, hon. Okupa had proposed that education qualifications apply to all councillors representing a city division, municipal council, municipal division, town council or district but when the House considered this matter, a decision was taken to only restrict education qualifications to the district and city councillors. As earlier noted, this amendment had not been referred to the committee and neither was it a subject of any formal consultation by the committee during the consultations the committee undertook. 

The committee notes that the President returned the amendments to clause 7 of the Bill reasoning that they have the effect of disenfranchising the people of Uganda by limiting them on the choice of leaders they can elect into positions of leadership, is discriminatory and not realistic in some instances where it requires qualifications of persons in certain offices, yet these people perform different roles, which roles require different competencies. 

The committee is aware that currently, councillors at all levels do not have education qualifications and clause 7 had proposed to impose education qualifications on city and district councillors of a minimum qualification of Ordinary Level.

The committee observes that education qualifications for councillors at the district and city councils should be supported in light of the functions and roles they are expected to perform. Section 9 of the Local Government Act directs that a council shall be the highest political authority within its area of jurisdiction and have legislative and executive powers. 

The roles performed by district and city councillors necessitate the imposition of some form of education qualifications so that persons who can perform those functions are the ones who attain such important positions in the land. The imposition of those education qualifications is, therefore, a reflection of the roles and functions of those persons, which include enacting by-laws and ordinances, formulating and passing budgets for the districts and being in overall administration and management of the district social services. 

The committee is aware that the medium of communication in all councils across the country is the English Language or Swahili as prescribed in Article 6 of the Constitution. Documents of councils, including minutes of meetings are all in the English Language as prescribed in paragraph 10 of the Third Schedule to the Local Government Act. 

In order to comprehend and participate fully in the decisions and deliberations of the council, councillors are required to possess a minimum level of English proficiency. The committee is also aware that councillors, especially at the district and city are eligible for appointment on the district executive committee, which is nominated by the chairperson from amongst members of the council as prescribed in sections 16 and 18 of the Local Government Act. 

The committee observes that many a times, because of lack of education qualifications for councillors, the chairperson of the district is usually curtailed in appointing the chairperson of the executive committee of the district who, in accordance with section 18 (2) of the Local Government Act, is supposed to be qualified as a chairperson of a district. This, therefore, means that there must be a councillor who is qualified for election as a district chairperson capable of being nominated as chairperson of a district executive committee by the district chairperson. 

The committee notes that because of lack of qualifications for councillors, there is always a crisis in situations where there is no suitably qualified councillor eligible for appointment to head the executive committee. 

The committee observes that the timing for the proposal so close to the general election might negatively impact on persons who do not possess the requisite qualifications. The committee observes further that the Electoral Commission has already set out a roadmap for the upcoming 2021 elections wherein, persons who intend to offer their candidature for the various political offices in Uganda have been informed on the processes that have to be complied with before nomination, the time for nomination, campaigns and elections. 

Therefore, imposing education qualifications at this time will not afford, the would-be candidates time within which to organise their candidature, specifically, to have all the necessary education qualifications and to verify their academic documents with mandated institutions, some of which are not operating due to the COVID-19 Pandemic. Those who do not possess the proposed qualifications will not have time enough to acquire them. 

The committee was also informed that there are certain parts of the country, which might be adversely affected by the proposed introduction of education qualifications. Madam Speaker, regions like Karamoja had Members in the committee who said education qualification is still a big challenge there. The committee is aware that currently in Uganda, there are 330 sub-counties without secondary schools. The committee is also aware that there are councils in certain parts of the country where the existing members, except the District Chairpersons, do not possess the minimum qualifications proposed in the Bill. 

In order to address the challenges identified above, the committee is of the considered opinion that whereas imposition of minimum education qualifications is necessary, there is need to ensure that the imposition of these minimum education qualifications does not adversely affect the operation of councils in the country as well as unreasonably curtail the enjoyment of a person's right to seek political office as well as participating in the formulation of policies and making of decisions that affect them. 

In that regard, therefore, the committee considers that adequate time and notification of the imposition of education qualifications needs to be given to the citizenry of this country in order to prepare to comply with the minimum qualification. The committee notes that a period of at least 5 years needs to be given to allow intending aspirants to acquire the necessary qualifications. Therefore, this means that whereas education qualifications may be imposed as proposed in the Bill, we are proposing that it should not commence automatically with the forthcoming general election but wait to commence with the 2026 general election cycle. (Applause)

Recommendations

    a) The committee disagrees with the assertion of His Excellency the President on this matter and recommends that education qualifications are maintained for district and city councillors. 
    b) In order to afford persons who do not possess the minimum education qualifications adequate time to acquire the education qualifications, the committee recommends that the minimum education qualification should take effect from the 2026 general election cycle.
    c) The committee recommends that Government urgently undertakes a review of all education qualifications for all elective positions, in light of the improvement of the literacy levels in the country with the view of reviewing upwards all education qualifications for all elective positions including for Members of Parliament. 

iii) 	Reservations of His Excellency the President on clause 1

The President also had reservations about clause 1 of the Bill, which proposes to amend section 7 of the Local Government Act to:

    a) Require the consultation of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development by the Minister of Local Government every time a local government unit or any other administrative unit is being created; 
    b) Postpone elections in a new local government unit or administrative unit that is created during the term of a local government council; 
    c) Postpone the immediate commencement of a district or administrative unit created during the term of a local government council and to require the same to commence six months before the next general Parliamentary or local government council elections;
    d) Require a district or administrative unit to commence by statutory instrument. 

The President's view on clause 1 is that the current section 7 of the Local Government Act is sufficient and should not be amended since the local governments are created based on people's wishes and requests, thereby making the proposals to section 7 to be redundant. 

The committee observes that the creation of districts and administrative units is based, among others, on the wishes of the people of that area, expressed by their elected representatives as required in section 7 of the Local Government Act. The requirement to consult the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will adversely affect the exercise of the rights of the people to demand the creation or alteration of a district or administrative unit. 

The committee is also concerned that subjecting the Minister of Local Government's discretion to authorise the creation or alteration of boundaries of districts and administrative units to the wishes of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will not only water down and fetter the powers and functions of the Minister of Local Government, but is also redundant in the sense that the creation of districts and other administrative units is a matter that is discussed and authorised by Cabinet where both ministers sit and participate in the discussions. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends as follows:

    a) The proposal in the Bill to require the consultation of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development by the Minister of Local Government should be rejected and deleted from the Bill for reasons explained above. 

    b) The proposal to postpone election in a new local government unit or administrative unit that is created during the term of local government council and the immediate commencement of a district or administrative unit created during the term of a local government council and to require the same to commence six months before the next general Parliamentary or local government council election as well as require a district or administrative unit to commence by statutory instrument should be maintained. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to report. 

Allow me to lay the minutes of the committee deliberations and also a copy of the report. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Honourable members, we had a lengthy debate when we were making that law in March so we do not need much debate. 

I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, with regard to the Local Governments Act especially on qualifications, the original proposals in the report are hereby reinstated. 

We would like to urge the President to expeditiously assent to this Bill because it has an impact on the next general elections.

Minister for Local Government, there is something you did not complete. While we were looking at resolutions of the House approving the 48 new counties, the Clerk found some inconsistencies in the composition of the newly created West Budama County. Please restate the composition so that the records can be properly captured. 

5.04
THE MINISTER of LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have considered the district council resolutions and wish to present the right composition for the newly created county of West Budama Central. 

It will comprise the following:

    1. Mulanda Sub County
    2. Mwello Sub County
    3. Pajwenda Town Council
    4. Siwa Sub County
    5. Nabiyonga Sub County, and
    6. Nabiyonga Town Council.

Secondly, the composition of the newly created West Budama East County is as follows:

    1. Nagongera Sub County,
    2. Peta Sub County,
    3. Kisoko Sub County,
    4. Katajula Sub County, and
    5. Nagongera Town Council.

Thirdly, the composition of the newly created Ruhama East County is as follows:

    1. Kitwe Town Council
    2. Nyakyera Sub County
    3. Nyakyera Town Council
    4. Rwoho Town Council
    5. Rukoni East Sub County
    6. Rukoni West Sub County.

Finally, the composition of the newly created Ruhinda South County is as follows:

    1. Kabira Sub County
    2. Kabira Town Council
    3. Mayanga Sub County
    4. Rurehe Sub County
    5. Mutara Sub County
    6. Mutara Town Council
    7. Nyakizinga Sub County.

I beg to move for the adoption of the House. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the information from the Minister for Local Government is noted. The record should be adjusted before the resolution is completed. 

Honourable members, I understand there is a small matter, which the Chairperson for the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs wants to amend in the Local Governments Act. Let us go to committee stage. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 1

5.07
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Chairperson, we had proposed amendments to clause 1 of the Bill. The proposal is that, “Delete paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e).” 

The justification is that:

    1) It is in light of the views of the President to remove the requirement on the Minister of Local Government to consult the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development every time a district, lower Local Government or administrative unit is being created since this is redundant in light of the provisions of Article 117 of the Constitution.

    2) The proposals will also fetter the discretion of the Minister for Local Government to authorise the creation of a district, lower Local Government or administrative unit by subjecting that discretion to the wishes of the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

    3) The proposals will also subject the wishes of the people while creating districts, lower Local Governments or administrative units to the wishes of the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development yet the wishes of the people are paramount on such matters as prescribed in Article 1 and 179(4) of the Constitution. 

Madam Chairperson, I beg to move for that amendment of clause 1, accordingly. I seek your guidance whether I could proceed to clause – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let us handle one by one. Honourable members, the question is that sub-clause “(a), (b), (c), (d) and (e)” of clause 1 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to. 

Clause 6

MR OBOTH: We would like to seek an amendment that clause 6 does stand part of the Bill, without amendment.

The justification is in light of the views as expressed above, which are about qualifications and requiring chairpersons of Local Government or municipal, town council and division to have qualifications; we have already discussed this and in principle, we pray that clause 6 stands part of the Bill without any amendment. 

MR AKOL: Madam Chairperson, when you look at the composition of the cities and the town councils, if the view was that A’ level is a higher qualification, I propose it is better for us to lower it to O’ level. The reason is that you have those elected leaders to supervise the technical people who are also working within the councils. If senior six is the problem, why don’t we come to O’ level as the qualification? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you did not present that proposal to the committee. I put the question that clause 6, as originally proposed, do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.) 

Clause 7

MR OBOTH: We seek to amend clause 7 by inserting immediately before paragraph (a) the following new paragraph:

    a. In sub-section (1) by inserting immediately after paragraph (b), the following: -

(c) Has completed a minimum education of ordinary level standard or its equivalent. 

Insert a new subsection (6) immediately after the proposed subsection (5) (a) as follows: - 

(6) Subsection (1)(c) shall come into force five years from the date of commencement of this Act. 

The justification is: 

    1. To impose education qualification on district and city councillors. 
    2. To postpone the commencement of the education qualification prescribed in the Bill to commence in 2025 prior to holding the nomination of the 2026 election cycle.
    3. To afford persons who do not possess the minimum education qualification adequate time to acquire the education qualification prior to the election cycle of 2016

Madam Chairperson, it was a consideration that we did not want to leave it hanging if it was so important for this Parliament. That is why we are legislating into the future, not necessarily in anticipation. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee. He stated that I was one of those they invited to appear before the committee and I would like to confirm that we did - and reconcile that the district, city - in fact he has left out – Honourable Chief Whip, could you please leave the chairperson? 

Madam Chairperson, we did reconcile that the qualifications for the district, city and municipal be adjusted. We, of course, did not agree that it starts five years from now but as the committee, I think they came up with that. I have no objection to that only that, in his presentation, he has left the municipal, because we agreed that the district, city and municipal – thank you. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not agree with the position of the committee that the issue of the qualification should commence after five years. My justification is that the laws that we have do not prevent the educated from contesting for these positions. 

It is not true that the issue of qualification affects only rural areas; even the urban areas, including Kampala. We handled the KCCA (Amendment) Bill and now it is Act but even here, at the headquarters, in the authority, people said, qualification will not help them. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I am of the view that the issue of the qualifications be dropped totally and also that component of “after five years” be deleted. In future, people will still convene and discuss whether it is relevant or not. 

When the issue of qualifications came, my District of Adjumani became totally cold towards it. First of all, these positions are not yet attractive; those interested are the ones without qualifications. They stopped in senior two or three. When this thing came to Parliament – I am happy that the President rejected this matter. 

I move that the part of the commencement from 2025 be deleted and the conditions surrounding the qualifications be left open to be discussed later. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, I also rise to raise an objection to the amendment proposed by the committee. The imposition of the qualification of O’level does not solve any problem. The reason Members were initially arguing was that we imposed a qualification on councillors to cure a situation whereby you find that – like we had in Tororo, where the chairperson dies and you fail to get a person suitable to replace him before elections within the six months. 

Now that the President has said this may create a very unfair situation, Madam Chairperson, I do not see what we intend to cure by imposing a minimum qualification of ordinary level because it does not serve any purpose. 

I, therefore, propose that we do away with the amendment proposed by the committee and leave no qualification as returned by the President, so that in future, if we feel that we have got sufficient qualifications that can enable somebody to attain A’ level, we can bring it back. After all, they had even wanted it to start five years from now. 

Madam Chairperson, I propose we reject the amendments by the committee of minimum O’level and the other consequential. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, looking at the concerns, it was a matter of great debate. It was a compromise that we took. Since the compromise is creating more issues, I seek to concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: He has conceded so there is no amendment now. 

MR EITUNGANANE: Madam Chairperson, I remember when we were considering this proposal, the Uganda Local Government Association (ULGA) – the umbrella association of local governments in the entire country, including the mayors, praised us for the decision we took, as a House, which was to improve the level of service delivery, interaction at the district and all levels. 

I still implore the chairperson that the proposal he has given to delay it for five years is still good enough. It will accommodate them. If indeed, people go to school – we are not short of human resource so we are not short of people who have gone to school – we are saying that we are grappling with issues of debates in the House. 

Madam Chairperson, let those ones who are politicians and want to get involved go to school. Let them know that it is a requirement that some level of education is required, even when you are practising politics. 

I support the position of the chairperson of delaying it for five years, giving them room to improve and then we move on. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is nothing to support. He has conceded so there is no amendment to clause 7. Honourable members, there will be no amendment to clause 7. (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa rose_)
 
MR AKOL: Madam Chairperson, I am very much aware that Government is very proud of the education they have brought in the country. I am surprised when the Chief Whip stands up to say Ugandans are not educated. I am surprised that you think we cannot get O’level to bring at the district council level –(Interruption) 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, is it in order for the honourable member holding the Floor to mislead this country by misinterpreting the proposal brought out by the committee to allow Ugandans liberty to choose the people that they want? If you want to elect a PhD holder, go ahead. If you have an S.5 dropout for different reasons, go ahead. If you have an S.3 who dropped out but the community sees his or her potential, go ahead. Is it in order for you to mislead this country that the NRM Government is not treasuring education and that people will not have the liberty to choose? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, he is out of order. Honourable members, it is true that the ULGA had a proposal but the Act of Parliament is made by the Parliament and the President. Therefore, one part of the makers have said no, we don’t want this. So, let us go with what the committee has said; we remove the qualifications and move on.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, we are part of the committee. The chairperson is coming up alone, how can you withdraw the position alone? He cannot say that he is speaking for and on behalf of the entire committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I ask the minister to move for the House to resume? 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.24
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.24
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill and passed clause 1 by deleting sub clauses; a, b, c, d and e. 

The Committee of the whole House has maintained clause 6 and 7. 

I beg to report, Madam Speaker.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO UA 50 MILLION ($68.5 MILLION) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADF) TO FINANCE THE UPGRADING OF THE KABALE-LAKE BUNYONYI/KISORO-MGAHINGA ROAD PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see the Attorney-General up, let me hear from him first.

5.27
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, prior to this, I would respectfully ask you together with the Members that whereas a little earlier this afternoon, you had adjourned the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, No. 24 of 2020 to tomorrow, for us to engage in further consultations. I would like to report that we have had these consultations with all the parties involved and after these consultations, we respectfully request that, that Bill be resumed for progress, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2020. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO.24) BILL, 2020

Clause 3

MR BYARUHANGA: I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I propose to move an amendment and under clause 8(h)(b); I propose to move that the item starting “all members of the district council” be numbered as 1 and therefore, 8(h)(b) would read: “Electoral College within region of representation 
1). All members of a district council for older persons within each region, shall constitute an electoral college for the election of the representative of the older person in Parliament for that region.”

I propose to insert immediately after that subsection (1), a subsection (2), which will be 8(h)(b)(2). Madam Chairperson, I propose the subsection 2 to read as follows:

“For purposes of this section, district council for older persons means the district council for older persons as referred to under section 16 and 17 of the National Council for Older Persons Act, 2013.” 

I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

MR NIWAGABA: Attorney-General, I would suggest instead of the words “as referred to” in that proposed amendment, we substitute with the words “as constituted” in that particular law. Replace the words “referred to” with the word s “as constituted”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new sub clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.)

(The Title, agreed to.)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, if we increase the number of women to two, we will have a challenge of prescribing how the regions will elect the two women. This is because they will be two out of five women. We have to state clearly which region will elect the two.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you leave that to the Electoral Commission? They have to find the two -

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.33
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Chairperson, I would like to move now, after those amendments, that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.33
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2020” and passed it with amendments to clause 3, 8HB (1) and 8HB (2).

THE SPEAKER: You have forgotten to report on clause 1.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that clause 1 was passed with amendments, and clause 3, 8HB (1) and 8HB (2), was also passed with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.35
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

5.35
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that clause 1 of the Bill be recommitted. Our justification is to harmonise clause 1 with clause 3, 8HA and 8HE, where the four regions are represented by one representative each and one national representative is reserved for a woman. 

Madam Speaker, if we create two slots for women, there will be a big challenge of electing the two women, and this is in harmony with the previous elections of the persons with disability and the youth representatives in Parliament. This is an amendment that had been brought by hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear the proposal?

5.36
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, indeed we had some consultations. I have agreed that the practicability would be rather complicated, so I have conceded to the formulation as it is here. 

However, I plead with the Government to come up with relevant regulations that will empower the women to capture some seats at the regional level, as is being done for the persons with disability. It is important that some affirmative action is worked out because if at the national level we only have one woman, we would, in a way, not be in total compliance with the Constitution. 

Much as I have conceded, I still maintain that something must be done to equitably accommodate the women at the level of representation, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am sorry, honourable members, I do not want to accept that because you are institutionalising the four regions to the men. That is what you are doing by the law – Why don’t you allow me to finish saying what I want to say? 

Honourable members, hon. Ogwal said that she is withdrawing because it is not possible. So effectively, you are saying that the four seats are all for the men and only one for the women. That is what you are saying. 

MR RWAKAJARA: Madam Speaker, if I may clarify on that issue. That is exactly how it is with the workers’ representatives, and the other four positions are competitive. The workers now have two female representatives and three male representatives. Because the other four positions are competitive, a woman can compete with the men and actually win. It is also entirely possible for all positions to be taken by women without question.

Therefore, I reckon, Madam Speaker, we should go with this proposal because it is workable and it does not bar other women from competing. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, we should maintain the amendment – “at least two”. They will be found.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, when I said that we had discussed and reconciled positions, we did look for a way. We already have the four regions which have ring-fenced for the woman MP at national level. Now, regarding the four regions – that is what we discussed with hon. Ogwal - it is open because we failed to find any other way to accommodate that second ring-fenced position for the woman. 

Hypothetically, all those four positions can actually be won by women. The point remains that we have ring-fenced one position for the women and the other four are open and can be competed for by both women and men.

5.39
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I would like to disagree with the Attorney-General. 

The practicability of that is very difficult. As you may already be aware, the men are more advantaged. Today’s politics is about resources; the men will outdo the women during the campaigns. If the elections were national, it would have been easier to get the woman with the highest votes, then the woman with the next highest votes, then you pick the others. If the elections are going to be done at the regional level, it will be very complicated. 

That is why I had agreed with you earlier, Madam Speaker, that we go through this tonight and tomorrow morning and then come back and discuss it. That way, we would have come up with a clearer and more concrete position. If we leave it the way it is being done now, it is possible we shall end up with only men. Thank you.

5.40
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): I would like to give myself as an example, Madam Speaker. There is a precedent in this House. Since 1996, we have had two women and three men representing persons with disabilities. The other regions are left to competition, even the youth; hon. Amoding was representing the youth while hon. Anite was representing the northern region. Currently, we have hon. Adeke as the female youth representative and hon. Kityo for the central region. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, according to how the regulations come -I want to believe that women are empowered now so much so that they can even take up all the positions. I am saying this as a representative for disabled people. I am a gender activist and I am telling the women to come out and compete; nobody is blocking you. No one is going to ring-fence positions for the men. Thank you, Madam Speaker. We already have this in practice. 

THE SPEAKER: What is your proposal?

MS ASAMO: I want it to be like the others. We have one older person who is ring-fenced for the females.

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that we should go back to the original proposal?

MS ASAMO: Yes, we go back to the regional composition. The regulations will bring out the issues of gender. The women will be given practice and it will also depend on how they will mobilise. Usually, when putting together the college, there are women in that college who can be convinced by the other women to elect them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.42
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, District Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What hon. Hellen Asamo has brought out is clear but it has worked out because the elections take place at the national level. For this particular case, the elections are supposed to take place at the regional level. Therefore, how will the regional balancing take place? Unless we introduce a provision to say that these elections also take place at national level, I think what hon. Asamo has explained may not work out. Thank you.

5.42
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, the examples given were very clear. She gave the examples of the elections of representatives of persons with disabilities and the youth. The election takes place at the regional level and that does not stop people from electing a woman from a region to come here as the representative of the elderly. 

It means that if we maintain what is already in the Bill – by maintaining at least one position – it does not stop women from competing for other positions. That would be okay. The chances are clear because the voters are not men only. 

In my district, Amuru, the district council for the elderly will not consist of men only; there will be women and men. Therefore, women who are elderly can even compete for those positions at regional level while we ring-fence one position at the national level. So, we can get another woman coming from the east, west or even central. I think there is no problem with that.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

Clause 1

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Chairperson, we are maintaining the original clause 1 with no amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had amended it.

MR BYARUHANGA: The original clause 1 is maintained.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the original clause 1 be maintained.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.45
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.46
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the original clause 1 of the Bill has been reinstated.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FORM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.47
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

5.47
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2020” – Bill No. 24 – be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and the Bill passes. (Applause)

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether we can do item No. 8. I do not know whether the committee is ready. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO UA 50 MILLION ($68.5 MILLION) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADF) TO FINANCE THE UPGRADING OF THE KABALE-LAKE BUNYONYI/KISORO-MGAHINGA ROAD PROJECT

5.48
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, I am here to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to UA 50 million ($68.5 million) from the African Development Fund –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I never wanted to raise this procedural issue. However, if we are going for loans, we also have issues because we cannot see our roads like Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu Road, Jinja-Kampala Express Highway or even the Dokolo Road. 

Therefore, I would like to say that given that roads are a big issue, would it not be procedurally right that we first conclude the Coffee Bill before we go to motions for loans, since we have issues to raise on loans?

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the chairperson of the committee responsible for agriculture. Where is the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries? Let us proceed.

MR BATEGEKA: Do I proceed, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR BATEGEKA: Madam Speaker, I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to UA 50 million, equivalent to $68.5 million, from the African Development Fund to finance the upgrading of Kabale-Lake Bunyonyi/Kisoro-Mgahinga Road Project.

Before I present the report, allow me to lay the following documents on the Table:

    1. The report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to UA 50 million, equivalent to $68.5 million, from the African Development Fund to finance the upgrading of Kabale-Lake Bunyonyi/Kisoro-Mgahinga Road Project. It is signed by quite a number of members - beyond the minimum number of members required to append their signatures to the report.

    2. A brief to Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow up to Units of Account 50 million ($68.50 million) from the African Development Fund to finance the upgrading of Kabale-Lake Bunyonyi/Kisoro-Mgahinga Roads Project by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

    3. His Excellency the President’s approval of the project.

    4. Certificate of Financial Implications confirming Government’s counterpart funding.

    5. Clearance letter by the National Planning Authority.

    6. Loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and African Development Fund on the financing of the project.

    7. Project appraisal report of April 2020. 

    8. Project appraisal report technical annexes of April 2020.

    9. The environmental and social impact assessment and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) summary for the proposed project, July 2019. 

    10. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) of the project, March 2020.

    11. Minutes of the meetings held by the committee to consider the proposal by Government to borrow up to UA 50 million ($68.50) from the African Development Fund to finance the upgrading of Kabale-Lake Bunyonyi/Kisoro-Mgahinga Roads Project. 

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. (Interruption) 

MS CECILIA ATIM: Madam Speaker, last week, when we discussed the state of indebtedness in the country, we were told by the same committee that they encountered a lot of challenges because most of the loan requests we pass here lack some prescriptions which are very fundamental. Some of them include the design of the project, absorption capacity, the counterpart funding and so on. All these have negative impacts on the implementation of the project. Of course, the more you delay in the implementation, the more costly it is to the economy. 

Madam Speaker, we came up with a proposal that from now on, when the Government comes to seek for permission to borrow, they should convince us that all those conditions have been met. This is because we have so many loans which have not been implemented and the country is incurring a lot of costs.

Madam Speaker, we therefore need to be guided. We are not going to continue blindly. Every other day, the minister is coming to present a loan request. We need to be guided. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know why you want to stop the chairperson of the committee from reporting. Let him report, we listen to his report and then seek clarification. 

MR BATEGEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move straight to the project’s objectives, impacts, outcomes and outputs. 

The development objective of the project is to facilitate growth of tourism and socioeconomic development in southwestern Uganda through increased tourist earnings and attraction of private investments in tourist related hospitality facilities and agricultural ventures.

The project’s specific objectives are as follows: 

    1. To improve transport connectivity by enabling seamless intermodal connection of the road infrastructure with inland water transport on Lake Bunyonyi, thereby enabling safe access to social and economic activities on the various islands by the local communities.

    2. To contribute to improved agricultural supply chain efficiency in the districts of Kabale, Rubanda and Kisoro in southwestern Uganda; 

    3. To enhance road safety.

The project will contribute to tourism development and the wellbeing of the immediate communities served by the project road through – 

    1. Increased tourism earnings; 
    2. Increased farmgate prices of key agricultural commodities;
    3. Increased school enrolment;
    4. Improved hospital attendance.

Project outcomes will include:

    1. Improved foreign receipts from tourist arrivals/visits to southwestern Uganda. 
    2. Reduced travel time for passengers and freight on the upgraded roads.
    3. Improved average farmgate prices for key agricultural produce, for instance, Irish potatoes and cabbage, in the project area. 
    4. Improved primary school net enrolment rate in the project area.
    5. Increased access to health facilities in the island district of Rubanda and in Mgahinga areas.
    6. Easier access to tourism sites.

Project Components
 
Brief Description of the Project

The Kabale-Lake Bunyonyi/Kisoro-Mgahinga Roads Upgrading Project has been defined within the context of tourist roads that link the main district towns to natural attractions, passing through sensitive natural environments. 

The roads are adjacent to the national tourist circuit that the Government of Uganda is planning to develop. Kabale is part of the touristic ring road network that aims to connect all the main national parks and tourist attractions in a round circuit in order to facilitate movement of tourists. The project intervention is part of the cross-country programme aimed at expanding and upgrading tourism-facilitating transport infrastructure and services. 

The project entails upgrading to bituminous standards 34 kilometres of the roads, construction of four landing sites on Lake Bunyonyi, construction of two roadside markets, farm produce holding facilities, and provision of two ferries, including two search and rescue boats complete with navigational aids.

The project roads are in southwestern Uganda in the districts of Kabale, Rubanda and Kisoro with an estimated population of over one million people to be directly impacted by the proposed intervention. The main economic activity in the area is tourism. 

The Kabale-Lake Bunyonyi-Kabeho road link connects to almost 20 hotels while the Kisoro-Mgahinga gate road leads to the mountain gorilla families. The region is home to 54 per cent of the world's mountain gorillas. The area is agriculturally rich. 

Financing of the Project 

The financing agreement is between the ADF loan, which is UA 50 million, and Government of Uganda which is UA 8.32 million. The ADF is contributing 85.73 per cent and Government of Uganda is contributing 14.27 per cent.

The Loan Terms and Conditions 

The African Development Fund will provide UA 50 million ($68.50 million) to finance the Kabale-Lake Bunyonyi/Kisoro-Mgahinga Roads Upgrading Project under the terms indicated in table 5 as below:

    1. Loan amount - Unit of Account 50 million ($68.50)
    2. Maturity period - 40 years
    3. Repayment period - 30 years
    4. Grace period - 10 years
    5. Commitment Fee - 0.5 per cent per annum of the undisbursed loan balance.
    6. Service Charge - 0.75 per cent per annum of the disbursed loan amount.

After serious scrutiny, the committee made some observations, which in the interest of time, I may not go through because the report is already uploaded on our iPads. However, I will make the final conclusion that after serious scrutiny, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to UA 50 million ($68.50 million) from the African Development Fund to finance the Kabale-Lake Bunyonyi/Kisoro-Mgahinga Road Upgrading Project be approved by Parliament subject to the recommendations made herein.

I beg to report.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable chairperson, we made a resolution here that any new major road being constructed must have a rest area. What I see here is a roadside market. First, I would like to know whether this market has got a day care centre. I would also want to know where the rest areas are in these designs; we resolved on that long time ago.

Mr bategeka: The rest areas are not catered for but it has a roadside market. The improvements to be made in the provision of that social infrastructure are contained in our observations.

The Speaker: This resolution was taken in the previous Parliament. It was resolved that any new road to be constructed must have those facilities.

Mr bategeka: May I request the minister to clarify? I may have missed a point there.

The Speaker: What are the components of this market and where are the rest areas we agreed on?

6.02
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, as you have rightly observed, we resolved that every main road that we construct now should have rest areas. On this particular road, which is Kabale-Lake Bunyonyi Road, they are situated at Kachwekano, which is mid-way and that is where the market is going to be constructed.

Madam Speaker, also in planning for landing sites at the lake, which you are familiar with, they are also going to put – That is where the ferry will be docking and they are also going to have the rest rooms.

The Speaker: Honourable minister, you are only addressing the destination. We are talking about the whole route. 

Mr bahati: It is not the destination. Kachwekano is mid-way Kabale-Kisoro Road and Lake Bunyonyi. Before you descend to the lake, that is where they are going to be situated.

The Speaker: Will there be a market and a rest area?

Mr bahati: Yes. That is what they have planned. Also, every landing site for a ferry must have those facilities. That is how it has been planned.

6.04
Mr Muhammad nsereko (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Whenever we borrow, we heap a burden on our countrymen. That means that we are asking for money but we must have value for it.

Talking about the new normal after COVID-19, we are borrowing primarily for the purpose of improving tourism. However, the entire tourism sector has been hard hit. The issue before us is: Do we first protect the very individuals, the baby companies, that have been in tourism? They came to you, Madam Speaker, many times complaining that their bookings were cancelled and they have to grapple with laying off workers, for example, in hotels.

What are we borrowing for in order to protect that very infrastructure that we would like to help attract tourists? Hotels no longer have occupancy, but you are talking about borrowing for a road for tourists to access hotels that will have no occupancy, let us say, for the next three years to come. This is a reality. Rather, we should be helping people that have been in that tourism business to survive now, so that we borrow to help them come to terms with the loan obligations that they incurred as a result of setting up these facilities.

I know hon. Bahati does not want to hear this but it is the reality. People have built hotels. Right now, as a result of the new normal, shouldn’t we be borrowing to bail out these people in their economic distress?

Secondly, we have talked about the Bwindi-Mgahinga location. We were here talking about the issue of the construction of the road from Rukungiri via Kihihi, Kambuga to Bwindi that would connect us to Ishasha border, Queen Elizabeth National Game Park, the airport by Garuga, Kayonza Tea Estate and Bwindi Impenetrable Forest. Actually, 60 per cent of the gorilla tracking permits that are bought are for tourists to go to Bwindi Impenetrable Forest via primarily Rukungiri, Kihihi, Kambuga, Kyesero and finally to Bwindi. Some tourists then branch off to go to Queen Elizabeth National Park. Part of the volume of the traffic of goods that go to the Democratic Republic of Congo goes through that area to Ishasha border and then to the Democratic Republic of Congo. Why is it that you have now prioritised Kabale, which already partly has a road and you are talking about an upgrade?

For the last 20 years, you have been talking about upgrading the road via Rukungiri to Bwindi but it is not included today. Is that fairness? If we are talking about tourism, you are not fair because the bulk of the money that the Uganda tourism basket gets is from the enclave of Kasese in Queen Elizabeth, Kanungu to Bwindi via Rukungiri. However, you are only talking about Lake Bunyonyi. That is not fair.

Coming back to the very subject matter, why are we borrowing this money? We are borrowing for the road but the people you are talking about will have collapsed businesses because we are going to have a low volume of tourists coming in due to COVID-19 –

The Speaker: Honourable member, I believe that the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development came here and said that he has some funds to support the economy. We have asked him to come and unpack how that money will be used to support people who are affected by COVID. 

Mr nsereko: Madam Speaker, you have echoed that; you have been on record and we thank you - even on the matter of traders - but they have been adamant. You have said that for the last three months, but they have never come here to present that economic recovery plan. It is strategic that no one wants to give it to us. That is why we come with piecemeal problems. 

They have not told us how the tourism sector will recover after COVID-19. We are now here going to approve a loan in the name of helping tourism when the very actors in the tourism sector would have collapsed in the next three years.

Therefore, what do we do first? Do we borrow for the road or for the business recovery of those who support the tourism sector itself –(Member timed out.)

6.10
Mr Robert kasule (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister and the committee for the report. 

I would like to also thank hon. Nsereko. He has said that we are borrowing for a tourism road. That is the positive. I would like to encourage him by saying that this road is part of the bigger circuit of that area for tourism. We are going to take these loans in piecemeal. I know this is small money. We would have wished to get more money so that we go up to Mgahinga, but this is a positive; let us allow it to come. 

We have always cried out for tourism. The matter of tourism entrepreneurs is a short-term measure and I think Government will do this with our own money. For this one, we need money from the African Development Fund. By the time the loan funds reach here, they will have taken over three years interrogating the matter; so, let us deliver this.

I also commend the Speaker; we have always complained about restrooms and I think the person who is not listening to us is Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). They should always include restrooms in their designs. We see big men with big stomachs along roads doing things that you would not want your son to do. We are praying that UNRA hears us this time round and puts markets and restrooms around the same areas for these long roads. Otherwise, I commend the loan and I beg that the whole Parliament supports the motion. 

6.11
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee. 

In the Ninth Parliament, I was part of a team of Members of Parliament that visited an agricultural institute in Kachwekano. At that time, the road was very bad. I do not know what it is like these days. When we were there, Lake Bunyonyi was just at the vicinity; it is a very beautiful lake. We were told that it is one of the deepest lakes in East Africa and that is the reason it is a tourist attraction. 

There is a table on page 8 and there is an item on training staff of the Ministry of Works and Transport together with those of UNRA on safety management. I wonder why the local people were not trained. Last year, when the Templar boat capsized in Lake Victoria, we were told that the fishermen were the first rescuers. I would imagine that it is the people from those surrounding areas who should be trained; maybe the minister will throw more light on that. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, we have been told that this is a tourism road. However, on several occasions, they have told us that there is a plan to construct tourism roads around the country. I would like to find out when the road to Kidepo, for example, will be constructed because we are told that Kidepo National Park has a number of lions that do not exist in other national parks. 

It is very important that the minister plans for these tourism areas because one area alone cannot generate the income that the country would expect. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.14
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We should all support the tourism sector because it is the only one that looks like it will generate revenue for this country. 

I am happy my sister, hon. Rosemary Nauwat, has mentioned that one of the other good tourist attraction areas is Kidepo National Park in Karamoja. We also have Mount Elgon but I do not see the plan for it. If the minister was coming here with tourism loans, he should have come with a plan. There is some hill in Busoga which people go and climb every now and then, but the roads – I do not see a road plan for all these tourism areas to be accessible. 

I have been to Karamoja. The best airstrip is now in Kaabong. Basically, Karamoja has two things; a bigger part of it has minerals, but a few of the individuals that land there in planes on a daily basis want to go to Kidepo National Park, although many go for gold. However, the road itself is so bad that even cows, if it rained, would fall. 

Madam Speaker, I have read what the chairperson of the committee has said, but I do not see him indicating the rate of return on this yet it would determine the decision to be made; if the rate of return is positive, for example, then I can invest. However, he is telling us to borrow yet he has not told us what the total inflow would be. We have been told the outflow as far as that loan is concerned. If the inflows are more than the outflows –(Interruption) 

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, speaking about tourism and roads that would facilitate that kind of service to the country, I do not know whether you have paid attention to the road that leads to Kagulu Hill. I took Commonwealth guests to Kagulu Hill, which is supposed to be in Busoga. I understand even our Speaker comes from the neighbourhood. The road is so bad, Madam Speaker. 

When the President was in Dokolo on 8 March 2017, he promised to fast-track the road between Dokolo and Amolatar to allow the Baganda come and see the place of refuge, which we have kept as a reserve, where we kept both the King of Bunyoro and Buganda for safety. At least we are trying to invite you to come and help us develop tourism centres in Lango and Dokolo but you are hesitant. 

Madam Speaker, as my son, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, has said, there must be equitable distribution of those facilities in the country. I thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you can see that the information was good - [Prof. Kamuntu: “No”.] – The information was good. Prof. Kamuntu, an economics professor, can say “no” but during his time as a Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, he did what he did. Now he can say “no” because he has aged and does not appreciate what we are saying. 

I would like to tell you that in this country, we need equity as my mother, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, has said. When we talk about Mount Elgon, who knows it here? We just see it on the maps. If you have been to Abim, you will notice that there is a very big rock that acts as a tourist centre. The bazungu go there to see it but we do not go there because the road is bad. 

This country has a lot of tourist attractions. If the committee had done some research, it would have helped them to identify tourist areas and decide what to start with and what to end with. This would have been the best report. However, for you to mention only that area because the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes from Kabale and wants a road for campaigns while forgetting other areas is wrong. This country belongs to all of us and that is why we have been asking for roads to Mount Elgon, Buyende and everywhere to be done. 

This is very dangerous for this country. If you are not aware, you are creating what we call a genocide because they are going to say that it is only one region benefiting. We have even talked about a road from Kampala to Jinja but we do not see it. This country belongs to all of us and as you may be aware, 70 per cent of this country’s economy is served by eastern Uganda - Malaba, Busia, Lwakhakha, Moroto and other borders. What are you doing? 

I would like to propose that this loan request, for the time being, be stayed until we have everything put in –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, do not accept that point of order because it is very bad. The whole country should be told what is going to happen. The business of saying “we pass this urgently”, is not right. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. On a serious note, I think it is time to ask the Minister of Works and Transport to update this country on the state of the tourism roads of this country. He should give us a programme showing which roads he is going to work on.

6.21
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to commend the committee for the good report. 

We have, over the years, talked about the need to develop tourism infrastructure in the country and in Kigezi as a subregion. Madam Speaker, I am happy that you are familiar with the road we are talking about. In 2012, when we visited Lake Bunyonyi with you, you made a commitment to the people of Kabale that the road would be tarmacked and the ferry would be provided on Lake Bunyonyi. I am happy that we have come to this time, when you are in the Chair. (Applause) 

I would like to appeal to the House that whereas we do acknowledge that we need to develop tourism infrastructure in the country, it is also important to realise that we cannot tag all these to Lake Bunyonyi road. It is important that we pass this loan request as we wait for Government to find mechanisms of finding money to develop other tourism infrastructure in the country.

Madam Speaker, I appeal to the House to support the passing of this loan request. Thank you.

6.23
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee chairperson for this good report. 

It is common knowledge that a good network of roads stimulates economic development, and this road is one of them. I have been to Lake Bunyonyi and I would like to inform Parliament that the scenic view of that place is out of this world and is a very big potential for tourism. Therefore, we need to develop it.

However, I need to bring to the attention of this Parliament the directive principles of state policy in our Constitution, that talk about balanced and equitable distribution of resources. Madam Speaker, as you are aware, a report was commissioned a year ago about the distribution of upgraded roads in the country. It has been noted that 60 per cent of the roads that have been planned or done are from the west, and that is a clear report that has been presented. There are a number of tourism roads that have been planned and most of them are also in the west, leaving out other parts of the country. 

I would like to bring to the attention of this House that Lango subregion, with a population of three million people, for the last 30 years has got only 50 kilometres of tarmac road. That road is only from Dokolo to Lira City and that is the only new road that has been tarmacked. The other roads were constructed by the late Milton Obote and others.

We met with the President and he promised to fast-track the Rwekunye-Lira up to Acholi road. We approved the loan request but the problem is that the project is not starting. The President promised to fast-track the construction of the Nakasongola-Amolatar up to Dokolo road but that has not happened. 

There is also a tourism road that is in Lango and I would like Parliament to note that. It is from Lira to Aloi, Otuke, Abim and up to Moroto-Kidepo. That road is very strategic but there is no plan for it. (Interruption) 

MR ACON: Thank you very much, my colleague. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that in 2018, a white man flew from California with his son to Otuke to take a picture of the red lizard. You imagine how beautiful our country is! 

The road from Lira to Otuke is 72 kilometres and they had to drive for two hours; the road is impassable. I would like to request the Government to come up with an additional budget to make sure that the road from Lira to Alebtong and Abim is worked on. This is a great opportunity. That is the information I would like to give. Thank you. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Lastly, Madam Speaker, I support the motion that this loan request be approved by Parliament. However, I would like to insist that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development includes roads in Lango subregion and fast-tracks them. The minister should also balance the distribution of the network of roads in the country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I would like to also thank the committee for the work well done. 

However, you are telling us that the sanitary facilities will be mid-way the road and at the end; since this is a tourist road, is that sufficient? When we are trying to construct these roads, we should consider the facilities. I would like to disagree with the argument that UNRA is not here; UNRA is here in the name of the Minister of Works and Transport. Again, when the committee did their work, they should have also consulted UNRA if they wanted UNRA. Therefore, we cannot allow that to continue. 

I would like –(Interruption)  

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you, honourable Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. Madam Speaker, much as I support the loan request, I would like to agree with the Leader of the Opposition. Many of our roads break down within one to two years because they do substandard work. Look at Mukono-Katosi Road; they have just handed it over but in less than a year, potholes have emerged. 

We get these big loans and spend the money but just as people start celebrating that at least they have been relieved from dust, the roads start developing potholes in less than a year. The Minister of Works and Transport together with UNRA should come and explain why. I thank you for giving way.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you for the information. Right now, if you go to Gulu-Nimule Road - the road leading to South Sudan – it already has a lot of potholes and this is very unfortunate. 

We would like the Minister of Works and Transport to do us well so that even when we are overburdened with these loans, we have quality work. We need facilities there. We also need the local content to be taken up seriously. That is what we would like emphasise. 

However, we also would like to emphasise equitability. Honourable minister in charge of finance, do not just think about your side only. You are so godly, but sometimes you become so selfish in distributing the resources in the country. All of us are Ugandans and we need those facilities. We have all those tourist sites. If you go to Acholi subregion, you will see Sir Samuel Baker sites -

THE SPEAKER: There is information from the minister who knows about the roads.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I would like to give information to my colleague on the Floor that Government has already secured two contractors for Rwekunye-Apac Road. One contractor is, I think, Gulusome and the other is Alcip. I think UNRA has already signed the contract and mobilisation is going to start very soon.

Secondly, for the road from Kitgum to Karenga to Kidepo, the Government, through Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, is arranging financing and I think they have already got a contractor. Very soon, it will be handled.

Madam Speaker, I gave this information because I have been in that sector and I know what has been taking place.

MS BETTY AOL: I would like to say thank you for those other roads but there is still a big question mark with equity, and also the quality of work and the facilities that we need on the road. Take note of this and try to improve on that road. The facilities should not just be midway and at the end. Let us consider where we have these issues –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Good enough, the minister says he has come from the sector review meeting. Could the honourable minister clarify, because it is not only Kabale or Kigezi that has tourist attractions; even us in the Lake Kyoga basin, we have hippos, the islands and the Nyero rock paintings. Can the minister tell us what the programme is for Kimaka-Bulambuli-Kamuli-Bukungu Road? It connects to the ferry and from the ferry to Kagwara, Serere, Soroti, Ngora, Kumi and Ochero. May we know? 

I wish hon. Bahati could stop distracting the minister because I would like him to listen so that he is able to give us the money. You have avoided that road. It has been pledged so many times, from 2010. When is the minister in charge of finance bringing a loan request here to cover that road? It has been a long and outstanding matter. There is no way we can continue seeing the construction of roads being unbalanced.

Madam Speaker, there is even a loan that is coming and they deceive us that it is balanced. However, you will find a road in the west is 107 kilometres, the one in the north is 34 kilometres and the one in the east is 32 kilometres. They will deceive us that it is balanced. It is going to come here, Members; I would like you to take note of that. Can the Minister of Works and Transport tell us what the plan is for that road?

MS NABULINDO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Since the minister is here and he is saying that he has been in those meetings about roads, I would like the minister to tell us when they are expanding Busitema Road. It is also a tourist attraction. We have so many baboons there. When are you expanding that road and putting restrooms, because it is a stopover?

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, I came in to give information because I came from the sector and I know the planning that was going on there. As Government, when our colleagues are not here, we stand in.

The Kitgum to Kidepo road that I talked about is a tourism road and it is classified as so. 

The Kimaka-Mbulamuti-Kamuli-Bukungu Road is one of the roads that are planned for and the President had directed that work must begin. I talked to my colleague, hon. Katumba Wamala, a week ago. Last Saturday, they met the President and the President insisted that that road must be worked on immediately. They were looking for funding and I think the President has sourced funding, which I think will come here.

On the issue of expanding the Busitema Road, there is an effort from Government seeking money from African Development Bank to expand what is known as the Trans-African Highway. That will be taken care of if that resource is got by Government. The road from Mombasa up to northern Uganda, South Sudan, Rwanda, which is under the northern corridor, is an East African effort. They have taken a decision that all those roads that are very important for carrying people and movement of goods must be done, and if there is need, to do double carriageways.

On the issue of restrooms, it is a policy that Government has taken on. I think now UNRA is beginning to design roads with those kinds of provisions. Thank you.

Madam Speaker, when I was still in that ministry, the President directed us – and I think he has even given us the list in Cabinet – on a set of about 31 roads. These 31 roads, he says, must be worked on in the next two to three years. He began with 18 and he has now added on another set of 13. The road that hon. Elijah Okupa mentioned should be among those ones although I am not very sure. I do not want to put it on record.

THE SPEAKER: I would just like to comment, honourable minister, that in north Busoga, there has not been any new road in 30 years. The only road that has been done was done by Sir Wilberforce Nadiope - the Jinja-Kamuli Road. We had a skirmish about the Musita-Nankoma Road. Where are the new roads in Busoga region? We want to know.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, in southern Teso, we have had zero for the last 50 years. I would like to comment on the roads the minister is talking about. The President wrote a letter to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development about 14 roads to be done by Energo but they have written back to say that they do not have the money.

THE SPEAKER: It was not Energo; it was Sogea – since 2018. 

MR OKUPA: Yes, Sogea. Those are the 14 roads you are telling us about now.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have asked a question, let me answer it. Musita-Lumino Road has been worked on. Also, the road from Nakalama to Mbale was done less than 20 years ago.

Of course, Busoga region needs more roads. The President has also directed for a road to be done from Kasolo, Iganga up to Budumbuli. It is one of those roads that he has directed on. 

On the issue of Sogea, it is true that the President did write giving Sogea those roads. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development advised that they work with Sogea only that they were not agreeing on the terms. However, I think there is a lot more effort to make sure Sogea can do some of these roads. Otherwise, they are giving some roads to other companies. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you advertise so that people compete?

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, of course that is the focus; that is why I said some of the roads will be done by Sogea and others will be advertised. 

THE SPEAKER: In the meantime, should the people wait until you decide whether to give or whether to advertise? Really!

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, in the interim, but the effort is on and the will is at its highest. Thank you.

6.42
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for his excellent report. No wonder, the chairperson is internationally exposed and he knows only too well the role of infrastructure in the competitiveness of any country. 

Colleagues, if it were possible, we would have tarmac on every murram road in the country because to be competitive means saving time on every movement that we make. However, we have to accept that all these things cannot be done at once. Therefore, an incremental approach in tarmacking these roads should be accepted and approved. 

Madam Speaker, let me add that projects financed by African Development Bank or World Bank – institutions where we are on board of governors as countries – are appraised before being approved for loaning. I have no doubt that this road, which is being presented in Parliament today, was appraised. I would like to answer hon. Nandala-Mafabi by saying that internal rate of return was also determined and it was the basis on which this selection was done.

Madam Speaker, yes, they call them “tourism roads” but they are roads. Everything goes on on them - the movement of people, movement of goods, security. This is a road. The value of infrastructure improvement is generally on improving the competitiveness of Uganda and as long as Uganda becomes competitive, more money will come in and more roads will be tarmacked. 

I want to also point out that roads like this one which are at the border, similarly – I thank the former minister of state in charge of works. I know for sure that the road from Kitgum to Kidepo National Park was already part of what we call “tourism roads”. “Tourism road” is just euphemism but it is a road. The road from Gulu to Atiak and Nimule is a regional road. If we can have Mpondwe Road also extended into Democratic Republic of Congo, it would be really great. 

Therefore, what is the conclusion, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: I think you are taking a lot of our time. You close.

MR KAMUNTU: The conclusion, Madam Speaker, is that we support the motion presented to this House and we urge the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to look for more loans so that all these roads listed here can be tarmacked. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: I hope the next report will contain roads from other parts of the country, with more serious kilometres. 

Honourable members, on the Order Paper, we have matters for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I would like the Government Chief Whip to ensure that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development comes here. He has two Bills on the Order Paper.

6.46
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg the indulgence of the House for one very last correction on the new counties. I have to do this because these counties are being gazetted tomorrow and I would like to be sure that they gazette the right composition of the new county called West Budama North East County. Please, the Hansard, capture this. The composition is:

    1. Soni Sub-county;
    2. Kirewa Sub-county;
    3. Sere Sub-county;
    4. Nawire Sub-county;
    5. Paya Sub-county; and
    6. Sop-Sop Sub-county.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: It is noted. Please, I hope you do not come with any more corrections because the Clerk is going to get confused. I hope this is the last one.

Hon. Atiku was saying we have not said, “approval of the loan” but the recommendation is contained in the report and the report recommended approval.

Honourable members, House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.47 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 August, 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 

