Wednesday, 1 August 2012

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members. You are welcome to this sitting. I am sure by now you have all received invitations from the Vice-Chancellor of Makerere University to the launch of the one-year celebrations to mark 90 years of Makerere University as Uganda celebrates 50 years of Independence. The launch will be presided over by the President, His Excellency Dr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda, and all alumni and visitors of Makerere University. It is this Saturday, 4 August 2012, at the Freedom Square, Makerere University. The event starts at 9.00 in the morning. Please join Makerere University, those of you who were there and even those of you who are friends of Makerere University, as we build for the future.

On Friday, 3rd August, ladies and gentlemen, there is a show at the National Theatre called Silent Voices. It depicts the trend of the war that took place in Northern Uganda. You are all invited. I am sure by now you have all got your cards. It starts at 5.30 p.m. on Friday. There will be a one-hour panel discussion after the play on the topic, “The role of Parliament in the quest for justice for war affected people.” Your presence will be highly appreciated. Thank you.

MR SAM OTADA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, you are aware I was not here yesterday because I was away on an assignment, which you delegated me to fulfil. So, I did not have the benefit of being here to know what you decided on how we were going to proceed with the debate on the State of the Nation Address. However, I have been made to know that debate started yesterday. 

As far as I remember, we have had a couple of meetings with you, Mr Speaker, to agree on the modus operandi on this subject matter. So, I rise to seek your guidance on whether you have abandoned the idea that we had developed before. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Otada. The meeting that we proposed to take place was supposed to be with all the party whips. I was supposed to get feedback from all the whips about what they had discussed with their respective groups. I have not received this to date. By yesterday, when the matter came for debate, I had not received that kind of information. So, I was constrained to just let the House proceed while if time could be found to decide on this, it would still be okay. 

We are now proceeding on individual member contributions and each member is taking three minutes. We started debate yesterday. That is how we are going to proceed from now on, but the item is going to come later.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry; I do not intend to engage you by any means. As far as I know, the whips on all sides of the House were ready to submit. I have the list of Independent members who had intended to speak on the State of the Nation Address. So, at least from my side and from the Movement side - I can say without any fear of contradiction because I saw the list myself – the list is ready, Sir. I think we are just waiting for a meeting with you so that we could agree on how much time would be allocated to each individual member. The list is ready and I could lay the one for Independent members on the Table, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that will not be required, hon. Otada. The idea of the meeting was to allow us here to structure this debate so that we give it a thematic treatment. The NRM, for example, would sit in a meeting and agree on who would speak for how long on what subject so that the whole debate, when it is completed, would be thematic and it would be handled in a systematic way. We would give, for example, the NRM a block time of five hours that they would manage among themselves; the Independents maybe three hours, to manage among themselves; and the rest of the political parties also would manage their own time allotted to them in that framework. So the debate would be structured and people would research and come and just contribute to the debate sequentially. 

However, the above has not happened. All I have are lists. I do not know who is going to speak on what. I am not required to know that. It is for you to know who you have slotted to speak on what subject and for how long so that you manage your time accordingly. We have not gone that far on that decision and that is why I was constrained to just proceed normally. The lists I have now are just an expression of interest of people who would like to speak. The time now is three minutes for each member who is rising to contribute on this debate.

2.22
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on an urgent matter of national importance under rule 39 (1) and (2). 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that in the district where I come from, as the Minister of Health yesterday said in a statement, there is an Ebola outbreak. The situation on the ground is extremely bad, to the extent that people in Kibaale have started migrating to find safe havens in other areas-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the rule which you have cited is for questions. So, would you like to ask the question directly? What you are asking me to do is to allow you ask a question without notice, which is according to the rule you have cited. So, just ask the question.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, thank you for your guidance. Yesterday, the Minister of Health-(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You did inform us last week that issues regarding matters of national importance will be handled towards the end of the sitting. I am wondering whether you have now changed the procedure or members can rise up as and when –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member cited a rule and that is why you hear me trying to refer him back to the rule that he cited. The rule he has cited is about questions, and the questions always require notice. You give notice to the Clerk of your questions and the question is sent to the minister. However, now he is seeking to dispense with that notice and seeking my attention to ask that question now. He wants to ask that question now and I want to understand what question it is. He should ask it so that I know whether it can be asked now. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue is about the current efforts that the Ministry of Health is carrying out on the ground. The reports coming from the ground are that a number of patients, totalling to eight, have called the hospital and they have not been picked from their respective sub counties. I would want to know the efforts the honourable minister is making to make sure that there is a quick response to those problems. 

Currently, what is on the ground is that the doctors who are in Kagadi Hospital are few, but even those who are there are working under very strong hardship. They are working for very long hours with no food and with no water even for their patients. The patients yesterday chose to go on rampage and some ran away from the hospital. 

I would want to know what the honourable minister is doing to contain this situation because patients of Ebola are running away from the hospital and hiding in villages and the people in these villages are also taking off to safe havens. So, I really want to know what Government and the minister are doing about this appalling situation of Ebola in Kagadi, in my constituency.

2.28
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Tinkasiimire for this level of vigilance. We had a brief ministerial statement here yesterday from the Minister of Health and she outlined a number of interventions that are being pursued in the areas where Ebola victims have been identified. She also brought on board what is being pursued at the national level. 

She has been to Cabinet today and one of the doctors heading the team on the ground was also in Cabinet. They talked about the efforts that are being pursued in regard to ensuring that wherever suspected victims have been identified, interventions are undertaken immediately to deal with these people and the homes where they come from. Quite a number of people who have been identified have been taken to centres within the district and some have been brought to Kampala-(Mr Tinkasiimire rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, I do not think this is a competent person-

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Let him take my information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is not the right minister. He is giving you what has happened in Cabinet.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: He is the Leader of Government Business today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let the honourable minister give that information of what happened in Cabinet. I will give an appropriate time for the minister responsible for the sector to deal with those issues more directly. You see, what you want are results oriented things not general statements. The general statements will not take us anywhere. We need specific action based statements.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: The information that I want to provide is the specific areas where these patients are and have not been picked.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But how helpful will that be to this honourable minister here? Write it down, give it to the Minister of Health and let her act on it. How is he going to answer you now? This is the Leader of Government Business, yes, and he is the Chief Whip but there is a sector minister who has been in Cabinet this morning. That is what we have been told. Why don’t we wait, allow some time and when the right minister is here, you give those specific points and they address them.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I would like to request hon. Tinkasiimire to give me this information so that I can make sure that my staff here pass it on to the minister, who is actually just coming out of Cabinet right now, because we have a meeting in the Prime Minister’s Office at 5 o’clock. This is the matter they are going to deal with to consider the budget that is required to contain this emergency–(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I represent the people of Buyaga West Constituency in the Ninth Parliament and I am present in this House. The point of procedure I am raising is whether it is procedurally right for me to have personal dealings with a minister who is requesting for information when I am actually present and I am directly volunteering to give it to him and be recorded on the Hansard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is it the Hansard you want or action in the constituency? (Laughter) The House is more concerned about the lives of those people and they want action that is based on saving their lives and not for the purposes of the Hansard here. Please, let us be sensitive to the issue of Ebola right now, not because we want to be on the Hansard just for the sake of it.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, the people in Kagadi are now watching our proceedings. They now know that I am working. (Laughter) They now know where to direct the inefficiency-(Interruption)

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, with all due respect - I respect my young brother who is even fit to be my son. We come from the same district. My constituency is at the centre of this outbreak but I do not come here just to show my people in Buyanja that I am now debating the issue. We should be able to get things moving rather than coming to give theoretical things here in Parliament. So, is the honourable Member of Parliament for Buyaga West in order to stand because he wants his people in Kagadi to watch him and see that he is working when he is not finding a solution to the problem and people are dying?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have advised that let the appropriate minister be fed with this proper information. It is not for us to play to the Hansard or because people are watching us, we say what we say. That is not the purpose this House is set up for. This House is meant to deal with specific things that affect people. 

Now it is action that is required. So, let us proceed with the action based circumstances so that we avoid all these unnecessary statements. We do not, certainly, debate here because we are being seen. We debate here because there are matters that are urgent and we need to deal with them. Please, let us move on the Order Paper - (Mr Fungaroo rose_) - Not on this, please. Let us go to the next item. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY 7TH JUNE 2012

(Debate Continued)

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, when I look at the Order Paper, I think the next item is number 3 but the Clerk is taking us to Item number 4. I do not know whether the Order Paper has been amended such that we are now skipping this request for the loan. Can I be guided?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the prerogative of the Speaker, Item 3 is stood over. 

2.37
DR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion on the State of the Nation Address. Since I have a very short time - I had indicated that I was going to speak longer - so let me go straight to the point. (Laughter)

I want to confine my statement to health, mentioned on pages 23-24. I noticed that the entire health sector has been reduced to two diseases in the State of the Nation Address - HIV/AIDS and nodding disease - and a few remarks were made about other diseases. 

On page 24, there is something to do with kuru disease. I have some knowledge about this disease and I think the President was misled to think that the kuru disease, which is actually found in Papua New Guinea, could have anything to do with nodding disease in Northern Uganda. Kuru disease occurs in people who eat human beings. In other words, it is a result of cannibalism. As a result of this submission in the State of the Nation Address, I have decided to study the history of the people in Northern Uganda and found no evidence of cannibalism. So, I do not know the implication of having stated this disease in relation to the nodding disease. 

This nodding disease is also found in Tanzania, and the President alludes to this on pages 23-24. He says the nodding disease in Tanzania reduced when the fly which transmits river blindness was reduced. This is factually wrong. I have knowledge about this. This disease is still rampant in southern Tanzania and is living alongside the prevalence of onchocerciasis -(Member timed out)

2.44
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker and members. I want to thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for the address. Specifically, I want to thank him for having acknowledged that the delay in infrastructure development hinders social-economic transformation of this country. 

I have specific interest in roads. I am concerned about the budget line where year in and out the same districts and roads are put out but not implemented. My proposal is that for a change towards social-economic transformation, let the outlined roads for this financial year be implemented so that we see uniqueness. 

I am also concerned about the narrow roads in this country. In our budget lines, we have areas where people go out and look at what is happening in other countries. The question I would like to therefore ask is: why does Uganda have narrow roads compared to others? Is it a style which we need to move with? Our pedestrians get problems when they are moving and we have heavy jams. I think for sustainability and for the future – since we are buying more cars and the population is increasing - let us think about widening our roads. 

I am also interested in the internal network. Some of our districts do not have tarmac roads. The alternative is the internal network, but they have not been worked on well. We have bridges which have collapsed and they are the only alternative to tarmac roads. I pray that the internal network of roads be perfected since the tarmac roads are not yet there.

On agriculture, His Excellency the President talked about linking agricultural activities to industrialisation. He cited the issue of cotton and fruits. However, I think the major problem is low investment in agriculture. We must inject more money in agriculture so that we can relate the agricultural activities to industrialisation. He has talked about emulating Mrs Kizza. I think the best word would be having our district farm institutes from where many-(Member timed out)

2.44
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I rise to support the motion in regard to the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency. In the interest of time, I will highlight a few issues. 

The President recognises that we have increased our revenue base from the Shs 5 billion in 1986 to almost Shs 7 trillion now. But His Excellency should also take cognisance of the fact that this money should be reflected in the welfare of people. You must not talk about GDP increasing year in and year out when actually the real transformation is not reflected in our communities.         

The other day I was discussing with the Commissioner-General of URA and found out that only 15 percent of the population pays taxes. That means that the tax burden is left to these few individuals who are actually easy to charge and where the tax is paid at source. Much of the informal sector in business has not been taxed. I think we need to look at how best we can widen our tax base as a country. The moment we shift the tax burden to very few individuals, we will have cases of tax avoidance and tax evasion. 

Mr Speaker, I want to draw your attention to local governments. We are talking about districts, and I want to congratulate the people of Rwampara upon getting this district, but the most important thing is not the districts we create; it is how best we can finance them. How can we have 80 percent of the government appropriated funds remaining at the centre and only 17 percent going to the districts, which ironically do 80 percent of the job in terms of service delivery, infrastructure, roads, health and agriculture?

The other day, I was at the local government and I asked myself a question: in which boutique does this government buy its programmes? They are well designed, but when it comes to implementation they fail. If you take the NAADS programme, for example, and check out some of the sub-counties where Shs 100 million has been spent, you cannot find anything of value. You wonder what we should do as a country. It is important that the President also recognises that much of it goes into corruption. We need to fight corruption and also walk the talk.

I want to end by talking about education. The President takes cognisance of the fact that education is key and I also agree with him. However, the cost of education is becoming outrageous especially in secondary schools, because we have no policy. This august House could help me identify how we can regulate the cost of education. Even in government schools like Ntare and Mbarara High School where I come from, people are paying in millions and yet Government injects money in them as well. There is the capitation grant and the buildings are already there but people are paying high amounts of money. Because of capitalism, honourable members, it is now “man eat man”, and I think it is up to us as a government to see how we can regulate some of these unregulated policies. 

As I wind up, I would like to say that the State of the Nation Address can only be of value if year in year out – (Member timed out)

2.49
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Mr Speaker, I thank His Excellency the President for the clear and precise exposition of government policy on the economy and other issues contained in his speech on the state of the nation on 7 June 2012. 

I have only two or three issues to raise on the State of the Nation Address. One is about roads. His Excellency the President talked very well about the roads and he identified some of the roads, which will be worked on this financial year. My concern is about the roads in my district – that is Nebbi–Goli–Paidha–Zeu-Vurra Road. This road passes through the food basket of the West Nile region. Right now, there is plenty of food in the area but because of the bad roads and too much rain, food stuffs cannot be ferried to the regional market. I know that the Minister of Works has written to Uganda National Road Authority to include this road in their budget. Unfortunately, when I looked through the budget of UNRA, it was not there. I only pray that this road is included in next year’s budget.

Secondly, on page 20, the President talked about power. I am happy about Nyagak, which was long awaited, with more than ten deadlines. It has now been switched on. I think it was switched on yesterday, 31st July. We are happy about that. Unfortunately, this power will only serve Arua Municipality, Paidha Town council and Nebbi Town council. I would like to find out from the minister when other trading centres and rural areas within Nebbi and Zombo will get power. I say this because as I speak, there are no signs of transmission lines – (Member timed out)

2.52
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I also rise to thank the President for his State of the Nation Address, which was very elaborate. Much as I agree with him, I have a few interjections to make. 

In his speech, he highlighted issues that have led to the economic recovery of this country. On page 2, he says that it is a fact that people’s property cannot be grabbed by soldiers and Ugandans can no longer disappear without trace. I do not agree with him here because this could have been properly achieved if government had implemented our national identification system and the databank. As long as this project is not implemented, it becomes very hard to identify and trace Ugandans. 

Secondly, on page 3, His Excellency talks about the improvements that have been done in the field of agriculture. He says that the backbone of agriculture is dependent on subsistence farming, which takes 68 percent. There is no country that can develop agriculture without doing it alongside industrialisation. I know we have a challenge of financing industries in our economy, but this can be done if the Government can expedite the law in respect to the Public Private Partnerships (PPP). I urge Government to expedite this law so that they can look at another option of financing industries. 

On page 13, the President, on a lighter note, talked about our oil resource but I would have expected the President to say more. Since everybody is excited about the discovery of the oil resource, I expected him to have highlighted the way this resource is going to be exploited and managed. I request the Executive to quickly handle the legislation on oil management in this country – (Member timed out)

2.55
MS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance. I would like to thank His Excellency for the State of the Nation Address. On page 6, his Excellency noted water for urban areas as one of the core issues in this country. It is true that water is life and should therefore be one of the core issues, but sometimes when there is a breakdown in the system, the Ministry of Water and Environment takes so long to rectify it. 

In Nebbi Town, for example, for years now we have not had piped water. When the generator broke down in 2010, the Ministry of Water and Environment picked this generator and brought it to Kampala and to date, it has not been replaced. We have gone to the ministry, but it is now two years and there is no piped water in Nebbi District. We are demanding that this should be fixed with immediate effect.

Secondly, I will hasten to add that His Excellency should not have restricted himself to water in urban areas only. Even water for production in rural areas is very important. My district is a water stressed area. Actually, 80 percent of the district is water stressed and is categorised in the dry corridor. Government has been talking about the Alui Dry Corridor Water Project for years. I demand that this project be operationalised. I have not even seen it in the budget for this year. 

Our young girls cannot attend school as needed because they have to go looking for water for eight miles and the women go to dig. When people cannot access the water, then we cannot improve accessibility of the girls to education. It is therefore important that water for production for rural areas is also improved so that women and girls can get more involved in productive activities.   

The other issue that I would like to comment about is on page 5. His Excellency rightly noted the need to stop the bad fishing practices on our lakes. I want to thank him for the way he phrased this statement - “If we could”. I think it is high time the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries informed this House about how long this operation of stopping the bad fishing is to last. I think any activity must have a timeframe. 

From what I see, this operation is not about to stop. I come from a fishing community and it seems this operation of stamping out bad fishing has become a lucrative business. On Lake Albert, time and again we hear gunshots as the operatives try to net fishermen but I do not get records of where these fishermen have been prosecuted. So if they are not being – (Member timed out)

2.58
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mable): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion and would like to thank His Excellency for the elaborate speech he gave that day. However, I have a few concerns. 

My first concern is in the area of agriculture. It is good to use the zone strategy, as he told us, but if we grow the crops, we shall have a problem especially in the area where I come from. People grow crops and they mature and in most cases they do not have storage facilities. The idea of silos had been previously talked about. If we do not have silos, then the foods that are grown are going to be wasted. What we want is to also have some small scale industries, or what we call value-addition industries, brought to different sub-counties such that the foods do not go to waste. This is why we are witnessing people sell all their produce; they do not have storage facilities and no value is added onto them and therefore they get little pay.

On the issue of roads, I would like to thank the President for the pledges. However, we have a road that has been under works for a long time, the Mbale-Tororo Road. It has never been completed and unfortunately, when they work on it they do so in patches. By the time they come back to the other side, they find the patch they worked on is again wasted. I request the Ministry of Works to ensure that by the time they leave the part that they have worked on, they leave it already complete, other than leaving it and then coming back when it already wasted. Since the farmers need big roads, I pray that these roads are worked on very fast. 

When we look at the municipality, around the Clock Tower the roundabout is in a very sorry state. Big trucks have totally damaged the roads. We request that this part be worked on very fast so that we avoid a lot of traffic jams around the roundabout, because people find it difficult to move around. 

In the area of education, I want to thank His Excellency for the USE and UPE programmes. However, there is a policy that has been introduced in USE – they are talking about skilling Ugandans and one of the subjects that has been introduced at A’ Level is computer studies. Now, for the areas without electricity, we do not know how we are going to cope up with – (Member timed out)

3.03
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): I thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern in the State of the Nation Address by the President is on agriculture. There is a lot of emphasis on these big agricultural projects like Bidco and sugar projects and then we forget about small scale agricultural areas. When you look at the communities that we represent, like the community where I come from, we are basically an agricultural area, but the enterprises that we promote were not really pointed out very well in the speech. 

When we look at agriculture as an enterprise that is going to transform this nation, we do not see how we can bring in the production chain. Let us say we are growing maize in Sheema, what is the production chain? How do we link agriculture with employment opportunities for the youth? We are struggling with youth unemployment and people are struggling everywhere; where do we fit in employment opportunities in the agricultural sector that cuts across the country? Where are the marketing processes? Where is transportation in the agricultural sector? 

I want to give a scenario. We say that we have got market in Sudan and other neighbouring countries, but what do we market? We market grains. Do we, for instance, have a factory in Sheema where we can process, pack and export maize flour? When this maize flour is exported, it has more value than the grains. 

Previously, there was a problem of food for chicken and pigs, and these are the enterprises that we promote in the agricultural zoning. We want to encourage these people to rear pigs and chicken but the food had risen simply because we export maize grain to these countries. If we had a programme in terms of processing this grain within our locality, we would be having a production chain where we would employ our people or youth and where we would export value-added goods that would bring more money to our country. (Member timed out)

3.05
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to register my disappointment with this year’s State of the Nation Address by the President. I had expected His Excellency the President to give me accountability on what happened in the last financial year based on the last State of the Nation Address he gave to Parliament. I was disappointed because when I looked at what the President presented to this nation, he did not account. There were many things which the President promised in the last State of the Nation Address. 

This time round, the President was very proud when he told us that he is collecting Shs 7 trillion compared to the Shs 6 billion which he got in 1986. When you go to the ground, however, on the issue of health, the other governments which were collecting Shs 6 billion were able to build hospitals in this country, fully-fledged hospitals. Today, we do not even have a single hospital which we have built with the Shs 7 trillion which we are collecting. 

What we have on the ground is three-bedroomed houses which we call health centre IIIs. When you go to the parish, you get two-bedroomed houses, which we call health centre IIs. But there is no fully-fledged hospital. Even the few hospitals which we have are in very poor conditions. Go to hospitals like Kiryandongo, - the Member of Parliament coming from there can vouch for this - go to Bugiri, go to Atutur, go to my referral hospital, Soroti, and see what is there. This is not only the state of affairs in eastern Uganda but the whole country. 

Mr Speaker, look at the state of roads in this country; recently, some people could not even go to Kanungu where the Prime Minister of this country comes from. We are being told about the Shs 7 trillion we are collecting and yet the infrastructure is dilapidated. I was very disappointed because I wanted that kind of accountability to come in this year’s State of the Nation Address. In the last State of the Nation Address, the President told us that he was going to have silos built in this country but as we speak today, not even one silo has been built. I am very disappointed. 

When you look at fuel, we had said that fuel reserves should be rehabilitated and stocked but as we speak now, not even one has been rehabilitated and stocked. That is why you see the prices of fuel go up and down without anybody – (Member timed out)

3.08
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Our motion is to thank the President for the clear and precise exposition of government policy. For that matter, I will thank the President for the clear part of the State of the Nation Address and I will reserve my thanks for the parts that are not clear and precise. 

On the day we had this address, I happened to talk to the Deputy Attorney-General and I asked him whether it is really true that we need tougher laws to fight corruption. He said the current legal regime is enough and that it is something else that we need. For that reason, Mr Speaker, I believe that what we need is not a tougher law but a tougher President. 

The President spoke about corruption in the past State of the Nation Address, but his position on corruption this time tends to be shifting and actually he is postponing the war on corruption. For that reason, I must say that when the President realises that somebody who is waving the pen is a dangerous enemy to this government, we shall start having the fight against corruption succeed. Otherwise, when we talk about having a stronger law against corruption, we may not even fight corruption during these five years of the current term of the President. 

The President enumerated the roads that are going to be worked on in this country. They actually cover four pages. Some were called “vital” and others, “other projects to be dealt with”. I was very disappointed when I found that in the whole list - the four pages - the President forgot about the road that he had promised the people of Bulamogi in Kaliro District. He had promised to tarmac Kaliro-Gadumire Road. The President himself said and implied that it was going to be an urgent issue, that he was going to tarmac that road, but amongst the “vital” and in “other projects”, it is not there. 

I believe that when responding to the debate, Government will come out clearly and speak about this road and give me the timetable that I should give the people of Bulamogi. It was because of that road that the President got 93 percent of the votes in Kaliro but he has forgotten about it. 

I felt the President made a big omission – Well, he talked a lot about money, but I thought he should have also talked about blood, which money does not buy. I am talking about the blood of the citizens of Uganda that are in Somalia fighting. We have lost very many people; Ugandans have died there. Recently, we were burying people in my place and many other places. Many Ugandans have fallen to the bullets of Al-Shabaab but the President did not mention what is taking place in defence and security of our country. Isn’t it a big omission from Government that we did not talk about something like this? (Member timed out)

3.11
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate His Excellency for his State of the Nation Address. His Excellency talked about the nodding disease on page 23. I would like to appreciate so much the efforts being taken by the Centers for Disease Control in finding out the root cause of this nodding disease. However, I really feel that what the government is doing is not sufficient. 

We need to look at what other countries that were experiencing the nodding disease did to control the disease. We learnt that countries like Tanzania, South Sudan and Ireland sometime back had the nodding disease. However, they have now managed to control the disease. In those countries, the children who were affected by the disease were confined to live in one area. So, in Northern Uganda, we could also borrow these good practices. Let the children who are suffering from the nodding disease be confined to one place as we continue with research. 

His Excellency said so much about the UPDF. I would like to join him in thanking the UPDF for the good work they have done especially in bringing peace to Northern Uganda. However, on page 2 His Excellency said that nowadays, soldiers do not grab people’s property. I feel that statement is really very unfortunate. Nowadays, soldiers have put all their energy into grabbing people’s property; for example, some time back, not even a month ago, soldiers put mark stones on our land in Amuru. They were claiming that the land belonged to them. That is grabbing people’s property. Therefore, much as you are praising the UPDF, the few who are emphasizing the grabbing of people’s property should refrain from that. 

His Excellency praised the NRM Members of Parliament for having administered democratic political kiboko on FDC during the EALA elections. I would also like to join His Excellency in thanking the people of Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, the people of Bukoto, the people of Jinja and the people of Luwero for having administered democratic political kiboko to all the NRM candidates in those areas. (Laughter) I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.15
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to talk about the State of the Nation Address of the President. I will go straight to the point. 

On page 10, the President highlights the performance of the economy with the income that has been generated since 1986. He highlights that Shs 5 billion was being collected at that time but now we are collecting a projected income of Shs 7 trillion. I seek to understand some of the arithmetic and the mathematics of it. In my opinion, I think that if we have had increased generated income, then things should have also increased in the same or a better way. 

When you look at the education sector, which is allocated Shs 664 billion, and you look at what takes place on the ground in terms of accountability – the status of the structures of the schools especially primary schools, most especially in my constituency of Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality - you will actually cry. I want to state that I have taken trouble to take pictures of such structures in addition to securing a report from the education department of Busheyi-Ishaka Municipality. The report is indicative of the fact that what is allocated here is just mere figures without accountability on the ground. Our role here is to ensure that we correct the situation as regards government services.

Look at the salaries of the teachers; they are crying, and the petition is already with us. Orphans during our time in school had bursaries. I have not seen anywhere in the budget of the ministry where such is being talked about. When we go to attend burials, there will be all those appeals to secure help for the orphans and the politicians start contributing to welfare of such orphans. That is a big concern on my part.

Even for these structures, we have SFG, which was promoting the erection of school structures but has also been reduced – (Member timed out)

3.18
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Every year we stand here and do two things after the President has addressed the nation; we thank him but shortly after that, we lament about the things that might have not been included or talked about in terms of our areas of representation. We also lament about things that might have been included in the budget of the previous year albeit with nothing being done.

The State of the Nation Address by the President in the last five years has basically been almost the same. I have been doing an analysis and got to realise that they only differ in just a few things. I think we should change the format of our debate. We should thank the President as Members of Parliament for the things he achieved in our respective constituencies. I am saying this because then we will be sure that he promised and executed them, that is, if he has done so. If he has not, we should tell him those issues have not been attended to so that he gets to know how his budget is performing. So, this thanking and thanking is just ritualistic in nature; it is a useless ritual. Please tell him what the situation is and stop lamenting because that will not help him. 

You know the President makes two budgets, the real and the political budget. The political budget is for fooling around to win votes and calming down people’s emotions. So, he keeps promising them on this and that. You can see how people are lamenting here on what was promised to their constituencies during the campaigns. You can promise during the campaign but the budget – (Interruption)

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to say that the President is “fooling around” and so what we are talking about in this House is “useless”? He mentioned those two statements. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Constitution states that His Excellency the President is the fountain of honour and several other titles and descriptions which all build to the honour of that office. Any reference that seems to suggest that the President can fool around would not be in order. The honourable member should withdraw.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I will withdraw the word “fooling” but replace it with the word “siyasa”, which is all about politics. I am saying this because we know that there are items in the budget that are included but eventually they are not implemented. Let me give you an example. In my constituency, we were promised a rural electrification extension line cutting across my constituency along the same road and covering about three big trading centres. When the concerned people came and surveyed the area, people were excited. Later on, I read an advert in the newspapers about how power was going to be extended to that area. What happened? 

They even identified a contractor but at the time of signing that contract, Rural Electrification Agency was told that the money, to a tune of Shs 32 billion, had been diverted. So, that power extension promise has not been fulfilled; there is no power extended to that area. The money was diverted by Government to somewhere else – (Member timed out)

3.23
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The 1995 Constitution compels the President to deliver the State of the Nation Address. In that address, the President must account for the money that this Parliament appropriates to him. Now, between the month of June of this year and the June of the following year, the President should account to the nation what he has done with the trillions of money appropriated to him. I would like to say that while I sat in the Conference Hall, I got nothing about the President’s accountability to the people of Uganda. 

The President kept asking us to look at Entebbe Road. I wear good glasses but what I see along Entebbe Road is property owned by individuals. How many Ugandans own that property along Entebbe Road? This country has got 82 percent of Ugandans engaged in agriculture. The President talked about modernisation of agriculture but what has he done for that sector? Zero!

The President talked about UPE in the address. The situation in this sector is terrible. How many pupils have dropped out of school and you people do not want to talk about it? The President had a chance to explain to Ugandans what he has done for the education sector, but zero infrastructure, zero economics, zero employment. Eighty-seven percent of Ugandans are unemployed but the President did not talk about employment at all - (Interruption)

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. By the time you become a Member of Parliament, one should have respect and honesty to themselves and the House. In my constituency, the President is constructing a tarmac road from Fort Portal to Hoima to Congo. Is he in order to stand here to say that the President has done nothing in infrastructure?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Without offending my colleagues from the Muslim fraternity, even the Bible says “Those who have eyes to see will see”. Some people may not have eyes to see so they do not see. So, that is a condition that the Speaker cannot rule on. (Laughter) 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I spent 25 years working for this nation and I can speak with my head up. Being old is not an issue and does not compete with being young. Everyone should speak for themselves. 

You come up and tell the nation that this economy has grown and yet you see poverty everywhere in this country. If the roads were done in your constituency and were not done in Mbale - What I am talking about is the economy, whether there has been economic growth in this country – (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I am constrained by the honourable member holding the Floor to put you to a point of order. Mr Speaker, everybody knows that the government is constructing roads in all corners of this country. Gulu-Atiak-Nimule is under construction, Arua-Oraba is under construction, even in his own constituency there is construction going on. We have just concluded constructing the Lira-Soroti Road. We are constructing Mbarara Road. Even at Mbale Hospital, recently the President commissioned a block of about Shs 2 billion. Is he in order to stand here, at his age, to start telling deliberate lies to the people of the Republic of Uganda? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already ruled on the honourable member’s ability to see. I will not rule again. 

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, with all due respect to my colleague, who is also a shadow minister for foreign affairs, a member of a committee which I chair, and whom I have been taking in high regard; on insistence that he does not want to take note of your ruling, I wish to honestly move that this honourable gentleman no longer be heard according to our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the particular motion being moved applies to a situation where a member is ruled out of order and persists on the same subject repeatedly, ignoring the order of the Speaker. The Speaker has not made any ruling to that effect yet. Let the honourable member finish.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That is the problem we have in this country; these people do not want to tell the President the truth and that is why he continues in wrongdoing because they do not speak the truth. I am here to speak the truth. 

The President talked about investors. He defended the investors but he did not even defend the workers of this country who have no minimum wage – (Member timed out)

3.31
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank His Excellency the President for the good State of the Nation Address he made. It tackles all political, social and economic aspects of this country. His Excellency was very elaborate, very articulate and I think he is a talented orator. We really need to appreciate the good work he has done for this country. 

In the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency the President gave five reasons that have caused the recovery of the economy since 1986 to date. On page 2, the President talked about security. I thank the UPDF for the peace and security they have rendered to this nation. I represent a border constituency - my constituency borders with Congo - and I would like to inform this House and the nation that as far as security is concerned, as far as peace is concerned, the government has done a commendable job for our country and particularly for my constituency. I can inform you that one can travel all the way from Kampala to Ntoroko at any time of the day or night and security is guaranteed. So, I really want to commend the good job the security organs have done. I want to thank the UPDF under the command of the CDF. 

I want to also thank the Police for keeping law and order. I thank the IGP of course because the Police have really kept law and order at least in my constituency. The Police are doing good work, and this is the security that the President was talking about. This is not only security in Ntoroko; in the whole nation, people can sleep and people can do business uninterrupted. So, we really have to appreciate the President, and he accounted for that. Those people are saying that he did not account for anything, but at least to me he accounted for so many things.

On page 14, the President talked about the councillors and the LCIs in our respective places. This was a very good idea. The President talked about salary increments for the councillors and the LCIs because of the work they do for us - they adjudicate cases and most of the political work is done by these local leaders. (Member timed out)

3.35
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I want to thank His Excellency the President for fulfilling his constitutional mandate of providing accountability for a year. 

However, on page 13 when the President talks of public servants clamouring for salary increments, it is an insult to the public service. There is no way we are going to deliver service desired when you are disregarding what they are demanding. Salary disparity in this country is breeding corruption and unless the Government of Uganda looks at addressing the question of salary disparity, I think we are not going to achieve much in service delivery and fighting corruption. You find someone being paid about Shs 40 million while another is paid Shs 1 million. Permanent secretaries, for example, are paid Shs 2 million yet they are supervising over other officers getting Shs 40 million. The President needs to address that problem.

When the President talks about corruption and selfishness on page 15 and 18, he falls short of talking about nepotism, because we see it being practiced in this country. When people who steal resources are related to those people in charge, they are forgiven. We should also have serious action taken on corruption.

I realise that this Government has started paying and compensating people whose properties were affected by war. Compensating victims of war is actually unreasonable. You cannot compensate all victims of war because verifying those claims will be a problem, and for how long - it will start from Independence, from those who suffered while fighting for Independence. So, you will pay the people from Northern Uganda, the easterners, those from Luwero and you will end up even paying the Kisoro people because they were affected by the Rwanda war. So, government should not be selective because it will be acting contrary to Section 21 of the Constitution.

The President talks about iron ore in Muko near Kabale. This is an error that should be corrected by Government. This iron ore is not in Kabale, it is in Bukimbiri Sub-County in Kisoro District. So on page 21, it was an error on the part of the President.

On page 22, the President talks about UPDF being stronger but he falls short of telling us how they are performing in Somalia, which is very important. So when they are responding, they should be able to report to this House how they are performing and the challenges they are meeting so as to get better pay or to enhance it. Some of these soldiers have complained that they are not being paid what they are supposed to get.

On page 24, the President thanks Parliament, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker but he did not tell us the performance in the Judiciary. How many judges are there? How many cases were decided? If you do not report to this House the performance of Judiciary, then you fall short of reporting. (Member timed out)

3.35
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman representative Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I request that you add me an extra minute. I thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for the excellent and elaborate State of the Nation Address.

On page 4, the President stated that if all the forty million acres of land of Uganda that are suitable for arable farming were put to their full potential, there would be a revolution in this country. This is a very good idea. I want us to look at areas in Uganda that have got vast land where farming can be done. If this programme or idea is implemented in such areas, we will be able to benefit.

In Namutumba District, however, the situation is different. Each family on average has two and a half acres of land which the head of the family inherits from his father. On average, each family has got 10 children of which five to six are boys and they also expect to get a share of land from their parents. Such an area like Namutumba District, which belongs to Busoga sub-region, represents the situation in the rest of the sub-region. If we keep on sub-dividing land, I do not know what the generation of tomorrow will have to share. I therefore call upon Government to get a special programme for Busoga sub-region, where Namutumba belongs, so that we can be able to fight this habit of sub-dividing land.

Busoga sub-region is an island of poverty. When you look at the Luwero Triangle Programme, it ends at the hydro dam on Jinja Bridge and NUSAF ends at Lake Kyoga. The one of the eastern region ends at River Mpologoma. So, Busoga region is left in an island of poverty. (Member timed out)

3. 42
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I want to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. I have one observation, which we need to address ourselves to as colleagues here. 

On page 18, the President mentions the issue of corruption and selfishness. It is true the Kazindas of this country are quite many, but at the same time we have a role to play as Parliament in helping the President to fight corruption. Here the President says that investors are frustrated, and that is true. Besides investors being frustrated, even our own local businessmen are being frustrated by the few Kazindas of this country. 

Kazinda is a case in point, and he is in the Office of the Prime Minister. There is also a big scandal in NAADS. What do we need to do as MPs to address this problem? Cases are referred to various government agencies; we are at appropriation now and we must begin justifying accountability to these various officers who are holding these offices, for instance, CID, DPP, IGG. They come here and they are presenting themselves for monies. I want us to ask them to justify their expenditure, to tell us how many cases they have handled and what value they have achieved from these cases. This is our role as MPs, entirely. 

The Minister of Internal Affairs is here while Kazinda is out on police bond. Do you want to tell me that Museveni should call hon. Hilary Onek to tell us why Kazinda is out? We push people to the IGG and he removes them. Do we need to call Museveni to remove people from these positions? In NAADS now, a principal accountant is frustrating suppliers by not paying them. Honestly, people have sold properties because someone is corrupt; who do you blame? My argument is addressed to us, and this is the right time to begin handling such cases – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hilary Onek): Mr Speaker, can I give my colleague information? Thank you for giving way. The Police and the CID, which are under my ministry, arrest, take them for prosecution and when they are taken to court, it is a different arm of Government, the Judiciary, who release these people. Remember the case of Kajubi; when he was released, the Police was not satisfied and he had to be rearrested and taken back to jail. So, the Judiciary must be made accountable particularly on prosecution of criminals who are taken there. That is the information I wanted to give you.
 
MR PETER OGWANG: First of all, I would like to inform the minister that I am very well informed about the person I am talking about. Our brother, the Principal Accountant who has been in the Office of the Prime Minister, is out on a Police bond. So, when you tell me that we are merely alleging on that, you should even go and find out why that gentleman is on a Police bond. Why is he out? 

Lastly, my President, on page 14, talked about not being in favour of salary increment to public servants. However, I would like to say that the solution to this, which specifically goes to the Ministry of Internal Affairs - you see, a CID officer who is paid peanuts to investigate Kazinda - I would think that Government should come up with a strategy on how such special agencies are facilitated to handle cases of such big magnitude so that we do not lose money. That is the only way we should expect to come out with results.
  
There are also cases of people who work in hard-to-reach areas, who should be motivated. (Member timed out.) 

3.47
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank my able President for giving us this wonderful speech - the State of the Nation Address. I would also like to express my sincere condolences to those individuals, who have eyes, but do not use them to see; who have ears, but do not use them to hear; who have mouths which they use to speak wrong things.  In the Koran they say, “They have eyes, but they do not use them to see,” and in the Bible they say, “They have ears, but they do not use them to hear.”  

I was also disappointed by the Leader of the Opposition’s use of abusive phrases while responding to the State of the Nation Address, which was not good. You see, we are Ugandans and if we want to take Uganda ahead –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable member is raising a matter regarding the Leader of the Opposition, which matter he raised that day and you ruled him out of order. Is he in order to persist with that same matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What did the honourable member say? 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU:  The honourable member said the Leader of the Opposition used abusive language in his reply to the State of the Nation Address and he said the same thing twice when the Leader of the Opposition was making his presentation, where you ruled him out of order. He is once again persisting; is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if a Member says somebody is using an abusive word without he himself using it, there is no order violated because it is just a statement, that somebody used an abusive word. How would that be out of order?
 
MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your wise ruling. However, I would like to state this and it should be put on record that I regard FDC as “Forum for Disorganised Change.” (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, we are all aware that Uganda is now under a multiparty political dispensation and there are a number of duly registered political parties. At the level of a Member of Parliament, it would be terribly absurd for my colleague from Katerera to appear ignorant about the names of political parties in Uganda. 

Is he, therefore, in order to start bringing in acronyms and names that have never existed in the Electoral Commission register? Is he in order to insinuate that members of the Forum for Democratic Change are, therefore, disorganised? Is the Member further in order to use such language that is intended to provoke emotions from other colleagues? Is he really in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rules of this House regulate the content and nature of speeches and, therefore, also the implication of speeches for the harmony of the House. A reference to a registered political party known by the names of Forum for Democratic Change, which has membership in this House to mean “Forum for Disorganised Change,” is improper and the honourable member is asked to withdraw and apologise to the offended Members.
 
MR KATOTO: Mr Speaker, I apologise. However, I meant FDC, the acronym and not the party. But I apologise and withdraw the statement.
 
Back to page 1, about corruption; the President should come up and we work with him as Parliament to fight corruption. There are charlatans that are disorganising all the work in Uganda. I am disappointed with the Judiciary because we sent them corrupt people and they were released the following day. I do not know where we should run for justice in as far as corruption scandals are concerned. (Member timed out.)

3.53
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in commending the President for the State of the Nation Address.
 
The role of ICT in economic growth and social change cannot be underestimated. Globally, ICT has been recognised as the major driver for social economic transformation. Technology improves productivity; technology lowers costs of communication; technology improves collaboration and sharing of information. In the last year’s State of the Nation Address and also in the NRM Manifesto of the 2011 Elections, the President highlighted ICT as one of the priority areas. However, I was surprised that in this year’s State of the Nation Address, ICT seems to have dropped off the list; this is a pity.  

As a country, we must continue to focus on how we can leverage ICTs to achieve quick and maximum benefits. I know that there are ongoing efforts to give computers to secondary schools by UCC. However, the bulk of our children are in primary schools. Statistics show that over 28 percent of the children who go to primary school do not proceed to secondary school and the bulk of these are the ones who go into agriculture. If we do not equip our population who make up the backbone of this country, we might be in trouble. That is why I would like to take this opportunity to urge Government to start thinking of putting computers in primary schools because even those that drop out of school at that level will be able to use these ICTs to enhance their economic capacity.

Mr Speaker, I commend Government for what they have done so far because we are aware that out of the 1000 secondary schools in the country, 800 have already got computers, but the situation in the primary schools is pathetic. I have a report here produced by the National NGO Forum called the School ICT Status Report, 2012. This report reveals a very sad situation; I will point out only one. This report says that 99 percent of the schools that were surveyed by the NGO do not have a single computer and 94 percent of the schools do not have electricity.

I think that as a country, we should start focusing on how we can take electricity and also computers to these primary schools. Allow me to table this report for Parliament to take a look at because it has good revelations that can help Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What report is this?

MR BALIDDAWA: It is a report by the National NGO Forum -(Member timed out.)

3.57
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to express my appreciation to the President for the State of the Nation address. A number of issues were raised, but allow me to raise an issue that was mentioned on page 13 about salary increments. If I may quote, the President said, “I demand that the clamour for more pay and allowances by public servants and political leaders must stop so that we concentrate on the roads and power.” I imagine this statement arose from the fact that at that time, our teachers were agitating for an increase in salary and also improvement in the UPE programme. 

I would have expected the President to address the country on how he plans to improve this UPE programme, but to say he demands that we stop asking for an increase in salary without telling us how he intends to improve on this UPE programme, I think, leaves a lot to be desired. For example, I do not know whether the President is aware that the majority of our parents have pulled out their children from UPE schools. The attrition rate is so high and people have sort of voted against this programme. So, instead of saying he does not want to hear about the increase in salary, I would have expected him to tell us how he intends to improve on this sector.


This statement also reminds me of what I have been reading in the papers, where the President says he would wish to see more Musisi’s in this country referring, to the Executive Director of Kampala. I believe that lady is able to do what she is doing possibly because of the high remuneration that she has. I wish this could also be replicated in other sectors.

The President went ahead to say that he would favour salary increases for LCV councillors and LCI chairpersons. How do we increase salaries for a category that is actually not legally in operation?

Lastly, the President talked about the core issues in an economy and this is on page 15. He listed many of them and he went ahead to talk about water, and narrowed water to the core issue in the economy, which is piped water for the big towns. I believe the President knows that the majority of his people stay in the rural areas -(Member timed out.)

4.00
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to express my sincere gratitude to the President for his tenacious efforts to guide this country and to give accountability on his constitutional obligation.

The President on page two talked about security of persons and property brought by UPDF/NRA. People should congratulate UPDF for that wonderful achievement, but I want to give information to one of the colleagues from the Opposition who said that UPDF soldiers are grabbing property of wanainchi. If it is true, it should be reported. Our doctrine is very clear, that when a soldier commits a crime, he should be punished. 

Therefore, if you have known any soldiers who have committed such crimes and you do not report them, then you have a problem. But it is very clear; UPDF is on record that it does not grab properties of wanainchi at all. Therefore, I call upon all colleagues to maintain this peace and security that has been ushered in by this government. The President, in his preamble, clearly calls upon every Ugandan to maintain this stability and peace.

Having said that, I want to inform the House that all religions tell us about certain things that God hates; a lying tongue; a heart that plans for evil; a foot that is quick to do evil; a man who sows discord in society. 

Having said that, I want to give information to hon. Wamai about roads infrastructure. In 1986 when the NRM Government took power, the total roads network composed of 7900 kilometres of national roads and 22,000 kilometres of district roads. Out of these 7900 kilometres of national or trunk roads, only 1900 or 24 percent was tarmacked and the rest of the 6000 kilometres was gravel.

Since 1986, the road network has increased from 30,000 kilometres in 1986 to 77,870 kilometres by 2005, consisting of 21,000 kilometres of national roads, of which 3000 kilometres are bibulous; 22,000 of district roads; 5000 of urban roads; and 30,000 of community roads.

This is information that can be checked with URA -(Member timed out.)

4.04
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the issues raised by the President and thank the Leader of the Opposition very much for having responded ably to the many issues raised by the President.

A number of suggestions were made by the Leader of the Opposition and I pray that these suggestions are taken in good faith because they were trying to make suggestions, which will help this country to address the problems we are in.

In the President’s address, he talked about infrastructure development and specifically, the electricity supply. We are aware that electricity supply has increased over the past years, but this has not been translated into development. We witnessed the increase in electricity tariffs, but no mention was made on how the increase in tariffs is going to be addressed. Therefore, I feel that it is important for alternative policies to be brought out on the use of solar energy. The government should also come up with strategies of addressing the many problems facing rural areas regarding electricity.

I would like to remind the Minister of Transport that the President has over time made pledges. There is a road from Nyendo to Bukakata which the President has been promising to tarmac over the years. But when he was talking about the roads to be worked on, he did not mention this road. Therefore, I think that it is also important for the President to stick to the promises he makes to the people when he was looking for votes.

Another pledge that the President had made but was not mentioned at all, was power to the people of Kitengesa. This has been a promise over the years and in last year’s State of the Nation Address, the President promised – and indeed, electricity poles were even placed around Kitengesa Town, but after –(Member timed out.)

4.08
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I begin by commending the Leader of the Opposition’s beautiful reply to the State of the Nation Address because it answered all the loopholes that were reflected in the address by the President. 

I wish to inform my colleague – though he has taken his seat – the honourable Col Mwesigye. We have raised an issue here and we are still investigating and trying to find an approach to handle land grabbing in Arua, being commanded by the President’s brother, that is Gen. Salim Saleh, who has grabbed six acres of Barifa Central Forest Reserve. If that is not tantamount to UPDF grabbing public property, then I do not know what it is. But if you are a friend to Gen. Saleh, you had better take note and inform him to pull out of Barifa Forest because it is a forest that has got its stakeholders interested in it. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to quote what the President said, on page 9. “Political opportunism involves failure to tell the people what the country needs and instead pandering to uninformed, wrong and populist positions.” For the last 26 years, if we are to go by this statement, you will find a lot in common with what the President himself represents. Arua in West Nile is one place that has been neglected on the issue of energy since Independence. We have been promised Nyagak, but unfortunately, the Nyagak which we thought would alleviate our lack of energy is being talked of, in extending power to Aru, which is in DR Congo. 

Therefore, is DR Congo going to pay the taxes that we Ugandans are going to pay for the money that was borrowed to construct this power dam? These are issues which the President should look into closely. Otherwise, if we are to talk of constructing a dam for the people of West Nile worth 3.5MW and before even extending power to the whole of West Nile, you are talking of extending it to a foreign country – which has got no bearing to us - I think this is tantamount to committing treason -(Member timed out.)

4.12
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Mr Speaker, I also join the rest in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address, which prepared the nation for the programmes that Government is set to implement. But when I quote the President on the level that he spoke about the number of roads he had also identified while moving around the country, you will realise that most of them were taken by UNRA. But the problem we have had is that UNRA is not fully funded. We have the Road Fund whose money is collected by Uganda Revenue Authority and is put into the Consolidated Fund while only small amounts are portioned to UNRA. 

The President did not come out to speak about how we can now operationalise the Road Fund policy so that UNRA is given its full amount of money as per the collections. This definitely comes back to Parliament – we may have to amend the Finance Bill so that at least the Road Fund can come into operationalisation. Even the President will have to stop commenting on how many roads in the whole country are in a bad state since it affects all our constituencies.


The President also spoke about agricultural improvement and even touched on the use of fertilizers. He talked about model farmers and several other areas that he has always spoken about, like irrigation equipment. My only worry is that we have not yet established industries in Uganda; even if we talked much about the use of fertilisers, how many industries within the country manufacture fertilisers? We have model farmers who can come up on a higher scale, but we do not have fertilisers. So, this still gets back to Government; we need to first put in place how much production in fertilisers we can have before we begin talking about their use. Even if somebody established a farm, he would not have the fertilisers to apply. 

Then other area I need Government to take up seriously concerns what the President spoke about the protection of exports. I come from a border constituency – that is Busia. Right now, it is the harvesting season for maize and when you go to Busia right now, you will find many trucks from Kenya parked all over the town. We do not have any regulation that protects the export of grains. At the end of the day, maize grain is fully exported with some foreigners coming to buy off whole gardens. In the end, we shall be importing maize flour and chicken feed from Kenya. There is need to have a policy that regulates the export of grain. (Member timed out.)

4.15
MS RITA NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I almost bled with pain when, on page 22, the President decided to insult the media, calling it corrupt, irresponsible, and unprofessional. I want to speak as a journalist who was not a professional, but who managed to earn from journalism for 10 years, despite being an accountant. 

I decided to forgive the President because I imagined he does not know what is happening in that world. I want to apologise to this House on behalf of the media workers in this country. If there are any of you who have been offended by giving a tip to a journalist, and you really feel you gave it without a cheerful heart but under duress, I apologise. But from today, if any of us has given a journalist a single coin, either in appreciation or under duress, please count yourself among the people that have blessed the life of that journalist. 

In this country, because we do not have a lot of authority over the private sector, the journalists are living under very tight conditions. The journalists you see here covering your stories earn as little as Shs 500 per story which is even not paid because of the exploitation. I wish this House would help by bringing up a minimum wage that would even work for the private sector so that we help these people. I know how much I was blessed as a radio DJ when you would greet someone on radio and he brings you Shs 20,000. Those people are still written on my heart. I even have clothes that I am wearing because of money that those people gave me. It is unfortunate that our President decided to reduce them to this extent, but I think, again, it is an opportunity for us to help this category of workers, of course not forgetting some of us who even go on to bribe the editors so that they can defame some of our opponents. I have seen an editor who has refused Shs 6 million to defame someone. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request that this House finds a way of helping these journalists so that they become professional, and responsible. (Member timed out.)

4.18
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have tried to read this booklet faithfully, but unfortunately, I might be one of the blind people who see very clearly. I want to begin by giving information to my colleague across there. He takes pride in the construction of 77,000 kilometres of tarmac road in this country. However, I think MPs should go deep enough to do some political analysis when they are making statements. When you look at the 77,000 kilometres of roads that have been constructed under the NRM administration - we are talking about a sum of 27 years – so, if you have your calculator, that comes to 2,852 kilometres per annum, but you would be asking, as an MP, “What is the annual budget in a year for the road sector that can only generate 2,852 kilometres of tarmac over a span of 27 years?” That would be logical enough because that is one of the ways to analyse the achievements in Government. 

That said, when I looked at the statement, I realised that the President ignored one region completely, and that is the West Nile region. As far as power is concerned, Mr Speaker, bear me witness, if you are to come with me to Arua Hospital right now - we have talked about this for generations. The President pledged with his entire team of ministers that we would receive power as early as last year in October. The next October is just almost two months away and here we are, the district is in darkness. I am very happy that the honourable Minister for Northern Uganda was there recently and saw this pathetic situation of the absence of power.

When people are in power, they become blind enough to provide light so that others see. Therefore, when this side is not seeing, it is because our eyes are fatigued by darkness. (Laughter)

That said, I want to focus on the economy and the disparities in the economy. The President lamented rightly that the growth rates have reduced. We appreciate that. Of course, we know globally that the economies are falling apart, especially those who give us the development money, but the question is, Even the little that we generate as a country, what is the span of its distribution? We are talking about jiggers in Busoga. We are talking about Busoga being an island and at the same time, we are thanking the President for an eloquent and exceedingly nice speech. What a contradiction. It is one thing to be an honest representative of the people; it is another thing to be a loyal person without clear direction for your people. I appreciate one leader who said, “Young men who come to Parliament seem to have a generational attitude towards the country.” (Member timed out.)

4.22
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the President for respecting the ritual of giving the State of the Nation Address, the purpose of which I would think would be to tell us how the country has been moving in the last one year, and to give us inspiration for the future that things are going to be a little brighter. When I was asked by a journalist after the State of the Nation Address, my comment was that he Nandalised his speech because of continuous reference to hon. Nandala-Mafabi, whose name he mentioned around 10 times in his speech, and which has been edited in the Hansard. 

Due to lack of time, I want to go to the point that is closest to my heart. The President, who at one time got a global award for the fight against HIV/AIDS, has continued to err. In the last debate on the Presidential address, I put it categorically that the President had relegated the duty of fighting against HIV/AIDS to external agencies. I mentioned that over four speeches had been mentioned and the President had not made any mention on the HIV/AIDS state of affairs. This is the time when he was woken up to mention a word and he grossly erred. 

Listen to this - the President attributed the spread of HIV/AIDS at present to promiscuity. I think the word “promiscuity” in itself - I will not say it is rude, but it is not overly polite, and it is pointing an accusing finger, to say that somebody who is getting HIV/AIDS is promiscuous. I think it is insensitive of the Head of State. What about the babies who are born with HIV/AIDS unsuspectingly? What about the poor women who remain home, very faithful to their husbands and they contract HIV/AIDS from their husbands? Or the reverse can be true; husbands who are faithful and then the women bring the disease. What about victims of rape? Would you like to tell me, Mr President, that this is promiscuity? The President should withdraw this statement -(Interjections)- on that one alone, Mr Speaker, the President must withdraw.

The President fails to address the dilapidated health care system. Just recently, we got a report from the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters –(Member timed out.)

4.25
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the President for his elaborate State of the Nation Address. Because of time, I will go straight to the point, mainly on teachers’ salaries. When the President talked about teachers’ salaries and said they should not be increased, I started wondering what these teachers were going to do. They have children at school, they also fall sick the way we fall sick, and I said, sincerely, these teachers should be looked at the way the UPDF has been looked at. At least, let them also have the facilities the UPDF are getting. Let them also get cement at a subsidised price. Let them also have ATMs that do not deduct their monies from their salaries the way the UPDF has. Then we would also say, now, whatever they are earning, they get it all and let the percentage be there that they are expecting.

My next point is on electricity. I appreciate the coming of Bujagali on board. I also want to see Karuma come on board since procurement is ongoing. However, the coverage of electricity in Uganda is below 13 percent of Ugandans. This is because the money which should go to rural electrification does not reach the Rural Electrification Agency. We need to have rural electrification get its own vote such that if we give them Shs 12 billion, indeed, it is Shs 12 billion not like last financial year where we gave them Shs 12 billion and they only received Shs 4.5 billion. This really helps us as a country; let all our people get electricity such that we also know that the economy is growing.


The other issue is on roads. The President, time and again, has always promised people of Kabale Town just 2.6 kilometres of roads in the middle of Kabale Town, for the last three years. When he came up to give a State of the Nation Address, I did not see my road in Kabale Municipality - just those few kilometres. For how long are they going to wait? Do you want us to first run to the streets and sleep in the middle of the road so that you know that there is an outcry? 

My last concern is about water coverage. I concur with the President that indeed, and I also benefit, that in towns, we need a lot of piped water, but also, people in the rural areas, who are the majority, need water, and the worst thing is that it is not affordable. For us in Kabale Town, people are always crying. Taxes are very high. My grandmother cannot afford it -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I still recall that we passed a loan for municipalities. I do not know whether that will be captured under that. So, you might have some hope.

4.29
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank his Excellency the President for a very good speech, especially on infrastructure development. I also thank the President for the concern, for the health sector. The President has very good intentions, but the Frontbench is letting us down.  When I see my colleague, hon. Richard Nduhuura, who selected health centres IV to be rehabilitated in 2007/2008 and left out Bwizibwera Health Centre in Kashari County, I feel sad. This is a health centre where male and female patients share a ward. This is the same ward where newly born children stay with pregnant mothers. This is the same ward where TB patients stay with non TB patients. 

It is a health centre that was donated by colonialists in 1949. We have been moving up and down. When I was Chairman LC V, we mobilised funds and put up a ward up to roofing level, but just Shs 50 million - the Ministry of Health cannot release that money. The minister has been there and I am very serious. 

Ebola is in this country. Supposing it happens in Bwizibwera, how would we even isolate the patients? So, the President has intentions, but the people helping him - God should help us and they see what to do.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.31
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to join the honourable members who have thanked the President for the speech which he delivered on the 7th June. The President highlighted the issue of our economy by emphasising the light industries. I expected the President to have mentioned the factory of cement in Moroto District because most of our lime is transported to Tororo.

Right now, the roads are spoilt. It is impossible to come from Moroto to Mbale. It is also impossible now to come from Soroti to Moroto. I thank the President for having raised the issue of tarmacking, which is very good. This is what we have been waiting for, for a long time. At the moment, I expect the government to do something on the roads that have become impassable. 

The President highlighted security. We have had insecurity for the last 25 years. Now, it is time that we also expect to have a large presence of Police in the region because disarmament is over. 

I would like to thank the President for the UPE and USE initiatives, but the problem we have in Moroto is that once these children pass P.7, we do not have secondary schools in Moroto, especially for the sub-counties of Katikekile and Tapac.

The President highlighted issues of health and he emphasised HIV/AIDS and the nodding syndrome disease. We have a problem in the Karamoja region, especially in Moroto Hospital, which is the only referral hospital in the region. We have shortage of drugs and services. I can see one Member nodding, but recently, there was a letter written by the LC V in my region highlighting corruption in that hospital, and recently, a woman died because of negligence of duty. How far are we going to continue with these kind of issues? I am happy that the President highlighted issues of corruption. 

As a Member of that region, I witnessed the First Lady, our minister, trying to handle thieves who had stolen money meant for the NAADS project. I urge that this continues and as Members of the region, we are putting in our efforts to ensure that this kind of action is taken seriously. (Member timed out.)

4.35
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. I rise to support the motion. I would like to support His Excellency on the issue of the UPDF, although they have taken 20 years to bring peace to the Northern Region. I further want to support them -(Interjections)- because in most cases, where Police are not enough, they have ably given support. A case is when the Yumbe people armed with arrows and bows attacked Moyo District. The 490 battalion was able to intervene and cool the situation. 

I support the proposal that the salaries of LC Is and LC Vs be increased and suggest that it can be extended to LC IIIs because LC III is an administrative unit where a lot of Government funds go and politicians support by monitoring. 

On health, His Excellency talked about the Nodding Disease, HIV/AIDS and this is very good. But in my district and in the Northern  Region, especially West Nile, Hepatitis B is killing many people. Not much emphasis has been put on it. I would like the government to bring it on board because vaccination is three times, and each vaccine costs Shs 35,000, which my poor people cannot afford. 

On agriculture, the President seems to indicate that the problem of 68 percent of households still being subsistence farmers is due to lack of mobilisation. I tend to disagree with him because mobilisation has been done extensively. What is lacking is  - there is low investment in agriculture. It should be increased and for my district, there is the land issue, especially the international border issue between Southern Sudan and Moyo. That conflict between Yumbe and Moyo over land has restricted my people from commercialising their agriculture. I plead to Government to settle the land issues in Uganda - especially in Moyo district - very fast.

On roads, I want to thank Government because they have included Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo Road. This is a road which was started in 1996. It came to a halt because the LRA killed one of the contractors. I support internal borrowing and Government should be allowed to borrow from NSSF. Once funds are available, I plead that the Moyo-Atiak Road be given priority. I thank Government because it has been categorised in the A category -(Member timed out.)

4.39
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I will address two issues, namely, the state of the economy and education. I want to commend Government for maintaining economic sanity, which included facilitating a modest growth rate of 3.2 percent as reported in the address. All this happened against a background of terrible economic challenges globally. Members will agree that in the face of the global financial crisis, we could not have adequate remittances from our sisters and brothers abroad. 

In the face of that crisis, we could not have an increase in exports to those countries, which benefited most from our products.  Also, we are aware that there was geo-political uncertainty in most of the Arab world, which included the Arab Spring. All this disorganised the supply of oil among other things.

Internally, we had a drought; we had the depreciating shilling against the dollar and other major foreign currencies. We are aware all this contributed to the modest growth rate which the economy posted. Therefore, for the government to have achieved that margin of 3.2 percent is commendable and we need to register appreciation to the government for the discipline they maintained.

However, I want to make an observation. Members will agree that this growth in the economy does not happen in abstract. There must be a physical space called the environment, which must be utilised to accommodate all the developments and growth in the economy. But Government has not done enough to address the increased levels of degradation of our environment. Two months back, on this same Floor of Parliament, I registered my concerns and requested the Ministry of Water and Environment to come up with interventions for the nation to know, for Ugandans to know, including we the legislators, because as far as I understand, many of us, Members of Parliament, are onlookers as the environment is being raped. The forest reserves, the mountain tops, the river banks and the wetlands have all been massively encroached upon and they are still -(Member timed out.)      

4.42
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. In specific terms, he is focussing on the infrastructure, power, education and health. 

On behalf of the people of Kajara, I would like to thank the President and the government for finally coming up to honour his pledge to construct the Ishaka-Kagamba Road. The people in my constituency are very happy and we are looking forward to UNRA honouring its obligation by compensating our people who are going to be affected by the road. In the same vein, this Kagamba-Ishaka Road was originally Ishaka-Kagamba-Ntungamo-Mulama Hills because that is the road which makes regional trade with Rwanda, Burundi and parts of Northern Tanzania easier. But by separating a road into two sections of Ishaka-Kagamba and then Ntungamo-Mulama Hill, the road - the equation is not yet complete. We appeal to Government - and we are very thankful that Kagamba-Ishaka is done. But before Ntungamo and Mulama Hill section is done, we have not yet achieved the original objective of facilitating regional trade. 

I would also like to support the President’s initiative of paying money to LC V chairpersons and LC I chairpersons. But these people are not working in isolation. The chairman works with the council and the executive. I would like to appeal to Government that as we address the payments to chairpersons, we must also address the payment to councillors at the district. We must also address payment to councillors at sub-counties. If you look at their payments, especially LC III councillors, they get Shs 5,000 in some cases. At times, they do not get anything. Shs 5,000 is meant for their transport and their meals. They even go further to tax this money. I think it is urgent. Even before we think of more districts, we should look at a way of facilitating the current districts.

The last point I would like to comment about is the matter of cooperatives. I noted with surprise that in the President’s speech, there is no mention of the word “cooperatives.” Yet, there is no way we are going to address the needs of poverty of the last man there without looking at cooperatives. I do not think the focus on model farmers is going to be helpful. That we give tractors to model farmers and then the poor man goes and learns from him and then he goes and borrows from a SACCO; I think that is absurd.  A rich man gets something for free and when a poor man goes to learn from him, he has to borrow. Poor people must be supported for the properties and the activities which they are doing. I think that is very urgent for Government. 

Secondly, we look at cooperatives as a vehicle of bringing up the common man who is at the grassroots –(Member timed out.)

4.46
MR STEPHEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in thanking the President for the articulate message he gave to Ugandans. However, I have some few remarks I have on some issues. Infrastructure should be constant; electricity and good roads. But when we look at the quality of our roads – much as the President has put emphasis on roads, we still see high levels of accidents on our roads. Let us expand on our roads. We should have quality roads because ours are not comparable to other growing economies. 

I also agree with the President that we need electricity; electricity should go to rural areas – that is the rural electrification programme. For example, in my constituency, electricity is transmitted through the villages to trading centres. We as Parliament should give more funds to Government so that electricity is rolled out to the villages as well. 

I want to thank the President for patriotism. We need to put more effort in patriotism; it will save this country from high levels of corruption. If we put more effort in it, the technocrats would not be stealing huge sums of money. We should continue giving more money to patriotism clubs. Let us also improve on the quality of our Education. We should continue supporting the President in the areas of education (Member timed out.)

4.45
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address. I would like to address a number of things that were highlighted by the President in the address. 

First of all, when you look at defence and security, it is true that without peace and security, we cannot do anything. It is the first pillar of development. If you look at the municipalities that are least developed, their poverty has been attributed mainly to wars. Some of us who come from areas which have been engaged in wars for over 50 years as a result of cattle rustling can attest to that. When you go to areas where there has never been insecurity, you will find they are more developed.

That is why we are going in for robust programmes in the name of PRDP. If we had security, I do not think we would have wasted all that money trying to bring up areas which are lagging behind. Therefore, I suggest that the President does not remove the foot from the accelerator pedal. 

On issues of electricity, it is true that without energy, we cannot do much. In the country, we have areas which do not have power; those areas cannot go into issues like value addition because it takes power. We have been talking about unemployment. But the reason is because many of the areas do not have power. Therefore, the people who should have been involved in cotton industries are idle because they have nothing else to do. So, I think provision of power across the country can help us because it is really crucial to development. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of roads is upfront in this case. When you go to farming areas like Kapchworwa and others, at the time of produce, there is a bumper harvest, but because of lack of transport, farmers become valuable to middlemen. The middlemen buy farmers’ produce at very low prices and stock. Then at the time of shortages, people tend to buy that same food at more than 1000 percent the original price, at which they sold it. That is very disappointing and if we get roads, we would have moved a step further. 

That brings me to pages 11 and 12 on priority roads. The President came out on priority roads and that is a different thing. But having those roads worked on is another. If these roads can be practically worked on, Uganda will never be the same -(Member timed out.)

4.52
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address. However, I have some few issues to comment on. First of all, on page 5, the President is commenting that importers have caused chronic haemorrhage in Africa; and more importantly, for only importing luxurious products in this country. But if I may ask, we used to have industries in Uganda; we had Nyanza Textiles, in Lango sub region, we used to have Lira Steel Mills, we used to have a cassava factory – but all these are no longer there. These are factories that used to employ a number of people. The President is now lamenting; but what has he put in place to help the people he is cursing. People like KACITA – I know many of those people deal in clothes –(Mr Migereko rose_)– not now. 

Uganda has the potential of growing cotton. We should not be importing clothes from outside the country, we should be producing our own; the President should stop lamenting. Above all, the investors that are called to this country; why do we think that investment should be in those fields only, we have other areas of investment. Why don’t we call these investors to repair or improve on our factories so that we can produce our own things? Is investment only in sugar? What about other items; we should open our eyes.

Another issue that I want to comment on are the roads. I want to thank Government because the road from Soroti to Lira was improved on. But if we are to help a district like Lira, then we have to organise roads for primary growth sectors. We have a road from Apac to Kitgum which is in a very bad state. I feel that if you are to help my district then consider tarmacking the road from Apac to Kitgum –(Member timed out.)

4.55
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the President for having responded to the directives of the Constitution to make a statement, and also thank the Leader of the Opposition for responding to this statement.

The State of the Nation Address is supposed to account for the money that this Parliament has given to him every year. He has tried to account for the last 27 years which, in my opinion, is diversionary. I understand the dilemna in which the President finds himself because having stated that his was a revolutionary change, many things should have happened, but what I see is a failure in power generation. Most young countries have concentrated on power generation but Uganda has failed.

Look at our health and education sectors. He talks too much about the roads. I am above 50 years old. The 77 roads that he is talking about are roads that were constructed many years ago. He has done repairs –(Interjections)- yes, he has been repairing the roads and I expect him to have constructed certain roads to connect this country. I find it strange to concentrate on 77,000 kilometres of roads - Rukungiri Road, Kisoro Road – we thank him, but we are saying that out of the 77, how many roads has he really constructed?

I look at the failure in modernising or bringing about a modern Public Service to run this country, other than creating a mini Public Service in State House to disorganise Uganda. I find it strange and this is the cause and misery that we have now. We should have had a modern and well equipped Public Service to run this country. I do not see that anywhere. Other than ridiculing public servants that they do not deserve the salaries they have –(Member timed out.)

4.58
MR MANOAH ACHILE (Independent, Aringa County, Yumbe): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. I will talk about the road network in the country. However, before I talk about that, I would want to thank the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the President in particular, for having linked the West Nile region to the centre and to the other parts of the country by constructing the Karuma-Arua Road. (Applause)

In the same vein, I would like to thank the Government and the President for embarking on building Arua-Oraba-Kaya Road. (Applause) We all know that that road in itself has got national and international socio-political-economic benefits and fruits. Honourable members, this is now where my focus is drawn. When we look at the layout of roads to be constructed on pages 28 and 29 of the booklet of his address to the nation, you will find that in Appendix (i)(a), there are lists of roads that are vital to the primary growth sector. They run from one through to 20, and in particular, 20 is very interesting; Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo-Afogi – that is the border of South Sudan and Uganda – it is perfect and I have no quarrel with that. (Applause)

Now, the smoke is here; Yumbe is not connected to Moyo. As I have just spoken, we are very grateful about Arua-Oraba-Kaya Road which passed via Koboko. Koboko is next to Yumbe. Again, Yumbe is delinked from Koboko and not connected by any good road – and even Arua, surely. Here is another key road that plays a big role in the country, be it economically, socially, politically and even some military paraphernalia connected to it – it will help to be efficient and effective – that is Yumbe-Kerwa Road, which actually cuts to Juba direct and is a three hour drive. That road has been ignored. What I am saying surely touches all your constituencies unless yours has been a special case and it has been taken care of. 

What I would want to submit is this; in the near future, the Government should take into consideration Yumbe-Kerwa, Yumbe-Moyo, and Yumbe-Koboko into consideration. It should be by mentality. (Member timed out.)

5.03
MRS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion. I would also like to appreciate that Kyegegwa District is getting connected to the electricity grid and we are very anxious to have it lit. (Applause) Let me hope that in the next financial year, it will be the road from Katonga to Muzizi as pledged by the President. It is even in the manifesto.  

I will address myself to page 4 where the President says that if all the 40 million acres of land in Uganda suitable for arable farming are put to their full potential, there will be a revolution in this country. I do appreciate that, but there is a real estate wave. The real estate business seems not to respect that we should even have any farmland in the future. I thought that it would end here in the city, but it is going to the rural areas where institutions like universities are forming, industries, new districts and yet the real estate business is unregulated, unplanned and uncoordinated. 

Most of the land and real estate brokers and agencies are not registered. We do not even have a land, housing and urbanisation policy and this will go a long way in controlling real estate agents and we would curb the fraud in this sector. Mr Speaker, what are we going to do? Shall we have any farmland in the future? Can we come up with a coordinated and regulated kind of approach to these real estate agents so that there is land that could work as housing and other land saved for farmland in the future?

The second point is on the same page, about the zonal meetings that identified packages of enterprises for each area, according to household landholdings. I would like to appreciate that the President initiated these zonal meetings. The zonal meetings would be a very good model that I would recommend the Ministry of Local Government and that of Agriculture to replicate in the districts as a regular activity, for a more involving approach in agriculture planning that could possibly guide NAADS interventions more meaningfully than just this scattered kind of programme where people seem not to be guided in what they really want. (Member timed out_) 

5.06
MS MARGARET BABA-DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would also like to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. He was very jovial and humorous that day and it was very interesting. For the first time, I saw him very excited and happy with his people. (Laughter) It was like a father discussing with his children. 

I would like to thank the President on two key issues. The first one is security of the nation. Today, our county is very secure; we can move from corner to corner, from one place to another without any problem. We are very grateful to the Army and all those who contributed to security, especially in the North. 

Mr Speaker, there is another wave of insecurity in Uganda, that is, domestic violence and even rampant killing of people. From the papers, every day you hear that someone has been killed; a woman has been killed; a man has been killed. How are we addressing this issue? We are becoming very insecure in our own homes. I think that it is very important if we do not have any aggressor outside, but we should also be peaceful in our homes. So, we need to address that. 

The second very important thanks goes to the President; for, at long last, he fulfilled his pledge of tarmacking Arua-Koboko-Kaya Road. I have been talking about this road for the last 15 years. And when they started tarmacking Karuma-Arua Road, we were left in the cold, but at long last, the road has been commissioned and it is going to be tarmacked. 

And I would like to ask you who are waiting for the roads, to also be patient. Yours will be tarmacked. (Laughter)

I would also like to thank the government for the road equipment which was given to each district. So, roads within the district will finally be put in good order all the time. I hope that they will provide some money for maintenance and fuel. Otherwise, some districts may park them because they may not have enough revenue. 

On investment, I think all of us like investment. We would like investors to come. But when investors come to get land, it is very important to talk to the people; to talk to the politicians so that the investor is given land in fair conditions. When you just say give it – land is a commodity. So, let us learn to talk to the people. I would also like to call upon people to release land for development. Without –(Member timed out.)

5.09
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. I recognise that this is something I can work with because it gives a vision, direction and helps us to think strategically to operationalise it. 

My prayer is, one; that all this we are trying to bring in as information and as gaps can help us to operationalise the State of the Nation Address, and if it is implemented, it can help improve the situation of the ordinary person.

I want to recognise peace and security; and I want to recognise the reduction of poverty, a fact which the Leader of the Opposition also recognised; that poverty has reduced, at least to 24 percent, and the middle class has grown up to 32 percent. 

I want to appreciate the fact that Nyagak has not appeared in the State of the Nation Address after a long time. It has been appearing every other year. I believe that this time round, Nyagak is going to be delivered. If it was a pregnancy, in Alur, it would be named Akumu or Okumu because it is a pregnancy which comes and disappears, and comes again and disappears. (Laughter) I want to thank hon. Simon D’Ujanga for persisting. 

The core issues that the President talked about are 10, but I would have loved to emphasise three, that is, electricity, roads and scientific innovation. For example, Mr Speaker, do you know that in Zombo district, there are small community groups producing soap, and nobody has even seen or thought about them? Do people know that Zombo District produces the best coffee? 

At this juncture, I would add that the President should have emphasised factories and industries. He talked about them and even observed that in industries and factories, there is value addition, there is quality production, there are employment opportunities, there is revenue, but this has been missed out. He even talked about the steel industries, for example, in Tororo and Kibale, but there is no mention of how we can make good the steel factories. 

I want to go back to coffee, and I want to plead with Government. Can you come to Zombo District and can we together develop a coffee factory in Zombo District so that that part of the world can also benefit from the income and employment opportunities that are taking place there. Now that –(Member timed out.)

5.12
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I want to appreciate the President’s efforts towards fighting corruption. 

All of us know that corruption is like a contagious disease. Hardly a day passes by without an issue of corruption cropping up; where you find, as of recent, an accounting officer with his junior staff embezzling money up to the tune of Shs 5 billion. 

Corruption is the cause of most deficiencies. When we talk about lack of drugs in hospitals; we talk about poor remuneration of civil servants - teachers, doctors and the traditional civil servants; about poor roads, the shoddy road network, it is all embedded in corruption.

However, corruption in the State of the Nation Address is just given a line. On page 1, he talks about it being No.4; and on page 8, among the issues to be addressed. But it appears nowhere in the body of the speech. 

So, I would want to urge my Government and I would want to urge His Excellency that we must stand up and be counted. We must come out strongly to fight corruption. We must be used as a yardstick by other bodies that fight corruption.

In addition to that, my concern is on agriculture. All of us know that agriculture is the backbone of this country and in the speech, it says, “To revamp the economy of Uganda, we must embark seriously in supporting the agricultural sector.” 

Having said that the Maputo Protocol to which we are a signatory, stipulates that 10 percent of the total budget should be allocated to agriculture. But when we look at the budget, only 3.5 percent has been allocated to agriculture. Mr Speaker, I keep wondering; are we serious? Is there a way we are going to revamp this economy if we keep under looking agriculture? 

It is my proposal that we ring-fence agriculture. I urge Government to ring-fence agriculture as a sector and if possible put money, whether it is through supplementary budgets, but we need to be seen to revamp this sector in order to fight the issues concerning people’s incomes, as well as empowering this agriculture sector, because it is where most of the people earn their living from.

5.16
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address and to congratulate the NRM Government for the achievements realised in the last financial year.

We appreciate the fact that not all the roads can be worked upon in one financial year. But the road to Mitooma was budgeted for in the 2010 Budget together with the one of Ishaka-Kagamba, unfortunately it has since disappeared.

In the meantime, while we wait for all the roads to be worked on, UNRA should keep all the roads under constant surveillance so that they are kept in good surface motorable conditions. I say this because recently, the roads in Mitooma were nearly impassable. And no matter how some of the bridges are damaged or washed away, there should be a provision to restore or repair all the bridges as a matter of urgency, so as to ease movement.

The Kabukyera Bridge that links Mitooma to Ntungamo, I would like to mention that this one has been down for the last six months. The Rushaya Bridge that links Mitooma to Rukungiri has also been down for the last one year. This has made life for school children very difficult because they have been cut off. Also trade has been negatively affected while lives have been put at risk.

We do appreciate the statement on the road unit for every district, but hope that these will be distributed soon and that they will be accompanied by sufficient operational and maintenance funds.

Mr Speaker, in order to link agriculture to development sufficiently, indeed the agriculture sector budget should be increased to at least 10 percent. And the NAADS programme should be reviewed so that the NAADS officials offer comprehensive technical advice to the farmers. They should also be fully responsible for agricultural production in their areas.

On health, I would like to say that our health system needs to be revamped. All health centres IV should be rehabilitated and re-stocked with each having a doctor and at least two midwives, if not more. The health centre IV in Mitooma, for example, is in a sorry state. We need to do this in order to reduce on maternal and infant mortality in addition to offering other services.

Mr Speaker, the civil servants are the buttress of Government. So, they should be respected and adequately remunerated –(Member timed out.)

5.19
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank His Excellency for delivering the State of the Nation Address. However, allow me to express some concerns in regard to page 11. On this page, the President talked about priority roads. I am particularly concerned with roads in category A. Under that the President talked about the Moroto-Nakapiripirit and Muyembe-Nakapiripirit-Moroto-Kotido roads.

I am seeking clarification from the Minister of Works and Transport. I am a common user of this road and I know that Muyembe-Nakapiripirit-Moroto-Kotido Road also covers Moroto-Nakapiripirit. So, I am wondering why these two roads are appearing in the same budget.

In the last session and in the few weeks of this session, we looked at issues of corruption where we learnt that some technical people misinform or mislead the ministers and even the President. Looking at this situation, the Moroto-Nakapiripirit Road is a subset of Moroto-Nakapiripirit-Kotido Road. So, why are they talking about the two? Isn’t that another way of wanting to make double payments?

My other concern is on page 14, where the President talks about pay rise for science teachers. That is a good plan because we now live in the world of science and technology. And if we have to catch up with the rest of the world, we need these scientists. However, I would like to point out that down there in the schools, which are also the breeding grounds for these scientists, there are a lot of challenges. For example, in my secondary, Pokot S.S., - the only secondary school in teh district - up to this year’s second term of the school calendar, we had only two science teachers for the whole school yet it was elevated to A-level status last year. One of them is the head teacher. You can imagine combining the load.

The problem is that the Ministry of Education and Sports doesn’t distribute teachers evenly. They instead over-staff some schools, mostly the traditional ones. The schools upcountry are left with very few teachers. To make matters worse, when these few science teachers are deployed upcountry, after two years of probation, they solicit for transfers from the ministry to schools in town and –(Member timed out.)

5.22
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to also thank the President for delivering this focused State of the Nation Address. While it is the obligation of Government to provide better roads for the comfort of its people, I do appreciate the commitment of Government in tarmacking the 44 roads in Uganda – Nakapiripirit-Moroto, Muyembe-Nakapiripirit and Kotido-Moroto inclusive.

I do realise the challenges faced by Government with the constrained resource envelope in providing the priority areas in the country. However, with the ray of hope that the President has given in exploring possible funding options to make a reality in tarmacking these roads is much appreciated.

Besides, as we wait for these, the  upcountry and rural roads require serious attention in terms of good murram and bridge construction for efficient service delivery to our people, especially now, with the procurement of road equipment, I expect UNRA and the districts to further improve the status of our roads.

Mr Speaker, I totally agree to the fact that our country is now peaceful and that the UPDF is now much stronger than it was before. The contribution of the UPDF to our real security should be recognised by Parliament and the country as a whole. Somalia is enjoying some relative peace because of the efforts and the contribution of our gallant men and women of the UPDF. In that vein, I want to commend the UPDF for that attempt to pacify Somalia while lending support to other countries on the continent.

Back at home here, we equally enjoy that peace, not forgetting the Karamoja situation with our neighbours, which situation has greatly improved. What we are now left with are isolated cases of theft that can be handled by the Police in the sub-region. I, therefore, urge Government to increase the presence of the Police in the Karamoja sub-region.

The issue of corruption and selfishness remains cancerous to the Ugandan population. It is true that some of the frustrations of investors are caused by corruption. However, over the years, Uganda’s image has been dented by corruption as a destination for foreign investment. Mr Speaker, it is because they believe corruption is part and parcel of business in Uganda. Part of the problem has been the numerous cases of corruption that have been handled haphazardly by the anti–graft institutions in Uganda, by letting off the high profile political individuals, which has caused a culture of impunity. This is dangerous to our young generation who will grow up with a mindset of theft, embezzlement, mismanagement and hence the vice of corruption – (Member timed out.)

5.26
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My appreciation goes to page 30, category B; that is appendix (i). Allow me thank the President for mentioning Corner Yei to Bar Obia. Although it is not yet started, I pray that in the next State of the Nation Address, this comes as one of the roads which will be tarmacked. My problem is the district roads. When you look at these, you will find that in the whole of Lango sub-region, Apac is still left out. This is a problem when it comes to monitoring Government programmes. So, Mr Speaker, again my prayer is that if this 55km road can be extended up to Apac, then I think monitoring of Government services will be easy in that particular corner of the country.  

Allow me go to page 14. Mr Speaker, when you read page 14, His Excellency mentioned that many of the public servants have land at home and can grow food to supplement the small salaries until the situation improves. I don’t know when the public servants will get time to go and dig. For example, if someone is working here in Kampala, where is the time to go right up to Lira, to Kapchorwa to dig on his land to support the meagre income that he/she is getting? I find this a rather careless statement, which was made by His Excellency the President, because public servants do not have the time to do extra work. 

On the same page, the President talked about the district councillors and the LC I chairpersons. Yes, it is good he has thought of facilitating the councillors, but I would like to assure Government that if the local councillors in the sub-county are left out, Government should be reassured that in the upcoming elections of 2016, we shall not see people participating to take positions at sub-county level yet this is the pillar or the foundation for service delivery. It starts from there. (Member timed out.)

5.29
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In fact, I am enjoying this State of the Nation Address from the Members. Some Members here have thanked the President sarcastically. They begin, “I want to thank the President…” and then they continue crying and lamenting about their areas. This is very painful. But I want to quote something and I want to know what the President meant. On page 13 he said, “While I still await patriotic offers about the voluntary cards, I have initiated some talks with the National Social Security Fund regarding the possibility of borrowing some money from them to do some of the roads.” The NSSF does not have that much money. It only has Shs 2,800 billion. Possibly, we could borrow something like Shs 1,000 billion from them. That would cover some of the roads, but not all of them. 

On page 16, the same President says, “I may resort to one alternative; borrow from NSSF to do some of the urgently required roads. We may have to get a 10-year bond to NSSF to get Shs 1.4 trillion to construct about 10 roads like Arua-Obora.” Internal borrowing should be encouraged. NSSF has Shs 2,800 billion on page 13 and he wants to borrow Shs 1.4 trillion from them. What is the truth behind that?

Secondly, some of us who have been here and saw copper being mined know that minerals get extinct. He is leaning on oil, “When I get oil, I will give teachers salaries; when I get oil we can construct roads; when I get this…” you cannot expect minerals only to cater for the country. You must create sources of money and minerals can find you on the way as you move forward. 

Finally, I want to know whether it was because of the vocabulary or there is a problem. I have never heard of the fourth arm – the media - being called DJs. I know that the media are either newsmen in print or electronic; but the issue of calling them DJs and yet we have DJs in Angenoir, Club Silk, I did not understand what the President meant. So, I think for the sake of the vocabulary and our children out there who listened to him, they might get confused when doing exams that newsmen are called DJs yet they know them as pressmen –(Member timed out.)

5.32
MR KENNETH ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to thank the President for his clear and precise exposition of Government policy in his State of the Nation Address. Specifically, I wish to thank him on page 3 for recognising that 68 percent of Ugandans are subsistence farmers. Over 98 percent of my constituency in Kalaki County are actually subsistence farmers, and whereas His Excellency believes that the problem of subsistence farmers will be solved when they are sensitised and mobilised to use more modern methods of farming, I believe that this is a multidimensional problem that cannot be solved by sensitization alone. First of all, whereas my farmers have constantly responded to initiatives by the government to grow improved variety crops, what has let them down is the fact that there is no value-addition to these crops at the end of the day. For example, in the early 2004, the government began promoting growing of a new variety of cassava MP14. By 2006, farmers had a glance of this cassava, people were starving in Moroto, the World Food Programme was buying maize from Kenya, and my farmers were stuck with this cassava. If the government could buy this cassava that it sensitises people to grow, I think we would see subsistence farmers coming up. 

Secondly, my farmers are stuck in their way of farming because they don’t have improved equipment for their farming. As you are probably aware, in the 80s, we lost our cattle to rustlers and now we have to use the hand held hoe. The government has been promising to re-stock and to compensate these farmers and I believe it is time this is done. 

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, in 2004, the government again mobilised farmers in the whole of Teso, for example, to grow citrus fruits as a way of improving their household incomes. The farmers responded. Today, we have over 4 million trees in Teso alone and yet we can’t see a factory that is going to put value into these oranges. So, really, it is not about sensitising these farmers. It is about putting value-addition in what these farmers are sensitised to grow. 

Mr Speaker, on page 14, the President recognised the need to increase salaries for teachers but he spoke about it as if it is not a very important thing. Honestly, a teacher earning Shs 250,000 a month who has to take his kid to a hospital where an MP like me also takes mine, he does not have any special discount -(Member timed out.)

5.39
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join the rest to thank the President for the State of the Nation address. I want to take this opportunity to applaud the President for recognising and highlighting the role of agriculture in the development of this country. However, and unfortunately, I did not hear any deliberate mention of a vehicle or mechanism through which this sector can be pushed further and faster to ensure that we achieve more from it.

There is a mention of the untapped potential of the agricultural sector, which is true, and there is also a mention of the poorly mobilised subsistent farmers. This would be enhanced by ensuring that there is a system or mechanism established through the minister to ensure that the mobilisation and utilisation of the subsistent sector is well done.

I am not one of those who will accuse the President of not exposing me to the Mrs Josephine Kizza model, but I will accuse him for not exposing me to the facilitation that the like of Josephine Kizza are getting from this Government. Therefore, there is no way I can reach where she has reached, and there is no way my peasants can reach where she has reached unless a similar type of support is extended to them deliberately.

The President talks about peace and security and the security of person and property, but this should not be left at the shallow level. It should be deepened further and sustained.

You have heard overtime lamentations of land grabbing. This is true, even in Teso it is taking place; so is that land secure? Can the government come up seriously and ensure that such cases of land grabbing are curbed.

The President talked about prioritisation of scientists and scientific innovation, and examples of an electric car being made, flour from bananas being processed, but there is need to look deeper into these ventures and whether there is value-for-money. How many cars have been made versus the amount of money put in them?

Finally, the President left me a little confused when he said, “If we were patriotic and undertook a voluntary salary cut,” being familiar with the language of English he said that none of us is patriotic, including himself. “If we were,” that means we are not, and this is a challenging and defeating statement - (Member timed out.)

5.39
MR STEVEN MUKITALE (NRM, Bullisa County, Bullisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the interest of time, I would like to propose a way forward on how this 9th Parliament including Cabinet and Leader of Government can help the President realise the concerns therein on the comment by Leader of the Opposition about unkept pledges. I would like to request that the Leader of Government Business talks to the National Planning Authority so that all these intentions are put in the national development plan and the Vision 2015-2045 is put in place so that we start articulating what is in the plan and protect the President from such pledges.

I am worried honourable colleagues, and this Parliament must help. We seem to be becoming hunters and gatherers. We got money from fish exports without ploughing back anything, now we are banning fish from fishmongers. We have been getting money from tourism without investing in it. We are getting money from agriculture and animal husbandry; we do not even have money for vaccines. We are now warming up to eat oil money; we are not even investing in the roads for an area like Bullisa and the lakeside road.

I would like to suggest that we must find money even if it means taking away part of the Karuma ring-fenced money to plough in the Albertine planning. You cannot expect milk from a Fresian without feeding it. There is no budget for the Albertine planning. I also want to suggest - friends have talked about education but there is no money to that effect and we are Parliament, we do appropriation. I want to suggest that the same money we put in UPE and USE should be the same money we put in vocational even if it means doing some bit of PTA in UPE and USE short of that we are deceiving our parents and we are not going to realise anything.

Finally, on agriculture, can we go back to the seven pillars of agriculture including cooperatives and marketing with PMA? Because NAADS has spent money, but it has not delivered and we cannot promote agriculture if we do not structure the land question. We are still living on all the land; Can we urbanise, can we give hon. Migereko to systematically demarcate land in Uganda? Can we zone this land? Can we clearly have the land registries for every district taken care of? I do not want to see Parliament failing to deal with the land problem and I continue saying, “I am an honourable Member of Parliament”. 

Let us be serious as Members of Parliament. We do appropriation, but all we say is lamentation; we are equally responsible because we can decide. For example, the rationalising of the pay, why should we continue blaming our teachers and others about challenges of payment? Let us rationalise pay from the KCC, URA and Parliament. Let us rationalise pay even if it means reducing MPs to one per district, but we should rationalise for Army, Police, teachers and KCCA if we are going to deal with the problem of this country. 

And finally, -(Member timed out.)

5.39
MR MARTIN MUGABI (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I read and I heard the State of the Nation Address, and indeed it was trying to address most of the problems that are affecting this country. I have heard from our Opposition side and my side that I sit on. I have realised that the problems are cross-cutting. I also saw that the President tried to see how he can address most of these problems, but of course there was a gap that was left.

There is one issue that we are living out, where is the source of funding? Where is our resource envelope? How should we move to increase on our resource envelope because everyone is crying? Education, health and water, everything; there is a problem. In every sector there is a problem. As an authority charged with collecting revenue, URA is setting targets for themselves and when they come here they tell you that they have performed 100 plus percent. URA, which is our resource envelope, it is high time as Parliament that we set targets for it, if we want all our problems to be solved.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to make it clear to my colleague that URA does not set targets for itself. Targets for Uganda Revenue Authority are set by the Ministry of Finance and presented to them and they have to work within those targets.  For instance, in the current budget, the targets have been increased by over Shs 1 trillion. They didn’t like it, but that is what was presented to them by the Ministry of Finance. So, it is for purposes of your information that URA doesn’t and cannot set targets for itself. Thank you.
 
MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way. My colleague has openly admitted that things are not moving on well in the country. The size of the envelope is becoming smaller and smaller. So, the information I would like to give you is that the alternative to getting things better is to change the government. (Applause)

MR MUGABI: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I want to make my point clear to you that I didn’t say that things are getting worse and worse. What I meant is that the problems are very many and the demands are increasing every now and then. You are talking of increasing salaries of all workers; you are talking of improving the water sector, health etcetera, but where is the money going to come from?  That is what I would like us to address. Much as we shall demand for this and that, where is the money going to come from? Unless we are saying that the President is like a cow that we are going to milk so as to get what we need.
 
So, I was trying to say that as Parliament and as a nation, where can we get extra funding -(Member timed out­.)

5.47
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the President makes a speech and more so the State of the Nation Address, I think that we have been given a pledge card and that pledge card is owned by all of us, especially MPs and the ministers, who should be able help the President to fulfil the pledges. It wouldn’t be prudent for us to come here year after year and blame the President for not fulfilling what he promised while we are co-workers with him. So, in my view, the blame game is not appropriate until we look at ourselves in a mirror and check what we have done to help the President or remind him about his pledges. 

On page 17, he talked about the wonderful chnages through which Kalangala has undergone. It says, “Kalangala is now completely transformed,” and this pledge card is what we should take to other areas that have been like Kalangala and need transformation. I would like us to see more transformation using the example of Kalangala. 

In the area I represent, we have got a lot of needs but we at least appreciate that Government has worked with the farmers and factories to at least put up another tea factory in Buhweju. That has been the contribution of our politicians including the ones that I replaced. So, that is the way we should go.

When you look at page 18, the President talks about corruption, but what have we done as MPs? The Ninth Parliament has built a lot of expectations in the public as one that has vehemently talked about corruption, but shall we reach the finishing line in fighting corruption because corruption is a killer? Corruption has killed roads; corruption has taken lives; corruption has taken health centres; corruption has even derailed our education system.

Lastly, I wish to congratulate the President for at long last having recognised our frontline allies in the fight and management of this country. The talk about the concentration of the councillors at LC I should rise from bottom to top and vice versa, and the facilitation should be meaningful such that we may have the moral authority to demand for service delivery from these entities. And within that, we should also look at the teachers and other civil servants to get non-financial benefits like medical and housing such that it is a top-up of their meagre salaries -(Member timed out.)

5.51
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in thanking the President for his State of the Nation Address. First, I refer to page 15, where we are talking about investment; putting a lot of money in the energy sector and agriculture, but we are forgetting one thing, that the once very green lush Uganda - the Pearl of Africa - is no longer that. There has been a lot of degradation of our environment and this issue has not been properly and fully addressed. I see here the minister in charge of that sector. I wish to categorically and kindly request her to take up the issue of greening Uganda. There is no short-cut. If we are not prepared to ensure that we have a sustainable environment, we might as well forget about putting heavy investments in these sectors because water will dry if we don’t look at the watershed and don’t plant trees.   

Secondly, the issue of water; I have so many times indicated to you that my constituency, Isingiro South, is the most water-stressed area in this country.  Sixty five percent and above is the water coverage for Uganda, but what is it for Isingiro South? It is a paltry 11 percent, which I have said time and again and it is on record. 

Thirdly, the issue of local councils; we may be here making wonderful plans, but without motivating the LCs, we are not going to make any headway. What happened to the LC bicycles, for example? I would like to see these guys in prison and the money to buy these bicycles recovered. I would like to see the LCs getting remuneration of some sort that will motivate them to do work, which we are planning for here.
  
Lastly, corruption. Corruption is a cancer; corruption kills; corruption is not a friend to you and me and to your children and grandchildren. You must all come out and fight it. This issue of having thieves and robbers given bail immediately they are arrested should be the thing of the past. It is the law that forms the basis of justice. I would like you to get that - (Member timed out.)

5.55
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, basing on the provisions of the address, a lot of effort is being put in by Government to make achievements in the road network. Now, with the completion of Arua-Oraba-Kaya Road and construction of the 44 roads mentioned in the UNRA categories A and B, coverage of tarmac roads will greatly increase. With this, Mr Speaker, allow me commend UNRA with the support from the central government for the effort put in place to bring about the achievements in the road sector.
 
My special appeal to UNRA is for it to exercise total commitment in meeting the annual targets of tarmacking gravel national roads and paving national roads. This will enable us deal with the issue of absorption capacity for the funds that will be allocated to them. With this mandate, there is need for us to consolidate the Uganda Road Fund and ensure that disbursements are made without any misappropriation whatsoever.

There is also need to increase the road network by unlocking areas that have high potential of agricultural surplus. If this strategy can work, then I would be glad to see Dokolo-Namusale Road in the plan because this is a road that connects many areas with agricultural surplus. It connects over 50 fish landing sites in both Lake Kyoga and Lake Kwania, and now with the coming of the ferry, which we expect to receive in two months’ time, the vehicular traffic on this road will definitely increase. This road will also bring Lango sub-region, Karamoja and part of Teso very near to Kampala. My passionate appeal to Government is to think about considering this road because it is vital for the primary growth sector. 

When you look at page 11, paragraph 2, His Excellency the President talks about four roads to be upgraded, and these roads are named in appendix 1. I have taken trouble to look at the list and I have realised that both categories, A and B, have only 35 roads. This makes me believe that there is still a balance of nine roads. Can I, therefore, propose that Dokolo-Namusale road becomes part of the nine roads that are yet to come? As a nationalist and a statesman, I advocate for even distribution of resources. Identification of road projects is as good as allocation of resources - (Member timed out)

5.57
MRS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to those who have already expressed appreciation to His Excellency for his address to the nation. 

I want us to refer to page 13, where the address indicates that His Excellency informed Ugandans that he has initiated some talks with NSSF regarding the possibility of borrowing some money from there to do some roads. While appreciating the issue of road construction, because it is a common good, we must bear in mind that this money that the workers saved is done in the absence of a minimum wage policy in the country. Going to get this money from NSSF indicates that there is a lot of money lying there in abeyance. This money would not be lying in abeyance if people could access it when their time is due. Up to now, even though the system of NSSF has been computerised, people still get their money through hardship, if at all. People are still getting a problem; they do not get this money until they die and even their relatives cannot access this money. I feel that this would be very unfair. This money belongs to those people who are not even looked at in terms of putting the policy in place for a minimum wage.

Secondly, we have had instances of governments that have come and gone and borrowed this money and it is used. The example I can give is the short tower here. The money that constructed that building was from NSSF but to date this money has never been refunded. We are worried as workers that if this government also goes on to borrow, how sure are we that this money will be refunded. It is a big threat, even if it is being said that there is a bond of ten years which I think is not sufficient to guarantee.

As a workers’ representative, I appreciate the effort that the President puts in to attract investors to our country to boost our economy. However, my only prayer is that these foreign employers be humane and also sensitive. Uganda is a sovereign country with laws; they should abide by the labour laws that exist. 

I want to give you a case in point. I am in possession of a complaint from some workers who are constructing the roads from Mbarara, Kitagata and Murongo. A driver was inhumanly beaten, and he was degraded in a way because he must be a family gentleman, and it was during the day. He was beaten very badly and a colleague went to intervene. In so doing, this Chinese employer, in a company called the China Communications Construction Company, turned his iron bar against the boy who came to intervene and rescue his colleague. The boy was badly beaten and his right hand is broken as well as his right leg and the man has nowhere to run to. There was no compensation, no treatment until they had to run to some advocates and right now, the case is at Isingiro Police Station. (Member timed out)

6.02
MS STELLA NYOMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Mr Speaker, I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the President for his State of the Nation Address. 

I would like to comment on the agricultural sector. The President highlighted that the agricultural sector was not performing well; it was performing at 1.4 percent. I had expected some increase in the budget of the agricultural sector during the budget speech. It is so unfortunate that this sector employs quite a good number of our people but Government does not come out to see how to increase production. 

The President has talked about value addition but where do we get the materials if the funds are not well allocated to the agricultural sector to increase production through soft loans? We have been talking of modernisation, but how do we expect peasants from the villages to engage in modernisation when they do not have access to credit facilities to empower them to engage in commercial agriculture so that they can contribute to the economy?

I would also like to thank Government for the disarmament exercise in Karamoja. I am so grateful that Karamoja is at peace. For some of you who have been fearing to go to Karamoja, this is the time to go there, but do not go there to rustle our minerals, we shall be on your neck. Karamoja is peaceful now. 

I also expected the President to come out and attract some investors to Karamoja. The trucks carry lime all the way from Karamoja to Tororo and when the lime reaches Tororo, it becomes Tororo Cement and yet it is Karamoja Cement. That is unfair.

Still on disarmament, I expected the President’s speech to come out on how to advocate for joint disarmament. Our borders in Karamoja are still porous. The UPDF have done their part, they have removed the guns, but the borders are still porous and guns are still coming in. How are we going to handle that? As a region, we still have that threat that we might go back to zero and we would not wish to go back but to progress.

Mr Speaker, the issue on corruption did not come out well. Corruption is one of the diseases, which have hindered service delivery in Uganda. Even those who have not gone to school are corrupt. Even church people - when you go to church, you need to have an envelope; you go to teachers, you need to have an envelope. So, I do not know how we can tackle corruption. I expected the President to come up with strong measures - (Member timed out)

6.05
MS MARGARET MAKHOKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in appreciating the President for his address. However, I have a few comments from page 18. Whereas the President talked about many things that concern this nation, he mentioned the high prices of commodities, which he said is good for serious farmers. On the same note, I have an observation regarding my people who are purely peasant farmers. The President said high prices are good for big famers but some of us in Namayingo District, who even have no water for production, how can we also join the big producers so that we can compete favourably with others? 

In Namayingo, the district water coverage is 24 percent and this presents hardships in rearing animals and poultry because the little water we get is shared with the animals. So, I call upon the government to intervene in our situation so that our coverage is increased to the level of other districts, which are as high as 92 percent. It is not that we do not want to be big producers, the circumstances have affected us.

On the same note, I have an observation on what the President said in his speech - “I intend to bring a law to severely punish those who endanger our future on the account of corruption, selfishness and opportunism.” Like my other colleagues have said, corruption is like a cancer in this country; everywhere you go, corruption is almost becoming a culture. It beats my understanding because even the children we are raising are beginning to understand that corruption is part of us. (Member timed out)

6.09
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to those who have thanked the President for the State of the Nation Address. 

I shall pick it up from where the previous speakers left. At the beginning, the President pointed out what had brought about the recovery. Among the five points, the first one was security of persons and property due to the discipline of the NRA and the UPDF. You have just heard the role UPDF is playing in Karamoja. I want to take this opportunity to assure Members of Parliament and all the other leaders in this country that the support and the good relationship UPDF enjoys from the population is the most vital weapon and pillar of our doctrine. 

I want to go to the point that is necessary for us to have this economy come back from the international economic crisis. If I may quote the President, he said, “If this money was distributed in a kiyekera way, we would have enough money to do these roads.” Here he was referring to the need to be frugal, the need for us to be very frugal with whatever resources we have. One elder once said, “The problem of the world is that there are enough resources for our need but not enough for our greed.” 

That leads me to the point on corruption. The President said that one of the problems that have delayed the economic recovery is corruption and selfishness. I think preaching about corruption is not enough; we need teaching, which requires action, and for us to do it ourselves. 

Mr Speaker, this morning, we had called a meeting for VACOCA, to tell you what role a Member of Parliament can play in fighting corruption in their constituency and district. As we speak now, I do not think that many of us know which projects are in our districts and how much money has been allocated. When we recently went to the Committee on Local Government, we found that they had actually not even indicated this in the statements – as we shall be telling you - but we have demanded that they do it and they are going to show us.

I want to tell you that we have actually postponed the meeting to tomorrow at 8.00 a.m. at the Members’ Lounge for Members of Parliament who are interested. Take the lead and support the President’s wish. He can make a statement and policy but it takes the involvement of everybody. We, Members of Parliament, have a strategic advantage; we have the information and we pass the Budget. We should start with prevention rather than waiting to do post-mortems when it is too late.

I would like to call upon all the leaders to do their best to mobilise everyone because the politicians are not the most corrupt, incidentally. From what we have discovered, it is the technocrats. Our role is to closely supervise them, from the beginning of the Budget as we pass it, and make sure what they put on paper is what they do in the districts and in the different projects that we pass. 

I had made an appeal before that we could put aside one percent of the budget of each sector - I am still appealing to this House and to the leaders of this country – to save the 99 percent. This will enable us to deal with this cancer and in the President’s own words “not to take it as though it were flu”. It is a serious matter and can be as infectious as the Ebola virus. We should really shun corrupt people and tell everyone, “Do not touch”. (Member timed out)

6.13
MS BETTY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to thank the President for his State of the Nation Address. The speech was very good and I hope even my people appreciated. However, there are some issues I wish to raise. 

The roads in my district are in a sorry state, especially the one from Kyambura to Buhindagye, which connects us to Kamwenge. My friend, hon. Katoto, and I tried to make noise about this road but the Ministry of Works only took a grader for one day and it disappeared thereafter. When it rains, people have to put off their shoes to be able to walk on the road, as though they had not paid for it. Sincerely, the potholes are so bad that pregnant women who go for medical check-up will have almost delivered by the time they reach the health centres. 

Another issue is on the health sector. Out of 146 health workers recommended for Rubirizi District, we only have 76. That means that most of the health centres are left at the mercy of VHTs or volunteers, and you can imagine what those volunteers can do when they are not trained.

A serious case in Rubirizi is water. I cannot say we are water stressed; we have a natural gift of 32 crater lakes but we do not have accessibility to those crater lakes. Most of our people drown going to fetch water because the lakes are on escarpments. I was telling the minister that for us in Rubirizi, we are used to free water - the water they get from the lake called Rutoto or Africa, because it is in the shape of Africa. However, these days, they have commercialised it and our people are saying they are not willing to pay even Shs 500 because they do not have it. They are used to the system of having their water because they believe it is a God-given gift.

On education, His Excellency said that he knows that the public servants are suffering, but he proposed that since they have land, they can go home and dig and supplement their small salaries. It is not like Europe. This has given room to these teachers to go and use the school gardens. Instead of teaching, they are there trying to supplement their salaries and our children are left at the mercy of class monitors and counsellors. You can imagine the situation down there. They leave just one sentence on the chalk board and go to supplement their salaries. (Member timed out)

6.17
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to join my colleagues in thanking the President for the address. There is no doubt that this government has done a lot for us since 1986. 

I want to focus on page 15 where His Excellency talked about the core issues that the economy must focus on. He listed 10 and I totally agree with him. I know these are the issues that when addressed, we can actually move forward steadily. 

I want to focus on health. There is a member who told us that there are so many health centres. I want to agree with him that when we move around, we actually realise so many structures- health centres IV, III, II - in some places. The hospitals and the referrals are also there. We agree with that. However, with the increasing population, there is still a lot demanded. 

In Kween District, we have a health centre IV and in this health centre we do not have a doctor, there is no ambulance and even the drugs can be got two days in a week and the other days there is nothing. So, I want to call upon the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Finance to get more funds so that we facilitate these health centres. They are there but we need to facilitate them. We need more funds for recruitment of health workers. We need more funds for equipment. In that health centre IV, for example, there is no theatre. We also need funds for other services within the hospital.

The last time when I was in the village, there was a woman who was about to give birth but there was no ambulance. Coupled with the difficulty that we have with our roads there, if it was not for my vehicle that rushed her to Kapchorwa Hospital, that woman would have lost her life. So, I want to call upon the ministry to look into that. Let us facilitate these structures. We shall be – (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have exceeded our time greatly. I will just allow another nine minutes. 

6.21
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for catching my eye. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you caught my eye. (Laughter)

MR AMODOI: Sorry. It is because for a long time I have been trying but it has been a little bit difficult. Mr Speaker, I want to join my colleagues in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address that was delivered on 7 June 2012. 

I want to highlight some few issues. One is the issue of agriculture. The President said that one of the focal points of this economy was agriculture. However, when the budget was read, there was, to my understanding, nothing that was actually allocated to the Ministry of Agriculture. We know very well that agriculture is the backbone of this economy and of this country. The biggest population of this country is employed by agriculture, including you, Mr Speaker, and myself. However, I think the government must come up with strategic programmes to allocate a lot of money to agriculture. Otherwise, we may be singing about agriculture but getting little from agriculture. 

Sometimes Government puts a lot of money in the importers of commodities, which actually takes a lot of our money. That is what we call the outflow. There is a lot of outflow yet actually, the dollars we bring in water down our money. I think the government should also strengthen policies as far as foreign currency is concerned. Some countries value their currency much more than the foreign currency.

The other issue I want to highlight concerns security. The President said that there must be security of persons and property. I want to state categorically, that there are some particular areas in this country where people are still suffering because of insecurity. One example is my constituency, Toroma. My constituency is one of the very few constituencies where people still live in camps. When you reach Angisa sub-county, people have been put in camps. 

I was happy when my aunt from Karamoja said that the guns are diminishing. However, much as they are diminishing, our uncles from Karamoja are still coming to take away our animals and people are actually not on their land - (Member timed out)

6.25
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take the opportunity to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address, which was good. I want to thank the government for the following things that I have seen in Kapchorwa District:

Improved hospital; our hospital is now doing very well because we have the female ward which is serving our women. We have an x-ray machine, which we used not to have, and we have a scanning machine which we used not to have. So, I want to thank the government really for this. For many years, we did not have such machines in Kapchorwa. We used to go all the way to Mbale for scanning and x-ray, but right now, we have the services in the district. I want to thank the government also for the additional health centres which have been built in the district. 

I want to thank the government for the schools that have been established in Kapchorwa District. We have many schools, both primary and secondary. I want to thank the government also for the good road, which was given to Kapchorwa. We have a very good road from Mbale to Kapchorwa. Some years back, we used not to have a good road - our road was so bad - but now we have a very good tarmacked road. This is very true. If you want to come to Kapchorwa, you will travel using that very good road.

I want to also thank the government for the good security that we are now enjoying in Kapchorwa District. (Applause) Members, I want to tell you that some two years ago, we were really in a very bad shape in terms of insecurity in Kapchorwa. We used not to sleep in our houses; we used to run all night migrating with our belongings because of our good neighbours. (Laughter) I am happy that we are now - (Member timed out)

6.29
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I thank you, Mr Speaker. So many people have thanked the President and I would not like to dwell so much on that. I will go straight to my constituency since there is no time. 

I would like to begin on the issue of water. I have a sub-county called Bukaboli. There is a big shortage of water in this sub-county and that is why that sub-county sent me to Parliament to look for this water. I stood here last year and I raised this issue. The minister told me that she had sent a team on the ground, but I want to say here that these ministers of President Museveni do not take us serious. Hon. Betty Bigombe told me that she had sent a team on the ground but when I went down there, nobody had gone there to ask about that water. So, there is that shortage of water in this sub-county. 

Boreholes cannot be sustained there. When you get water using a borehole, after some few minutes the water develops some solid objects. The honourable Minister of Water is here; please, you handle that because there was a loan request which was passed here and it had issues dealing with water. Some two sub-counties in Mayuge were included but this crucial sub-county was not included.

Secondly, in the State of the Nation Address, the President talked about the Shs 250 billion for the LCs. I want to thank hon. Tashobya for thinking like people from the east. The Shs 250 billion is going to be given to the district councilors, but let the LC III and LCI councilors also get. Actually, the whole team of the LCIs should get part of this money. The trend has been that the LC chairman gets Shs 120,000 per year, but he does not work alone; he has a team, unless we are saying that we abolish the other positions. The Minister for Local Government should take this seriously. The whole LCI team should get this money. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have exceeded our agreed time now by 30 minutes. This House is adjourned to tomorrow, 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.32 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2 August 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
