

Thursday, 11 August 2022

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m., at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I do not have much to communicate. I want us to go straight to the business. LoP? (Laughter)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My procedural issue is under rule 28 – “Statement of Business by the Leader of Government Business”. 

Under this rule, the Leader of Government Business is required, at every last sitting day of the week, to make a statement in the House regarding the Government Business of the succeeding week. 

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, has ably done that. For instance, the other week, she submitted - under her business - item No.1 was the Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2022 and item No.2, the Insolvency (Amendment) Bill, 2022. 

Earlier, she had also brought a motion to thank Ugandan athletes who won various medals in the World Athletics Championships in Eugene, Oregon, USA. 

However, Mr Speaker, for all these weeks, this business is never reflected on the Order Paper as it is required by our Rules of Procedure. So, are we proceeding well in compliance to our rules? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Yes, to begin with, we are proceeding well because whether the Rt Hon. Prime Minister presents business or not, as a House, we can handle other business that is available. On that one, we are proceeding very well. 

In regard to business for the succeeding week, as a leadership of the House, we have been discussing with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to see how best we can make this better. We know a few challenges have been there, sometimes, delays in gazettement and all that, but we are working around the clock with her. I will ensure that your office is informed on the way forward so that we look at this together as leaders, but we have already started discussions in regard to that matter. 

I also believe with the coming in of the new Government Chief Whip, it will be much easier to help the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to mobilise most of this business. Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. 

We do not need further point of further. (Member rose_). Is that a point of procedure? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising a procedural matter - and I have seen the Minister of Internal Affairs here. 

Recently, in the public domain, we have seen a number of police officers who have had their ranks elevated. Indeed, that is a good gesture by the Government. However, Mr Speaker, there is a very big complaint – that is why I am raising this procedural matter – on the same people who had the same qualifications and training, but have been on the same rank for over 12 years, yet they were left out. 

Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter because any rank you get in the security organ gives you an advantage in regard to your remuneration. 

So, the procedural matter I am raising is: would it be procedurally okay that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes and briefs this House on those people who are left out, yet they have similar trainings and are well qualified, but have been kept on lower ranks for a long period? Otherwise, one time, we raised this matter. Mr Speaker, in fact, those who qualified recently have higher ranks than the others (Interruption). I am on procedure, honourable members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Ssewungu. You have raised your matter.

MR SSEWUNGU: The minister is very comfortable but Mr Speaker, the honourable member with a rosary is attacking me, and I do not know whether she knows security. You do not know security.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleagues. I have taken some days without being here; sometimes I love some level of flexibility. 

Hon. Ssewungu, I think this would have been better if it had come as a question for oral answer or a question for the Prime Minister. Otherwise this was not a procedural matter. It is a serious matter. Kindly bring it in the right format. (Applause)

Honourable colleagues, let us go to issues of national importance. Hon. Komakech Christopher? 

2.21
MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Pader District is one of the districts in Uganda, and Pader is one of those districts in Acholi region that is outstanding. Pader District has two constituencies, that is, Aruu County and Aruu North County. 

Mr Speaker, I am the Member of Parliament for Aruu County in Pader District, which has two town councils. One of the town councils has piped water, thanks to the ruling Government, but because of this piped water, Umeme has persistently and abruptly caused load-shedding in this town council that has affected generation of water. Because of the piped water system, the borehole system functionality has been phased out -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think for Hansard purposes, it should be for “pumping of water”, not generation. Isn’t it? 

MR KOMAKECH: Thank you very much – for pumping of water. But the issue is that when there is no electricity, there is no water in the town council. People drink with cattle in the dams. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayers?

MR KOMAKECH: Mr Speaker, Puranga Town Council in my constituency has no piped water and so we cannot access borehole service. Meaning, literally, there is no water in the town council. People bathe with one cup of water a day. That means they only have to wash the armpits and the legs so that they can save some little water (Laughter). 

My prayer goes to the Ministry of Water and Environment. Is there a way they can come out to make sure that 10,000 households in Pader Town Council and the 5,000 households in Puranga Town Council have reliable water? We are in the 21st century. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Hon. Komakech, in your prayers, you said that the one area which has water has persistent power cuts and they are not able to pump the water. 

The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is here but you have not asked anything to do with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to provide you with reliable power. 

MR KOMAKECH: Mr Speaker, I wrote and went to the office of the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. That is why I did not include him in my prayer. I am waiting for him -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we need reliable power in Pader. It is not only in Pader although this has been raised by the Member, specifically to his area. Please, take it up. Honourable member, cross-check with the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. Honourable Prime Minister, convey the same to the Minister of Water and Environment. 

Please go ahead and submit this in writing to the Minister of Water and Environment. We are going to ensure that we follow it up.

2.24
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning Banyankole Kweterana Cooperative Society, which supplied an Iranian company coffee worth $450,000 in 2017. After supplying it with coffee, Iran was slammed with economic sanctions. The society has tried to recover the money, but has failed. 

Mr Speaker, it is my prayer that the Government picks up this matter such that the property of the union, which it pledged to raise coffee to sell to Iran, is not attached. I pray that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, together with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, express interest in this matter so that the society can be saved.
 
2.25
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER OF UGANDA AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, I think we need more information about that so that I can call the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, together with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, to handle that matter. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, Hon. Mawanda, avail information to the Prime Minister. I will also follow up on the same because the banks are about to sell the property of some of the traders – the management of Banyankole Kweterana.

It is not that the Iranians do not want to pay, but the issue is about the sanctions. They would need to see the intervention of the Government to see if there is any way – whether they can talk to the banks by giving a letter of comfort as the Government intervenes or work out with the Iranians and see how best they can help these people.

Hon. Anthony Akol? Colleagues, today I will allow a little bit more questions – up to 10 – reason being, the Prime Minister requested me that she won’t be available today. She is not feeling fine. So, we do not have Prime Minister’s Time. Thank you.

2.26
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. Uganda will always have two seasons of planting. Unfortunately, this year, in the first season, the farmers in the country lost a lot of crops due to the weather situation. For that matter, some areas are prone and have a problems of hunger - people are dying of hunger. 

At the same time as we talk, we have received rain in the country. Unfortunately, because people lost their crops and most people rely on the first season harvests to plant in the second season, they do not have seeds to plant in their gardens. 

Mr Speaker, the situation is worse in the country because, coupled with poverty, people cannot even buy seedlings or the seeds that they want to plant. At the same time, those who have little money to buy food, in some areas – I have been informed today – there is even no food to be bought. 

This situation is across the country but the worst has been ranked by the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees as the areas of Karamoja, Acholi, Teso, West Nile and Sebei. 

Mr Speaker, because of these reasons, many Members have been coming to your office and to the Office of the Speaker on the same issue. Therefore, I have some Members who have the same complaint. If you can give them time to raise their issues and then I give our prayers. Among those who came to your office are Hon. Christine of Kiboga -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable. Please. (Laughter) Just say the prayers. (Laughter) I know Hon. Tebandeke came. Hon. Kenny Auma came. Hon. Christine came – many.

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, thank you for your guidance.

This month of August is the right time that people have received rain and really want to plant. Therefore, our request and prayer number one is that the Government should urgently distribute seeds, especially fast-maturing seeds. Among them, we pray for maize and beans seeds. Maybe many others in other areas will come out to tell you.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, in the areas where food distribution is not taking place, especially people who are being hit hard – for example Agago that has lost 20 people to hunger – we request that food distribution be done in those areas. Among them, according to the information I got from the Prime Minister’s office, is Acholi subregion, Lango subregion, Teso subregion, West Nile and Sebei. 

Our prayer No.3 is that the Government should come out clearly to inform us on how they are going to manage the insecurity of food in the country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: [Member: “Information.] Thank you. Colleagues, there is no information on matters of national importance. Whenever I am in the Chair, you know that is not provided for. (Laughter)

The colleague is off the Floor. Hon. Silwany, please, take your seat. Hon. Tebandeke, have they covered all the prayers? If they are covered, you do not need to repeat them. I am asking about prayers, not clarification. If there is a prayer, which Hon. Anthony Akol has not covered -

2.31
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The other prayer we have is to request the Government to expedite the feasibility of agricultural insurance and its related application. Farmers planted quality seeds and expected to get something. Some of the soils were fertile but the performance of the produce was poor. 

We request that in order to have food, we must have seeds and in order to have produce to enable value addition, seeds must be provided at the moment. 

The other prayer is to request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Monitoring to offer an instruction that enables the Parish Development Model committee SACCO accounts to release the money or be in position to use the money. Right now, the money is lying idle on the parish PDM SACCO accounts. Thank you.

MR SILWANY: Mr Speaker, I rise on a very important procedural matter. Something very important came up in Hon. Anthony Akol’s submission that I would like to relay, procedurally, for the attention of this Parliament. 

During budgeting - in the recent budget – we did not budget money for seeds. However, Members of the Ninth and 10th Parliaments always got maize seeds from the National Agricultural Advisory Services to give to their communities.

Right now, people are demanding for the same seeds, which we did not budget for. Would it be procedurally right for you to guide the Minister of Agriculture to come up with a temporary measure? We cannot just suddenly stop. Maybe, Members of Parliament could get seeds that they can take to these communities and then gradually we can boost and continue with the Parish Development Model. That is what I wanted to bring up.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. (Interjection) Honourable member, we do not have any Member on the Floor; so we cannot have any point of order, unless you are raising it against me. 

Colleagues, I need to guide on Hon. Silwany’s submission. Honourable member, you have indicted Parliament - that it is us who failed to provide money for seeds. If it is true – from the way you put it, we cannot be the same Parliament to come around and demand the minister to go and improvise. Do you want the minister to sell his cows? A minister can only improvise within the budget but please - on this matter, I see that we are going take long. 

Let me allow Hon. Tebandeke and then the chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture to give us some information and then I will guide on the way forward. 

2.35
MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NUP, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Shadow Minister of Animal Industries and Fisheries in conjunction with agriculture. During the National Budget Framework Paper, we were very keen and sober. We budgeted and thought that the Ministry of Finance would respect our submissions to allocate money for seed-distribution. 

I remember the Shs 4 billion that was supposed to cater for the seedlings that the Ministry of Finance diverted to the Parish Development Model and in my simple calculations, the Shs 4 billion will only serve the interests of 40 parishes vis-à-vis the whole country that has been served using the same budget allocation. 

I see it as unfair and it will not address the problem of food insecurity in the country. Whereas Hon. Akol mentioned the Acholi Sub-region and so on, but the entire cattle corridor has no food, including my own constituency Bbaale, more so, Galiraaya and Bbaale subcounties. 

Mr Speaker, I have one prayer: Since the Minister of Finance is here with us, I beg this Parliament to agree with me – let us ask him to reverse that would-be money for the Parish Development Model so that it buys seeds and our people get enough seed for planting, as they prepare for the season. 
I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, be cautious of the language you use here. We do not want Parliament to be the one propagating illegalities; the language of reversal - there are very clear procedures we should go through. Nevertheless, I will guide on the matter. Let me get information from the chairperson on Agriculture –(Interjection) Hon. Kibalya, let us listen to the chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

2.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable colleagues who have raised the issue of seeds. From the Ninth Parliament, Parliament has been having an arrangement codenamed, “NAADs/Parliament food security arrangement”, where communities were getting seeds especially maize seeds, and in some cases beans, to empower them.

We have been having planting season A and planting season B. Planting season A falls in March and that is when we the leadership of the Committee on Agriculture initiate - with NAADS - the process of giving seeds to MPs to take to their communities. 

We are now in planting season B; many have flocked my office - just like they have flocked yours - but it was a serious oversight in the budget. During budgeting, we even warned members, we said; “This is the only thing we survive on.” It is a food security arrangement. 

The Parish Development Model does not have a food security arrangement. So, this was the only one - and some of the Members of Parliament who could pick seeds would give us very good results. An example is Kiboga; they did very well. 

The maize looked little, but it had impact. Now people are starving everywhere -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But chairperson, you are also lamenting.

MS OKORI-MOE: No, I am not lamenting; let me come –(Laughter)

We needed just Shs 4 billion - Shs 2 billion for planting season A and Shs 2 billion for planting season B. 
So, I request that we provide that money so that people have the seeds.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. I will allow the UPDF; Gen. Kavuma happens to be the Deputy Coordinator Operation Wealth Creation; he has valuable information on this matter. Gen. Kavuma, everyone is fighting that you speak from their side. (Laughter)

2.40
GEN. SAM KAVUMA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make clarification because when I came in, I found Members mixing up three issues. One, the enterprises that were being given by Government through the Ministry of Agriculture and NAADS and distributed by Operation Wealth Creation.

Then the other one is the introduction of the Parish Development Model. The third issue is the seeds that were being given to Members of Parliament to take to their constituencies; those are the three issues on which we need to get clarification. 

The first one of enterprises: These were not only seeds; they were giving out cows, piglets, and all sorts of things but when Government came up with the Parish Development Model, that issue was stopped; all the money that had been budgeted in the previous years for that was now focused on the Parish Development Model. So, that one is no more as a policy; it is from Cabinet. 

The other one of seeds that were given to Members of Parliament to take to their constituencies, I do not know about that but if the situation now demands other arrangements, then it should come as a new matter. 

If Members of Parliament feel there is a lot of famine where we come from, that should not be mixed with the Parish Development Model or other programmes; it should come up as something new and then Government will see what to do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. (A Member rose_) No, he is not here as a Government official; he is here as a substantive Member of Parliament. So, Gen. Kavuma, you can take your seat. I do not want him to take questions. Gen. Kavuma, please take your seat. 

Colleagues, I know we can take advantage but when there is a minister - when a Member of Parliament is here, even if he holds a certain position, when there is a political head, that Member cannot be subjected to answering questions; we must know that. He is a substantive Member; we do not want to cause problems to colleagues. 

Honourable minister, you are going to say something, but I was of the view - because this is a very serious matter and we are more or less debating it, which is not right - that the Minister of Agriculture, on Thursday next week, presents a comprehensive statement to this House, which we shall debate. However, on that statement, we need see the actions you have taken to mitigate all these issues that have been raised.

Clerk, extract the prayers clearly and the issues raised by the Members; ensure the minister receives it tomorrow so that they can have time to prepare. You see, I can say Tuesday or Wednesday but you need someone to prepare. Sometimes on such matters - if I can borrow my experience of having been in Cabinet - when we extract such prayers, it even helps the minister to raise it in Cabinet on Monday; he will talk authoritatively after he has consulted. I have ruled on the matter. 

MS AOL: Yes, you have ruled on the matter but you should know that this is a short period of rain. If it is short and we asked for Thursday, it means our issue is going to be responded to almost at the end of this month yet that will be too late for us to have the seeds; it will really be too late. 

If the minister was here, we needed –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister is here; let us do it on Tuesday. We give the minister Tuesday. (Applause)

Hon. Ssewungu, do you want to correct something?

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I want to correct the record. The Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Parliament has never given out seeds. This matter came from the late Hon. Mathias Kasamba – may his soul rest in peace – when he was the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. We do not know how he organised this. We saw ourselves getting maize seeds without transport and ministers were getting more kilogrammes than the backbenchers. (Laughter) 

So, that idea was brought by the late Hon. Mathias Kasamba; it has to continue but Mr Speaker, it must be expunged from our record. We said that Parliament gave but it did not; that was just in the wisdom of the late Kasamba. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It is good to have a very clear record of the House. Do not expunge it from the record; just correct it because a colleague – hon. Isaac Otimgiw, is it on the same matter?

MR OTIMGIW: It is just quick information, Mr Speaker. I was just asking: when the minister comes back on Tuesday, could you also include, in his report, how the tractors have been distributed. We have been hearing that there are tractors at the ministry but somehow, they are disappearing slowly. We do not know who are taking. When we write letters, we do not get. Could that be in the report? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable minister, include that too. Hon. Kibalya, do you have a procedural matter?

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a procedural matter, in relation to what Hon. Anthony Akol raised, which is the same. Last month, the Prime Minister was here – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And on which I have ruled. 

MR KIBALYA: The Prime Minister was here when we were handling the issue of Karamoja. Government was informed that there is looming hunger in the whole country. The Prime Minister promised that the following week, they were going to Table a report to show how they had planned to address the looming hunger in the country. At that point, the issue of seeds was also raised and the Prime Minister promised - so, as the minister comes with the report, let her know that the Prime Minister confirmed to the House that she was coming up with a programme to address the issue of seeds and the looming hunger in the country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government does not work in silos; we work as a team. So, please work as a team. When the Prime Minister speaks, she, most of the time, assigns ministers. So, the Minister of Agriculture, the Prime Minister, and the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, please work as a team. Hon. Onzima, procedure?

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I want to raise is in relation to the issue of hunger. This issue has always come on the Floor of Parliament and sometime back, and assessment was done. It was discovered that the hunger rate is not the same; there are areas, which have been hit harder.

Government took a decision that in some of these areas like Karamoja and Isingiro that had been hit harder by hunger as a result of drought, there was need to construct valley dams, both for animals and irrigation, to help boost the production of food. 

However, since then, we have not got any report or feedback yet the same regions continue to experience the same problems. So, there were a number of areas in Karamoja; even in West Nile, there was one which was supposed to – it is in Pakwach. 

So, I will also - through you - I do not know whether it will be procedurally right for the minister, as she comes to talk about the issue of seeds and others, to also respond to this and give us a status report on these valley dams, because a loan was procured. The activities were supposed to go forward. So, how far has it gone? We need a status report. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, this is where we also have to do our own oversight role; to play our own role as an oversight institution. If we passed a loan, like a Member has raised, the committee responsible should be the one telling us that “here, colleagues, we passed this loan but nothing has been done.” 

So, minister, please include that in your report but let committees – today, I met the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy but you see, after most of these loans are sent to sectors, the sectoral committees need to appraise their performance so that we know whether they are being implemented or not. It is because every day, at least you interact most of the time with these institutions.

Colleagues, let us close this matter. We shall have a comprehensive debate on the matter on Tuesday. However, minister, I hope there will be real clarification, action taken and concrete proposals, in as far as addressing this challenge is concerned, reason being, whenever we have drought and problems, you spend hundreds of billions buying food. Members are only telling you to invest that money so that people produce their own food so you do not suffer buying. (Applause). That is what you have to focus on.

Colleagues, in the gallery today, we have students and teachers of Apex Junior Primary School from Kira Municipality, Wakiso, represented by Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda and Hon. Betty Ethel Naluyima. (Applause) They have come to observe proceedings of the House. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you.

We also have a delegation from West Nile, which has come to check on their Members of Parliament. They are represented by Hon. Lawrence Biyika Songa, Hon. Geoffrey Feta, Hon. Noah Musa and Hon. Jackson Atima. 

As you know, we have a substantive item on the Order Paper, regarding power supply in West Nile. So, they have come to observe the proceedings of this House and see how best we are going to handle their issue. Join me in welcoming to them. (Applause) Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Hon. Michael Wanyama? 

2.53
MR MICAHEL WANYAMA (NRM, Namayingo South County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Our community is a fishing community and we border the shores of Lake Victoria. As I speak, there are aquatic animals such as the hippopotamus that have devastated our gardens and the crops. They eat everything green on the lake shores, especially along the villages surrounded by the lake. These are the villages of Rubango, Rugaga and Mulwala in Mutumba Subcounty.

My prayer is that the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife should intervene or else we are going to face a problem and a disaster of famine and hunger. I submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Which ministry do the hippopotamus fall under? (Laughter) Because they stay in the lake. Therefore, I ask the Minister of Agriculture - We should put them under tourism? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, a colleague needs help.

2.54
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, those animals fall under the Minister of Tourism; so, I am going to call the Minister of Tourism to intervene in that matter and see how we can protect our people so that they remain with their food and so that the animals also stay in the lake without interfering with food or with the people around. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think comprehensively, this has to do with the compensation fund under the Wildlife Act, which we passed here. Personally, in my community in the areas of Kiyanga Sub County and Kigyende Sub County, people no longer have goats and crops. Elephants have eaten everything.

[Mr Akol rose_] The speaker is submitting, Hon. Akol. This is the only opportunity I have of raising my constituency issues. I am also raising matters of national importance. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, whenever we complain or when communities come, we are just looking bad. If we knew that we were not able to raise funds for this role, why did we allow it? The proposal came from the Government. Why don't we operationalise this fund so that once wild animals come and destroy people's crops, buildings or anything, we are able to compensate them or should we amend and remove that law so that we know people cannot get compensated. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on that, respond to it on Thursday next week. Please, we need a statement on operationalisation of that fund. 

2.57
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your ruling is very wise. In the Tenth Parliament, the same issue happened where crocodiles - by then it was Hon. Julius who reported - ate eight people in Budimo in Busia District, Samia Bugwe South. Hon. Odero also reported this matter on the Floor of Parliament but since those people were eaten, the Government has not compensated their families and up to now, the families are really suffering.

Moreover, the crocodiles are back, Madam Prime Minister; so, there is fear again that they will eat other people and there will be no compensation. Therefore, as the minister comes to give that submission on Thursday, you better include the issue of the people who were eaten by crocodiles in Budimo Village, Busia District. Thank you. (Interjection)- And the hoes for our people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me first allow Members from the islands then I allow my sister and Hon. Ssewungu. Hon. Mayende, do you also have wildlife in your area?

2.58
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. These issues are not coming for the first time. I remember one time here, I raised an issue - This one is about the hippopotamus but the other one was on crocodiles. My people, after undergoing a lot of suffering, killed one of the crocodiles. They were arrested by the officials of the Uganda Wildlife Authority and were brought up to Buganda Road Court. 

Therefore, we cannot be in a situation where we are giving preference to wild animals against the populace. Unfortunately, in the Bill we passed, we looked at the game parks and wildlife and they never looked at the lake. 

When a boy’s arm was bitten off by a wild animal, specifically a crocodile, the Minister of Tourism promised to help but up to today, the minister has never visited the area. Maybe as the minister comes, he should also give some hope that there can be room to amend that specific provision so that we include wild animals in the lakes, especially hippos and crocodiles.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The principle of the fund was that we collect money from national parks. Therefore, I think part of that fund should be used to compensate neighbouring communities once they are affected. 

We need to look at who collects money from the lakes. Yes, if it is Hon. Adoa - Because you are not going to go to UWA to compensate where it does not collect money. These are things we need to look into deeply. 

3.00
MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. This year alone, in my constituency, we lost two individuals who were killed by crocodiles and hippopotamuses; the same scenario that my colleague raised. 

However, when we look into the operations of the Uganda Wildlife Authority, they are taking charge of all those wild animals including the aquatic animals; hippopotamuses and crocodiles. They are also sources of revenue. If you go to other areas, even here at Entebbe, just going to see a crocodile, you have to pay some money. 

If you go to Pakwach, by the time you cross to Pakwach District, you view those animals and you pay some money. When you enter a game park, you pay some money but when you lose your life, they can hardly respond. 

The worst scenario is, last week when we had a meeting with the minister and his team, what we realised in form of irregularities is, when you lose a life, this person is compensated Shs 15 million but individuals who lose crops are paid to the tune of Shs 45 million. We were asking ourselves: between human beings and crops, which one is more important? Those are the things we are trying to say.

3.02
MR FRED KAYONDO (DP, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I agree with the compensation and the compensation fund. However, that is giving a painkiller to a very big problem. 

Mr Speaker, we have destroyed the eco-systems where these animals are supposed to be in preference to beaches and hotels. Those animals are supposed to be in an eco-system somewhere in that environment but you have built hotels all over, we have built beaches all over and they have to exist because we need them. That is why they leave where they are supposed to be and come and intermingle with the people.

Unless we take a bitter pill and go back and restore where they are supposed to be; we talk about those big fish around the shores of Lake Victoria and have these animals, we are just giving a painkiller to a very serious problem because they have to exist. Thank you.

3.03
Ms santa alum (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank my honourable colleague for bringing up this issue. 

The colleague has brought up the issue relating to the hippos and crocodiles. On the Floor of this very Parliament, very many Members, including myself have presented issues concerning the human-wildlife conflict. In my district, Oyam borders Murchison National Park. Many times, the elephants have invaded the communities and killed very many people.

People try to come and seek this compensation but it is a nightmare. Not a single person has ever been compensated from my district and many others yet we passed the law here and thought it would help the people as far as compensation for human life and the crops is concerned. 

My prayer is that let the minister come with a comprehensive statement, not only on the hippos and crocodiles, but also the wild animals, which have killed very many people. And not only in Oyam and a few districts – it should be a comprehensive statement consisting of all the districts affected by the human-wildlife conflict. Thank you.

3.05
Mr joseph ssewungu (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Vice-Chairperson of the Government Assurance Implementation Committee. As the honourable member stated, we have had meetings with the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife and they say that the challenge with the law is that they have not yet gazetted the regulations. That is why they are failing to compensate but in the committee, they gave us the regulations.

However, we are wondering how Government fails to gazette regulations that determine payment of people who have been affected by these animals. 

Not to pre-empt our report - we shall table a very good report here at the right time when you allow us. The Prime Ministers are here; go and gazette the regulations from UWA so that compensation can take place within the new law that was passed by Parliament and assented to by the President. Otherwise, that is being lazy. 

If you cannot gazette the regulation – 

The Deputy Speaker: Now, you have started quarrelling. (Laughter)

Mr ssewungu: Those are my prayers. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, before you came, I told Members how I am one of the most affected. Hon. Juliet Bashiisha from Mitooma and I, neighbour Kahingi Forest and Queen Elizabeth National Park; a very big stretch. Our people no longer have what to eat. All their animals have been eaten and crops destroyed by hippos, elephants and buffaloes. 

UWA is making money from the National Park. We made the law for compensation but we are not compensating people. What is going to happen is that people will go to the parks and kill animals. Even in my community, whenever a member dares to go to the park, most of them do not come back. They are killed from there. 

I have many cases. I have lost my OBs in the park. Sometimes even when one is killed, they say he was eaten by animals because you have no evidence; people cannot even go to ask for the body. 

We passed a law here, which was proposed by Government - not even by a private Member because it would have been against the Constitution - but by Government to compensate people affected by wildlife animals. UWA makes the money; so, what we want is to operationalise the law.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what they are saying is “regulations.” However, we look at it as a deliberate ploy to frustrate the compensation. Even the Minister of Tourism would want to compensate.

Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have requested that the minister comes on Thursday, next week, with a comprehensive statement, responding to Members’ issues but also showing steps being taken to implement the law. We need to clear steps. If there are regulations, take it up so that our people stop suffering. 

Colleagues, we have to move quicker because the Prime Minister who had told me will not be able to make it, has made it. As per our rules, at 4.00 p.m., I have to alter the Order Paper and allow her time.  Some of the issues we are unable to cover, we shall push them to Tuesday. 

3.09
Mr eric musana (INDEPENDENT, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to give a matter of national importance specifically on electricity. In my constituents, I have two projects running, one by Chapa Contractors and the other by On-Track Engineering Services. These have stalled for the last three years. They are not on ground. 

I have moved to REA several times and Rural Electricity Agency seem not to be having any answer. When I was interacting with them, they raised issues of not being so sure whether they will be in office because most of their contracts are almost expiring. The honourable Minister has given them instructions to check out themselves by October. 

Mr Speaker, I remember when we were doing the mergers, we thought these staff would be brought on board and then the system would run.

The Deputy Speaker: Prayer?

Mr musana:  My prayer is that the minister advises the contractors to resume their sites and have the projects completed because there is a lot of vandalism.  All the poles that were erected are almost rotting. 

The last one is on regularising REA staff. There is a lot of confusion there. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. Honourable Minister of Energy. This is a cross-cutting issue; so, the answer will recover all.

3.11
The minister of energy and mineral development (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank Hon. Eric for having raised this matter. You are all aware of the decision that Government took to merge some MDAs and also to mainstream others. The Rural Electrification Agency is one of those that were mainstreamed, their Vote cancelled and their money – Shs 157 billion, which was on that vote - was brought to the ministry. 

The former REA - it is former because it does not exist. The board was removed - we agreed to continue with the staff, and pay them their amount up to the end of the contract they had with the Rural Electrification Agency. This contract is ending in October. 

The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Energy was obliged by law to notify the staff in three months period that since their contract is ending in October, they must prepare to handover to human resource personnel because this is required by law. What will ensue, thereafter, is a fresh recruitment and the first call is going to be given to the REA staff. 

Meanwhile, Cabinet has passed the department - this is a structure - where the staff are going to work. They have to work under a structure. We are going to have a department of rural electrification – the Rural Electrification Programme (REP) – so that we continue with the work of rural electrification because it is very key. 

Therefore, it is not true that that there is confusion and that the staff do not know what is happening. They know what has been happening but they have been moving around, lobbying and expecting the Government to rescind the decision, which is too late. This august House has already authorised me, through a motion that was brought by the Ministry of Finance, planning and Economic Development. There is no confusion. We are moving systematically. 

The first call will be given to the former REA staff – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if I got the Member well, his major issue was not people having their contracts renewed, but work going on. Work has stopped; the people have a laissez-faire attitude towards work. What are you doing to ensure that, indeed, work resumes and goes well? That is the major point of concern.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was going to end with that clarification because his matter had two parts.

Regarding the work that stalled, this is a matter that came because of a change in contract, where one of our former staff of REA authorised TBEA to change the order by authorising them to procure conductors, which were not as per the specifications in the contract. We engaged the Attorney-General and realised that TBEA was right. The person who authorised them was our staff. So, we had to own up. I found this on-going, but as I speak, the Attorney-General has guided and work has started in many areas. 

I have taken note of your specific contractors on the ground. I am going to cross-check. Where further guidance is required, I am going to do so. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, kindly, do oversight on this matter. Link up with the minister and visit some of these places. You can do random visits to some of these places. Report back to this House in the next two weeks in regard to this matter, starting with Hon. Musana’s area. Thank you. 

3.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

3.16
MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will begin by congratulating our students, pupils and schools for successfully closing term II. 

I rise on a matter of national importance regarding upcoming concerts that seek to attract high school students. In this very House, on 14 July 2022, a Member raised a matter where it was seen on social media that musicians were dancing in very obscene and seductive ways in schools.

Consequently, in a circular that was issued by the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Government issued a ban on all concerts that involve such kinds of dances in schools. However, social media is awash with adverts of a certain radio station that is going to hold a concert next Saturday, 20 August 2022, at Lugogo Cricket Grounds. In this advert, the concert spells that “Zzina Sosh 2022” is going to attract - I read verbatim: “Mark your calendars. The biggest high school turn up is going down on 20 August 2022 at Lugogo Hockey Grounds. All Ugandans and top artistes will be performing live.” 

I am raising this matter, not because the Ministry of Education and Sports is responsible for students outside schools, but still, the Government has to regulate the conduct of concerts that attract people below the age of 16. 

My prayers are that: 

    1. The Government should quickly stay this particular concert, pending issuance of guidelines on how this concert should be conducted. 

    2. The Government should re-echo the ban on these concerts to protect our children from moral and cultural degradation. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. This is a very important issue because you find them selling alcohol and drugs to our below-18 people at most of these concerts. They go till late. Sometimes, you meet very young people walking around Lugogo at night, while some are skimpily dressed. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Member has requested for guidelines for such concerts, where our young people – teenagers – are going to be in attendance. The name “Zzina Sosh”… –(Laughter) 

3.19 
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I have taken note of our Member’s concern. I am going to engage the concerned ministries so that we can put sanity in what we call “concerts.”

Mr Speaker, you will realise that the Minister of Education and Sports is a mother, who is always trying to make sure that our children live decently. She is always on top of her game. She will act. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is a concert outside school. These are holidaymakers. The Ministry of Internal Affairs, which clears such activities, needs to make a commitment on this. (Laughter) We need clear guidelines for such.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker, it is true that we enforce the law. However, I think it needs more than us. It needs the ministries of ethics and integrity as well the one for gender so that, together, we can enforce what is well laid out. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, please, we do not have much time. Hon. Namugga, kindly, follow up with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who is going to coordinate with the ministers of internal affairs, gender, labour and social development as well as ethics and integrity to ensure that, indeed, this does not happen without guidelines. Please, be in touch with my office so that on Tuesday, we can see how best to inform Members. 

Colleagues, some of you sent in questions and I received the questions you had brought in. More than half of the questions were not of urgent nature. They are questions of policy. They are questions you have sat and researched but you want the Prime Minister or the minister to give you a quick answer. You are going to get a half-baked answer. 

I am not going to allow some of the questions under this. I will push them to the Prime Minister's Time. That includes Hon. Frank’s question. During the Prime Minister’s Time, you will ask her those questions and, maybe, she will be able to prepare and give you a comprehensive answer. 

3.22
MS CHRISTINE NANDAGIRE (NUP, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to talk about a matter of urgent public importance in my constituency. 

Last weekend, I conducted a medical camp in Bukomansimbi Town Council, but outcomes pushed me to raise this urgent matter. 

In Bukomansimbi, my people are being affected by a number of diseases due to drought and lack of clean, safe water in the area. Mr Speaker, over 2,000 patients participated in the medical camp and the outcome of the camp indicated an increase in diseases caused by lack of safe water.

Around 600 patients were diagnosed with typhoid, diarrhea, gastritis, pneumonia and skin infections due to poor hygiene like ringworm, scabies and impetigo in children, among others. Most of these infections are caused by drinking and bathing with unsafe water due to drought. 

Today, a jerrycan of water in Bukomansimbi is sold at Shs 2,000. The available water sources are the swamps of Katonga, Kyoja and Nabajjuzi where they have to walk for over 15 miles (24 kilometres). And due to drought, crops, including coffee and maize stems have dried up, which has led to lack of food and fruits, exposing them to low immunity. 

My humble prayer is; we would like to be considered to get tap water immediately to reduce the rampant diseases caused by unsafe water. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness should consider my people and provide us with some food supplies and seeds. 

The Office of the Prime Minister should consider the people in Bukomansimbi to get an irrigation system, which can help our farmers during the dry seasons. 

The health facilities should also have enough drugs because patients walk for long distances and yet end up not getting treatment in the health facilities. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, thank you for organising a medical camp and serving your people. Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

3.25
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I also join you to thank the Member for organising a medical camp. 

I will coordinate the ministries concerned, that is, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Water and the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness: 

    i. To provide her people with some food.

    ii. The Ministry of Health to provide you with enough drugs through the National Medical Stores; and water - I will coordinate all the ministries. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, your question was well and comprehensively written. Therefore, I guide that you give a copy to the Prime Minister for easy follow-up. Hon. Etuka Isaac? I committed myself to allow 10 questions. 

3.26
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Anyiribu Subcounty is one of the numerous subcounties in this country without a health centre III as per the Government policy.

According to the Ministry of Health’s programme and the budget grant implementation guidelines, page 57 of 83, Anyiribu Subcounty was allocated Shs 900 million for the establishment of Health centres III. In the draft budget, the Shs 900 million for the establishment of health centres III was reflected. However, in the final budget, even the Shs 11 million that was allocated for health centres II in the subcounties was removed alongside the Shs 900 million. 

This means that the Shs 900 million for the establishment of the health centres III is removed and even the Shs 11 million for the health centres II, which are being run by Madi and West Nile Dioceses has also been removed, leaving the subcounty without any support for health services.

Mr Speaker, I pray that the Shs 900 million for the health centres III should be reinstated, and the Shs 11.8 million for the health centres III also be reinstated. I beg to lay this on the Table. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, it is true, some districts did not absorb money in the last financial year. Therefore, I will request that the Minister of Health comes here with a report and gives us the status, whether this money is going to be reinstated. However, the challenge is, some districts failed to absorb the money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, instead of the Minister coming to give a statement here, I would guide that you link the Member with the Minister of Health and the Minister of Finance to ensure this money is reinstated. The Ministry of Finance is usually the one that takes money; that is if it was budgeted; if it was not budgeted, then it would need a supplementary budget. So, please, coordinate that one, Prime Minister. (Members rose_) I am ending with Hon. Anthony Akol. (Interjection) Yes, because when you bring a matter, I see how urgent that matter is. I have exhausted all the matters that you brought to my office, which were urgent; those that I did not consider urgent, I am pushing them to Prime Minister’s Time. 

Now I have friends who are making signs that you have some matters; please, you know my office. So, next time just do that; sign language will not help here. (Laughter)

3.29
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, the matters we raise in this House are not for individual Members of Parliament but for this nation. Therefore, what we raise benefits everybody -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, instead of raising your matter, you have started –(Laughter)

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. The Ministry of Internal Affairs, in their latest press conference, raised a very pertinent issue concerning the export of labour in this country.

The minister said that every company that exports labour must first make sure that those who are going have their organs tested because there are allegations about the sale of human organs taking place where they are taken to work.

The Minister mentioned one of the hospitals where all of them have to go for the test to make sure their health and their organs are okay before they go - and that is Victoria Hospital. 
Unfortunately, the same Minister of Internal Affairs has withdrawn his own directives for this activity to go on.

Last October when I visited Dubai, we interacted with our ambassador there and raised serious issues of people leaving Uganda but sometimes the embassy is not even aware. At the end of the day, when they get problems, they come to the embassy. So, they were facing many problems; for example, resources to transport them back to the country. 

Mr Speaker, if this issue is not addressed, it is going to affect us; we have raised it many times from the Ninth Parliament to the 10th Parliament, on how Ugandans are suffering out there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Prayers. 

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, my prayers are:
    i. The Minister of Internal Affairs explains to this House why the same directive by the same ministry is being withdrawn. 

    ii. The minister should also explain to the House the human rights violations that are happening, especially, when he himself was addressing the press, he said that human organs are sold and the dead bodies are always used to feed crocodiles in foreign countries.
 
    iii. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development explains to this House the lasting solutions for Ugandans working abroad to stop these human rights violations. I beg to move. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs?

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker, this is a cross-cutting issue that has something to do with gender; it is a very big concern. I request that we work inwards across Government to present a more comprehensive paper on the matter before we get to respond to the concerns of the honourable member.

MR AKOL: Thank you, honourable minister -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he has not allowed you.

MR AKOL: He is running away, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. Honourable colleagues, when a member allows you, he says it on the microphone so that it is recorded and captured on the Hansard. 

Thank you. Honourable minister, on Wednesday next week, please present a comprehensive statement on this matter. The issue is not the hospital but the checking of organs. That is what I picked out. 

Hon. Ssekikubo, you have a point of procedure? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure in relation to the Prime Minister’s Time. 

Mr Speaker, this is derived from rule 41, and usually because there is limited time of 40 minutes, Members rise and put issues to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister: is she aware of this, this? If so, what is the way forward or how has Government handled this matter? 

I am afraid the way we are proceeding is as if we are raising matters of public importance then space is given to ministers. It should be her to invite a minister to clarify or to expound on a point. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But aren’t you ruling - 

MR SSEKIKUBO: No, no. I am raising this: would it be procedurally right - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leave room for me to guide. (Laughter) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: So that you restore the rule the way it is so that as many questions can be raised rather than engaging on matters of public importance that attract debates. Mr Speaker, are we procedurally right? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, if you had come here on time – I wish you had come here at 2.00 p.m. when we started the session. 

I informed the House how the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was not going to be here today. She communicated to me, and I said because of that I am going to allow many issues, which Members may have. They are burning issues and the ministers were here to respond to these issues. That is why we have taken this long. 

Now, I made my commitment, then in the process the Rt Hon. Prime Minister came and she told me now she has come. But I had already made my commitment and informed members; so, we are proceeding well. Otherwise, we usually allow five questions maximum. 

But also, whatever a member submits here is very important. Whether the response has come from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister or from the minister, what a member sometimes needs is a response. And the constituents are watching; they want to see their member representing them and being heard. (Applause) So, we are proceeding well. 

Point of procedure, Hon. Pacuto?

MS PACUTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. Last week, I did rise on the same issue. We passed here the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill three months ago. However, since then, we have not heard whether the President returned the Bill or assented to it. The Attorney-General did promise the House and Uganda that he would report back. It is now about weeks. 

Mr Speaker, we have the fisheries community; a good percentage of who could be quite helped if this Bill comes into force in form of an Act. Right now, the Fisheries Protection Unit is implementing operations, which are outside what is in that law.

Mr Speaker, are we therefore, proceeding well – now that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is here, the Minister of State for Fisheries is here – not to get a response to give assurance to the fisheries community in this country, and the Fisheries Protection Unit to operate within the law? Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, we are proceeding very well because this matter was raised yesterday on this Floor. That is why you have to be here every day. It was raised yesterday and the Rt Hon. Speaker guided very well on it, and you are going to get a response. Thank you. 

Next item? Sorry, Hon. Yeri?

MR YERI OFWONO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last year, on 28 September 2021, I raised a humble petition for the lock-up owners and vendors in Tororo Market. The petition was sent to the Minister of Local Government with instructions to bring a report. I raised it under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. Up to now, we have not got the results. Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister of Local Government.

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Busingye Rusoke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This afternoon I communicated to the member who has raised this matter that I have been assigned to travel to his constituency on Tuesday next week, to solve the problem, and I promise I will. 

I have already solved the ones in Kasese; it had a similar problem. We are heading to Gulu but I am starting with his since he brought it on the Floor of Parliament. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, whenever you raise matters, and for over a month, you have not received any response from the minister, please reach out to the presiding officers so that we can link with the minister. We do not even need to come here. We can make a call and say: “Honourable minister of Energy and Mineral Development, this colleague raised a matter; you promised to act but you have not acted.” Please, be watchful; keep watching so that we do not delay much. 

I hope, honourable minister, you have invited the Members of Parliament from those areas where you are going. You need to inform them for them to attend.

MS BUSINGYE: Through the same Member of Parliament I promise, Mr Speaker, that they will know, starting today, when I will be there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

Hon. Kivumbi, do you have a procedural matter? Honourable colleagues, procedure alone is now becoming -

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of procedure. On the 2nd of June, I wrote to the Clerk to Parliament, as a Shadow Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, requesting for a resolution on the termination of agreement between the Government of Uganda and Uganda Vinci Coffee Company Limited. I copied that letter to your office, to the Leader of Opposition, to the Government Chief Whip, and the Opposition Chief Whip. However, I never received an answer. 

On 15 June, I again wrote another letter to the Clerk – the other one had been written on 2 June – this was 15 July when I wrote the second letter to the Clerk to Parliament requesting him to avail me the same resolution. I copied to you in, and all the relevant offices; the Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Chief Whip but I never received any response. 

Matters are moving in the media regarding Vinci Coffee. I am so keen, in post-legislative scrutiny, because the resolutions of Parliament must be abided with. For me to make a conclusive conclusion as to whether it was tampered with or it is still as Parliament resolved, I need that resolution. However, the Clerk has failed to heed to my requests. 

As Parliament, as we proceed to pass resolutions, if the Clerk continues to decline - I know that under the law, I can move to the High Court and compel him to give me this resolution but it would be prudent that I first exhaust the internal mechanisms. I beg for your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. Please meet me in my office tomorrow at 3.00 p.m. I will arrange a meeting with the Clerk so that we look into this matter. I believe if we had done that, it would have moved quicker. I am going to ensure that we follow up on this matter, together with the LOP, my colleague, the Speaker and the Clerk. Thank you.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE STATUS OF PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL (PDM)

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR OPIO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. On Tuesday this week –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How do you rise when you do not have my permission? Honourable minister, proceed.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, as per your instructions, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was asked to present a report -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just take your seat for a minute and we allow a Member to raise his procedural matter.
 
MR OPIO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, on Tuesday this week, the Speaker directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to present a schedule of disbursement of the Road Fund on Wednesday, which was yesterday. She also directed that he presents the status of the Parish Development Model.

The procedural matter that I am raising is that, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that he also presents the status or the schedule for the disbursement of funds for the roads maintenance in this quarter, alongside presenting the status of the Parish Development Model? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Speaker directed.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, indeed the Speaker directed and yesterday, I came ready to present that report. Unfortunately, there was no space on the Order Paper and I walked to the Speaker to allow me to present it. She said I would present it next Tuesday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please submit the document formally so that we can get space for it.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I am presenting a report on the status of the Parish Development Model to date.

Mr Speaker, the Uganda National Household Survey (2019/2020) found that despite the numerous efforts by both the state and non-state actors, 39 per cent of Uganda's households are still stuck in subsistence (living hand to mouth). This translates to approximately 16 million Ugandans countrywide. They are the most poverty stricken, landless, vulnerable and unemployed. They are trapped in the vicious cycle of "low income, low savings, low investment, and low income".

The Parish Development Model is a multi-sectoral strategy to create socio-economic transformation by moving the 39 per cent households still stuck in subsistence to the money economy using the parish/ward as the epi-centre for planning, budgeting and service delivery.

Mr Speaker, PDM is a multi-sectoral, transformative intervention, focused around the following seven (7) Pillars:

1. 	Production, Processing, Storage and Marketing; 
2. 	Infrastructure and Economic Services; 
3. 	Financial Inclusion; 
4. 	Social Services; 
5. 	Community Mobilisation and Mind Set Change; 
6. 	Community information System; and 
7. 	Governance and Administration pillar.

The Parish Development Model, commonly called (PDM), was launched by H.E the President on 26 February 2022 in Kibuku District. Subsequently, the Government rolled out the PDM countrywide in Q4 FY 2021/2022.

Mr Speaker, I turn to the roll-out of the Parish Development Model. The roll out of the PDM involved the following activities:

    i) Community awareness and Sensitisation. 
    ii) The roll out of the PDM information System.
    iii) Data Collection on households and other issues. 
    iv) Enterprise Selection and Group formation;
    v) The PDM SACCO Establishment.

The Status to date

a) Funding the Parish Development Model;

Mr Speaker, in Financial Year 2O2l/2022, the total revised budget was Shs 234.3 billion of which Shs 200 billion was the initially approved Budget and Shs 34.2 billion was supplementary funding. By the end of Financial Year 202l/2022, Shs 139.38 billion had been released as indicated in table 1 below, representing 60 per cent budget performance in the financial year.

Table one, Mr Speaker, represents the PDM funding in the Financial Year 2021/2022 broken down in billions of shillings. I do not know whether I should go into the details of this but I will endeavour to summarise it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable, we have the statement. It is uploaded. Just tell us the total.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, since you have the table, as you have guided, let me now move to item B, which actually relates to this table.

Out of the Shs 200 billion approved budget, Shs 182.25 billion was appropriated to the Local Governments for the following Parish Development Model activities:

    a) Shs 125.39Bn was provided for the Parish Revolving Fund and only Shs 62.69 billion was released while Shs 62.69 billion was not released;

    b) Shs 1O.5 billion was provided for administrative costs to cater for office and overhead costs. All these funds were released to the local Governments, by the end of the Financial Year.

    c) Shs 28.79 billion was appropriated as staff costs for recruitment of parish chiefs and town agents. All these funds were released to the Local Governments.

    d) Shs 17.83 billion was appropriated for gadgets and tools. Only Shs 11.87 billion was released by the end of the financial year while Shs 5.95 billion was not released.

Mr Speaker, the funds that were not released were on the account of non-readiness of the local governments and the parish SACCOs. The ministry could not release funds for SACCOs that had not yet been formed and members/beneficiaries that had not yet been identified because it is a process.

c) Funding to the Central Government institutions

Additionally, Shs 17.48 billion was appropriated to Central Government votes to undertake the Parish Development Model prior actions in the Financial Year 2021/2022 as indicated in table 1 above. Of that :

    a. Shs 17.4 8 billion, Shs 4 billion was appropriated to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) for data collection. All these funds were released in the Financial Year 2021/2022, but those funds were totally inadequate. 

    b. Shs 2.98 billion was appropriated to the Ministry of Local Government for operationalisation of the Parish Development Model Secretariat. However, only Shs 1 billion was released in the Financial Year 2021/2022, leaving a balance of Shs 1.98 billion unreleased. 

    c. Shs 8.8 billion was appropriated under the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance for the development of the Parish Development Model information system; it was about designing a system that will be used to operate the parish model and data collection. Only Shs 5.48 billion was released, while Shs 3.32 billion was not released in the Financial Year 2021/2022.
 
    d. Shs 1.7 billion was appropriated under Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) for the revolving fund, that is, Shs 1.17 billion, and administrative costs, Shs 0.1 billion, staff costs for recruitment of town agents, Shs 0.27 billion, gadgets and tools Shs 0.17. All these funds were released to KCCA by the end of Financial Year 2021/2022. 

Mr Speaker, you will also recall that during the financial year, Parliament, under Supplementary Schedule No.1 of Financial Year 2021/2022, approved additional PDM funding amounting to Shs 34.3 billion as indicated in table 1 above. The additional funding was allocated as follows:

    a. Shs 3 billion was provided for community mobilisation and mind-set change under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. All these funds had been released by the end of the Financial Year 2021/2022.

    b. Shs 31.3 billion was appropriated to the Ministry of Local Government as follows:

    c. Shs 10.3 billion as funding for preliminary activities under the national rollout strategy for the PDM in Financial Year 2021/2022. All these funds had been released by the end of the financial year. 

    d. Shs 20.9 billion was appropriated - I am using the word “appropriated” to mean that the money was actually approved by this Parliament - under the Ministry of Local Government for onward transfer to beneficiary local Government as top-up funding for the parish revolving fund. However, these funds were not released in the Financial Year 2021/2022. By implication, therefore, some of the parishes did not receive the planned Shs 17 million in the Financial Year 2021/2022. [Member: “why”? – The reason is that it was not released. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the approved budget for the Parish Development Model in the Financial Year 2022/23 amounts to Shs 1,142.05 billion. In other words, about Shs 1.1 trillion, of which Shs 1,059.4 billion was appropriated for the revolving funds. By implication, Shs 100 million has been provided for each of the 10,594 parishes and these funds were appropriated to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to enable direct disbursement of the revolving funds to the bank accounts of the PDM SACCOs that are ready, upon the validation and confirmation of the particulars of the members. Shs 155 billion has been released in the first quarter, as summarised in table 2 below. 

Mr Speaker, you can clearly see, in that table, we have the revolving funds appropriated under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I have mentioned the figures and the quarter one release is indicated but we also have money released to various agencies under the national coordination system. All those agencies are listed there and the figures that were allocated and the releases made to them in the first quarter have all been indicated. 

Mr Speaker, of the Shs 1,142.05 billion that was appropriated under the various votes to cater for the PDM activities this financial year, Shs 134.83 billion (11.81 per cent) has so far been released. 

d) Status of implementation

The status of implementation of the PDM is as follows:

    a. The General PDM implementation guidelines were issued by the Ministry of Local Government and I have a copy here. The guidelines provide a conceptual framework for PDM, the principles that underpin PDM, the seven pillars and their delivery mechanism, stakeholder roles and a result framework. 

    b. Operational guidelines were developed and issued for pillars 1,3,5,6 and 7 so, all those pillars have a guideline. For example, this is the guideline for the pillar on financial inclusion. Additionally, the PDM SACCO model bylaw was developed and deployed. 

    c. Business development services and financial literacy content was developed and captured in the harmonised PDM trainers’ guide. This is aimed at promoting a business mind-set in the target beneficiary households. That is why we are talking about mind-set change. 

    d. Countrywide district mobilisation and sensitisation activities were led by Cabinet from the 21st of June to the 3 July 2022, targeting district leaders. All ministers went across the country to sensitise the leaders about the parish model. The activity directly benefited 17,872 leaders. 

    e. Community awareness and sensitisation was also undertaken. Sixty three national trainers were identified and trained. The national trainers in turn facilitated a Training of Trainers (ToT) for 885 district level officers from all local Government, 15 cultural and religious institutions were also sensitised. 

    f. As of 30 June 2022, household data had been collected from 3,275,088 households constituting 34 per cent coverage. 

Data collection was completed in five districts – this is 100 per cent coverage of households in those five districts. The districts are Bukedea, Butebo, Kaabong, Ngora and Rukungiri Municipality. This exercise is still ongoing and 64 local governments have already achieved 50 per cent coverage, in terms of data collection.

District and municipal commercial officers from 176 local governments – because these are very key in implementing this model - were oriented on the expected deliverables, timelines and reporting under financial inclusion - financial inclusion is where the money for the revolving fund is - at five regional workshops. The regions representing the country were Mbarara, Kampala, Gulu, Soroti and Mbale. The workshops were held on 6 May 2022. 

Inter-institutional technical support teams were set up and deployed countrywide from 6 to 30 June 2022 to support and supervise the local governments during the PDM roll out. As at 31 July 2022, a total of 8,267 PDM SACCOs – that is 78 per cent - had been registered by the Registrar of Cooperatives, under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. The PDM SACCOs are registered under the Cooperative Societies Act, as amended.

The Registrar of Cooperatives subjected the PDM SACCO applications recommended by the local governments to a robust checklist, which is attached here as Annex A.

Way forward 

It is true that some parishes and wards did not receive the planned Shs 17 million as the Parish Revolving Fund in Financial Year 2021/2022. However, this is mainly on account of non-readiness because we are transmitting the money direct to the SACCOs and not to the local governments. 

For instance, the ministry has established that 3,914 PDM SACCOs had not yet been registered by 30 July 2022, while some were registered after the closure of the financial year. By implication, therefore, some of the revolving funds were returned to the Consolidated Fund at the end of Financial Year 2021/2022, in accordance with the law.
 
As a way forward, therefore, the ministry shall fast-track the actions below:

    1. The revolving funds that had been released to the local governments, but were returned to the Consolidated Fund at the end of the Financial Year 2021/2022, will be provided to the respective parishes, upon validation of the PDM SACCOs registered;

    2. Additional funding shall be provided to ensure that each parish/ward receives the established shortfalls on the Shs 17 million planned for Financial Year 2021/2022, over and above the approved budget for Financial Year 2022/2023. 

Mr Speaker, I think I should clarify here that in this financial year, the SACCOs shall receive Shs 100 million but wherever there is a shortfall, it will be sent to the SACCOs that are affected.

    3. The ministry is currently reviewing all work plans and budgets for the PDM-implementing MDAS in Financial Year 2022/2023, to ensure seamless alignment of the Financial Year 2022/2023 budget and the PDM; 

    4. The ministry, through the Accountant-General’s office, has enrolled PDM SACCOs on the Integrated Financial Management System, commonly called the IFMS. This is aimed at ensuring direct disbursement of funds to the beneficiary PDM SACCO bank accounts.

In future, we plan to release the Parish Revolving Funds in two tranches – in July and January – so that the beneficiary households can plant their crops by the start of the two major rain seasons in most parts of the country. 

Furthermore, the following shall be done in order to ensure the success of the PDM: 

    a) Complete baseline data collection exercise countrywide. I mentioned that we are at 34 per cent but we have to achieve 100 per cent data collection;

    b) Activate full PDM operations and activities under all the pillars;

    c) Expedite the Operation Wealth Creation-led exercise to validate and verify membership in PDM SACCOs. Local governments were directed to publicly display lists of members at subcounty and parish levels; 

    d) Support local governments to complete establishment of the remaining 3,914 PDM SACCOs and take corrective actions on the basis of verification; 

    e) Conduct first general meetings to appoint substantial leaders for the registered PDM SACCOs and adopt resolutions on bank account signatories; 

    f) Conduct training for leaders of registered PDM SACCOs on SACCO governance, loan management, records keeping and good agricultural practices. Standard record templates shall also be provided to the PDM SACCOs at the trainings;

    g) Roll out the Parish Development Management Information System, and; 

    h) Establish a grievance redress mechanism for PDM SACCOs and enterprise groups.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Colleagues, such a statement, as per Rule 52(2) of our Rules of Procedure, may be debated. (Members rose_) Please, listen to me. (Laughter) First, take your seats and listen to the Speaker. (Laughter) The rules do not say, “Shall”; they say “may be debated” and I want this matter debated. 

However, colleagues, you recall the House gave the same assignment to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government and their report was ready. Hon. Onzima brought the report and, as presiding officers, we guided that we wait for the statement of the minister on finances, a statement which we shall, again, give to the committee to update theirs with such figures and all that. Colleagues, it would be unfair – I do not think you will substantively debate.

So, I want the chairperson of the committee to take this statement, call a meeting of his committee on Monday and update their report by including information from this statement. On Wednesday, we shall have your report and debate this matter comprehensively for one hour. (Applause)

4.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Godfrey Onzima): Mr Speaker, most obliged. We shall take this and add it onto our report. Otherwise, the previous report – as you had said - was already ready.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, this statement, for purposes of clarity, is not an update on the status of the Parish Development Model because it does not fall under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is the Ministry of Local Government which is in charge. 

So, it should be made very clear that it is on the funding because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is in charge of only one pillar, which is financial inclusion. So, we need to be very clear so that it reads properly. It is an update on the funding of the Parish Development Model. 

Hon. Kazini, we have already sent the statement to the committee; you will wait until Wednesday.

MR KAZINI: Mr Speaker, I am not debating; mine is an issue - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you do not speak on the microphone, unless you are given permission by the Presiding Officer.
 
Now, honourable colleagues, we are going to have Prime Minister's Time for one hour and then, we do the petition from West Nile. So, the Prime Minister's Time will end at exactly 5.13 p.m. I need to update the Prime Minister that the rules have changed. The Prime Minister's Time is now one hour. And, please, avail her with the new rules. (Laughter)

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would need to first amend the Order Paper to allow you to present a statement on the Business for the Succeeding Week as per Rule 28 of our Rules of Procedure and then, after that, also another item, which will be Prime Minister’s Time. (Mr Kazini rose_)

Hon. Kazini, do you have a procedural matter? You see, colleagues, when you keep making a sign to me here, sometimes, I can get offended by the signs you make. (Laughter) Yes, because a colleague has been making that sign but I know there is something. If you want to –(Members rose_) Colleague, if it is a matter of procedure, please, tell me but if it is a matter on which we have already ruled - (Mr Twinomujuni rose) – Is it a point of procedure or what? 

MR FRANCIS TWINOMUJUNI: Mine is a burning issue, Mr Speaker. Whereas training was carried out in every local government in Uganda, in my district of Kikuube, my local government leaders were not trained. I, therefore, request that the minister considers Kikuube for that particular training. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister concerned, please, do as requested by the Member. 

MR TWINOMUJUNI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

STATEMENT OF BUSINESS BY THE LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR BUSINESS OF SUCCEEDING WEEK

4.14
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I have information for Kikuube District because the minister has reported to me. The civil servants in Kikuube were receiving bribes from people. And when the minister went there, the communities were bitter and they reported this. There was a district councillor who wanted to beat up the minister. And that is why the minister backed off. So, it is not true they did not train; the minister went there but he was fought by some councillors of Kikuube.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope you took or you are going to take action, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

MS NABBANJA: I thought that Hon. Kazini should be updated. 

Mr Speaker, I move under Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure that requires me, as the Leader of Government Business, to make a statement to the House regarding Government Business for the Succeeding week. I am, therefore, hereby submitting the following business for next week - that is 16 to 18 August 2022. 

    1. The Partnership (Amendment) Bill, 2022
    2. The Trustee Incorporation (Amendment) Bill, 2022. 
    3. The Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2022. 
    4. The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2022. 
    5. The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2022. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. For record purposes, they will be submitted for First Reading. That is very important.

MS NABBANJA: Thank you. Mr Speaker-

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

4.16
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, Hon. Isaac Etuka Joachim, Member of Parliament of Upper Madi County gave a lengthy background and I want to read it verbatim. It says; 

“Objective 22 of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy requires the State to encourage people to grow and store food reserves and encourage proper nutrition through mass education, international treaties and conventions, which Uganda ratified recognise that the right to adequate food is a human right. 

Article 25(1) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 11(1) of the International Covenant of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights both provide for the right to everyone to an adequate standard of living, including adequate food. 

Article 11(2) recognises the need for more immediate and urgent steps to ensure the fundamental right to freedom from hunger and malnutrition. 

Uganda ratified the ICESCR in 1987 and recognises the importance of food and nutrition in the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.”

His prayer is: “Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what short, medium and long-term plans does the Government of Uganda have to repossess and establish regional food reserves to eliminate the current shame where people are dying of hunger in the Karamoja Subregion?” 

Mr Speaker, this is my response: 

Government of Uganda has embarked on five approaches to enhance food security in the country. In the short term, Government, through the Ministry of Agriculture is in advanced stages to undertake large scale food production, leveraging Government land held by UPDF, Uganda Prison Service, the National Enterprise Corporation, the National Leadership Institute, and MAAIF agencies like NARO and NAGRIC&DB, amounting to 109,989 hectares. 

This follows approval of proposals to enhance food and animal feed security tabled before Cabinet. These have been mobilised to produce mainly food security crops like maize, beans, soybeans, and sorghum. This is expected to commence in this current planting season. 

Secondly, in the medium term, Government is mobilising large-scale farmers across the districts of Uganda who have capacity for large-scale food production. The immediate target farmer cluster has an average of one 100,014,661 acres. We expect that these will be ready to commence planting activities in the March 2023 planting cycle.

However, MAAIF will continue registering all farmers with acreage starting from 10 acres, which can be committed to production of a particular crop or enterprise using district agriculture extension staff and other Government structures.

The Ministry of Agriculture together with the Ministry of Finance are partnering with key private sector players in the relevant value chains in regard to enhancing their storage capacity to avoid scarcity. 

The Ministry of Agriculture plans to construct regional export grain bulking centres to process grain from farmers in local catchment areas, with the capacity to receive already cleaned and dried maize in its wider vicinity for long term storage in the large on-site silos. The four proposed locations are Sironko, Masindi, Lira and Mubende. Construction is expected to commence in November, 2022. 

The Minister of Agriculture is working on a strategy for national food reserves for consideration by Cabinet.

The second question is from hon. Aisha Kabanda. She said that there is a coercion for Muslim women and girls to unveil while taking passport size photos at passport offices and institutions of learning that do not recognise veils as part of the school uniform. This, according to her, is a violation of the right to freedom to practise religion, which includes the freedom to manifest a religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching as enshrined in Article 29(1)(c) of the Constitution; International Standards Organisations and International Civil Aviation Organisations guidelines.

Her prayer is; Can the Prime Minister inform the House how this matter is going to be addressed? 

Mr Speaker, this is the second time she is asking this question. 
The response is that the Ministry of Internal Affairs and its affiliate institutions that include the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control, which is directly responsible for the administration and efficient issuance of passports and travel documents, implement their lawful mandates, cognisant of all rights and freedoms of people. 

The directorate, at the time of introducing the electronic passport of East Africa in Uganda, the Ministry of Internal Affairs issued a statement to the 10th Parliament outlining the procedures, which include:

    1. Photo requirements;
    2. Standards of applying; and
    3. Enrolling and issuance of electronic passports. 

These were presented and approved by Parliament of Uganda. 

The International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) has stipulated certain mandatory specifications for passport photos. The salient points of specifications that are in turn implemented by the Directorate are as follows:

    a) Images should be two by two inches;

    b) The images must have adequate brightness and contrast;

    c) The skin tone should be natural; 

    d) It should show a close-up of the head and partial shoulders;

    e) The image should be straight-looking, centered with a neutral expression;

    f) The face should be in sharp focus and clear with no ink marks or lines; 

    g) The face from forehead edge to bottom or the chin should be 70 to 80 per cent of the photo or one inch height;

    h) The eyes must be open and no hair obscuring the face;

    i) Prescription glasses, if worn, should be clear and thin framed and should not have flashy reflection or obscure the eyes;

    j) Head covering are not permitted except for religious reasons but your facial features from bottom of the chin to top of the forehead, and both edges of your face must be clearly shown;

    k) The photo must have plain light background. There must be no other people or objects in the photo and

    l) The light must be uniform, with no shadows on the face or behind. Red eye photos are not allowed.

Accordingly, passports with photos that do not match the above ICAO photo specifications are liable to be rejected by Immigration authorities globally and could result in extreme inconvenience to the passport holder. Passport applicants are, therefore, advised not to submit photos with any of the defects listed above. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, we call upon you and all the members of public to take note of these photo requirements to avoid being inconvenienced. 

The Minister of Internal Affairs has committed to ensure that officers are continuously trained on the national and international requirements. Where, and in the unlikely event that any of the officers falls short of these standards to guide the passport enrolment process, which infringes on the right and the freedom of all people, including Muslim women and girls, it will invite sanctions against the offending officers. 

Question number three is from hon. Phiona Nyamutoro, the National Female Youth Member of Parliament. She asked: “Rt hon. Prime Minister, there has been an outcry of missing files at police stations as a result of manual recording of cases.” Her prayer is: “What is Government's plan in addressing this challenge?”

My response is that Government, through the Uganda Police Force, has commenced the process of digitalising the recording of cases reported at police stations countrywide. The system is referred to as the Criminal Record Management System that is intended to avert incidents of case file disappearance and mismanagement during and after investigations to ensure timely follow- up of cases. 

The system will ease the work of police and all security agencies in the tracking, detecting and reporting of war crimes. It will also keep track of war criminals. The system intends to minimise errors arising from duplicating the same information relating to the reported cases. 

Number four is Hon. Isaac Etuka, Member of Parliament for Upper Madi County. He said; The school feeding programme, the children in Uganda, particularly those of the poor and urban poor, are studying on empty stomachs. This affects their concentration in class hence poor performance, whereas those in the middle class who afford food for their children are fed on unhealthy food, which promotes non-communicable diseases. 

His prayer is, when is the Government coming up with a clear school feeding policy and Bill that regulates safety of food for school children?

My response is: 

The linkage between school feeding and learning outcomes is uncontested. Various studies have demonstrated that quality and safe food directly improves cognitive development among children, school enrolment and school attendance, learners’ participation and concentration in classrooms. 

Therefore, Government recognises school feeding as a strategic opportunity for schools to optimise education achievement by preparing and nurturing children and youth into healthy and productive adults and is working to have this policy in place as soon as possible. 

Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, the Ministry of Education and Sports (Pre-primary, Primary and Post-primary) Act, 2008 under Section 5 provides the responsibilities of Government and those of parents and guardians. The responsibilities of Government are under Section 5(1) which includes, among others: 

    a) Provision of learning and instructional materials;
    b) Structural development and teachers’ welfare;
    c) Recruiting, deployment and promotion of both teaching and non-teaching staff;
    d) Ensuring equitable distribution of education institutions. 

The responsibilities of parents and guardians under Section 5(2) include among others: 

    a) Registering their children of school-going age at school;
    b) Providing parental guidance and psychosocial welfare to their children;
    c) Providing food, clothing, shelter, medical care and transport. 

In 2021, the Ministry of Education and Sports embarked on the process of drafting the National School Feeding Policy. The draft Regulatory Impact Assessment report and the draft National School Feeding Policy were developed. The Ministry of Education and Sports is now at the stage of stakeholder consultation on the draft Regulatory Assessment and the draft National School Feeding Policy. 

Honourable Members of Parliament, after consultations, the next stage will be to prepare an action plan to determine the cost requirements for the National School Feeding Policy in order to secure a certificate of financial implication from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

In view of the above, the draft National School Feeding Policy will be submitted to Cabinet for approval.

Hon. Joakino Isaac Etuka, Member of Parliament Upper Madi County asked another question: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as you are aware, Agricultural Cluster Development Project is a six-year development project which officially expired in March, 2022. In the Financial Year 2020/2021, the ministry allocated Shs 4.5 billion for rehabilitation of roads in Madi-Okollo District and the list of roads was submitted to the ministry accordingly. To-date, no work is done on all the roads in Madi-Okollo. 

His prayer is, can the Government assure Ugandans in that part of the country as to when the stalled and submitted projects in all the districts under the ACDP will resume and be completed? 

My response is: 

There are four districts where the Agricultural Cluster Development Project road chokes project works are still on-going. These are Butaleja, Tororo, Mpigi and Madi-Okollo. In the case of Mpigi and Madi-Okollo, the bids returned quotes above the budget and this situation is being handled by the procurement office. 

The project expired in March 2022 – that is true - and a non-cost extension of l8 months was granted to enable the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the implementing agency for the Agriculture Cluster Development Project, to finalise all the pending activities including road chokes rehabilitative works. 

Honourable colleagues, the phased procurement process for road chokes rehabilitative works has been completed, contracts signed and works are at different stages of implementation except for the works in the districts of Butaleja and Tororo whose works procurement process is still on-going.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Rule 41(8)(a) provides for the time allocated to the Prime Minister; at least not more than 40 per cent shall be allocated to written questions.
Rule 41(8)(b) says “Not more than 20 minutes for oral questions.” I hereby open up oral questions. We should be done with the Prime Minister’s Time by 5.00 p.m. exactly –(Members rose_) No, it is not allowed. Read Rule 41(9) of the Rules of Procedure. Under the Prime Minister’s Time, only the Leader of the Opposition can give a response. 

I will ensure that I balance debate between colleagues from both sides of the House. I will ensure that the Opposition, Independents and the ruling side are all represented. I do not want written questions because these are oral questions. Make them sharp and take one minute each. 

4.40 
MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 41 (b) of the Rules of Procedure on a matter that concerns Ugandans. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is the Government’s stimulus plan for the transport sector, aware that the Government has similar plans to revamp sectors like education and tourism? This is because of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic that have affected many aspects. You realise that in the developed world, there are issues like high fuel prices and supply shortages that have grossly affected the transport sector.

Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, your one minute is done. 

MR ATIMA: Mr Speaker, allow me to ask my question now. The point I am raising concerns one particular business sector in my constituency -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let me guide you, honourable. Allow your Speaker to guide you. 

MR ATIMA: Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Questions for oral answer are sharp questions that do not require reading because the Prime Minister is not going back to read. Therefore, they should be answers that a Prime Minister can give right away. 

Otherwise, if there are questions that require such a comprehensive answer, like the one you have asked, then, it should be a written question so that the Prime Minister can go back. Therefore, I will only allow Hon. Atima to ask such a question; please, the rest, I have guided you.

MR ATIMA: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. The question I was raising concerns one key company that closed business one month ago; Gaga Bus Services that has been very popular in this country. 

Because of the economic situation, Gaga Bus Company closed business and people have been rendered jobless, revenues; both local and national have been affected. How can the Government help such a business? Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I wish you had started like that.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Government put money in the Uganda Development Bank and we have been encouraging such companies to go and borrow from such Government banks. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nambozo.

4.43
MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for being on spot when we had disasters in Bugisu. However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Sironko District had some bridges washed away. We are requesting that the Prime Minister gives a directive like she has always done to the Ministry of Works and Transport to reinstate the bridges that were washed away to enable the people of Sironko move around and do their business as usual. Thank you. 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister's Office using the Prime Minister's Delivery Unit made an assessment in the Elgon Region, during which we found out that some of the brigades that were washed away belong to the districts. However, some of the districts do not have capacity to replace these bridges and one of them is Sironko and many other districts in the region. 

Therefore, we agreed together with the Ministry of Works - we had a meeting last week that the districts will be helped by the ministry to make sure that we replace these bridges. Those that are under UNRA, the Ministry of Works will work on them. 

We are in touch with the Ministry of Finance to make sure that we provide some funding to the districts to replace those bridges.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Nakaseke Central.

4.45
MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Recently, the Electoral Commission suspended the women council elections, saying that it was given little money; just only Shs 15 billion out of Shs 35 billion appropriated by Parliament for this exercise. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, women are asking when this activity will be conducted. Secondly, the people who participated in the voter display were not paid, We need clarification. 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Uganda Electoral Commission was very clear that they do not have enough money. Therefore, I will come with a comprehensive report about the same next week. I do not have an accurate answer now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Moroto Municipality -

4.46
MR FRANCIS LORIKA (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Recently, Shs 70 billion was allocated to the Ministry of Water and Environment to address the issue of water shortages in Karamoja, especially with regard to the valley dams. However, we got information that that money ended up in the Ministry of Agriculture. 

From my experience, the valley dams that were originally built by the Ministry of Agriculture did not serve the purpose because they seem not to have the expertise in that matter. 

How shall we solve this kind of confusion, especially when another ministry is taking money that belongs to a different ministry, yet, they do not have the expertise? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister -

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Water has its own budget. The Shs 70 billion was given to the Ministry of Agriculture to handle irrigation schemes. The role of the Ministry of Water is to provide bulky water up to the farm gate and the Ministry of Agriculture gets the water from the gate and distributes it to the farm.

Therefore, Rt Hon. Speaker, we have had meetings and we have agreed with the Ministry of Water and the Ministry of Agriculture under my chair, including the Cabinet that there is no need for our ministries to collide.

There are two staffs; one was a technical staff called Kato in the Ministry of Water who was once a technical officer in the Ministry of Agriculture. He and another technical staff are the ones who are at loggerheads. We are handling this matter to its logical conclusion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Entebbe Municipality -

4.48
MR MICHEAL KAKEMBO (NUP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister; Entebbe Grade B Hospital is now a regional referral hospital. It was gazetted during COVID-19 lockdown to manage only COVID-19 patients but a few weeks ago, it was opened to the public.

However, it had a problem with water and toilet supplies, which were broken down. As I speak, the staff in Entebbe Grade B Hospital and the patients cannot even wash their hands. The hygiene and the health status of -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, what is your question?

MR KAKEMBO: I wrote to the Minister of Health and she promised that by this week, it will be settled but up to now, it is not. My question to you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when will the Entebbe Grade B Hospital water and the toilet system be fully functional? 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I am aware of the situation in Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital. The Ministry of Health was waiting for the release, which came last week. They are going to handle that issue immediately. 

4.50
CAPT. (RTD) DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda South County, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Right Honourable Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in the year 2018, we passed a loan here for agricultural supply chain and value edition where Mitooma District was among. However, to my surprise, today, it has never been implemented. When is the implementation going to be done? I thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I do not have a direct answer now. I will go back and inquire from the Ministry of Agriculture why this loan is not performing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Otuke -

4.51
MS SUSAN ABEJA (Independent, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is coming to a month since we wrote a letter to your office that our people are dying of hunger. Last week, one of your commissioners presented a schedule for Otuke, to give us food on Monday. 

I also mentioned this to my people - and they are waiting for food. Others who are sick with HIV have even refused to take ARVs because they do not have food and my people are dying. What can I do and whom should I contact because now, I do not have an answer for my people? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister -

MS NABBANJA: I saw the communication from the colleague and we, in the Prime Minister’s Office, when that communication came - that was the time we had issues in Mbale - we thought we should handle Mbale first but I want to promise the colleague that Otuke people will be served. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kisa -

4.53
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am a regular user of the Jinja-Kampala Highway. It is now about four years - Government compensated people and a contractor was obtained to construct the Jinja-Kampala Express Highway. 

The current status is that where people were compensated, fraudulent people have started occupying that very place where the highway will most likely pass. I want to get a progressive status about this Jinja-Kampala Express Highway. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I will bring an update. I do not have a direct answer now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next week, you shall answer it as part of the written responses. Dr Bayigga -

4.54
DR BAYIGGA LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Rural Electrification Agency, having had its activities halted and taken to a vote where we thought that improvements were going to be effected, we have not seen any improvement at all and our people would like to have power lines extended to their villages. 

You will remember that, we, the people of Buikwe, came and saw you and you directed the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to ensure that this is done immediately we passed the budget. Would you like to inform us when activities for extension of power lines will resume? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, now that my minister is here, I request her to help me answer that question. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One minute; we are using one minute because I still have other honourable colleagues that have to ask.
 
4.55
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have actually seen work resuming. I have been commissioning a number of projects that had stalled. I promise Hon. Lulume that I will get back to him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. The honourable colleague next to Hon. Komakech.

4.55
MS AUMA KENNY (UPC, Woman Representative, Kwania): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is about the road equipment that was supposed to be procured for the newly created districts. Kwania being one of the districts has not yet received the road equipment. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister? 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, there are some new districts and municipal councils that have not yet been provided with road equipment. This Parliament appropriated money to have them procured and the procurement process is ongoing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Josephat?

4.56
MR JOSEPHAT TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Bugangaizi South County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Many administrative units have been put in place and more so, town councils. I have about two town councils in my constituency but one of them does not have a garbage truck, that is, Igayaza Town Council and Kakumiro Town Council’s garbage truck is also a “DMC”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is a “DMC”? You know Parliamentary language is clear, honourable. 

MR TUMWESIGYE: It is a vehicle that is in dangerous mechanical condition, which is about to give way. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very good.

MR TUMWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, a lot of garbage is generated on a daily basis. Many people are moving into urban centres for financial opportunities. 

My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is: many town councils have got garbage trucks but when is she considering giving us at least one garbage truck for Igayaza Town Council? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that is your district. (Laughter)

MS NABBANJA: Thank you very much, my honourable Colleague. Igayaza Town Council is in Kakumiro District, where I am a Member of Parliament. If there was a chance, I would have already given them but I will request the Minister of Local Government – since she is here, I believe she has a definitive answer to that question. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Local Government -

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Rusoke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have requested for a supplementary budget, which we are processing, so that we can acquire road equipment for our people but we shall start with the cities. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they want garbage collection trucks. 

MS RUSOKE: For garbage, yes, but the issue of the road equipment arose. For garbage collection, we ordered for 10 trucks but we shall also start with the cities. 

4.59
MS AGNES ACIBU (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a concern and a question for Government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just a question.

MS ACIBU: What intervention do they have for the street children in Kampala? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister -

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, two weeks ago, we had a meeting with KCCA, Ministry of Gender and Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

We all agreed that the street children were becoming very many. Therefore, we started getting them off the roads and they are being taken back to Napak, to their families. We have a holding centre in Napak and the Prime Minister’s Office is providing food for these children as parents come to identify them. So far, we have removed over 3,000 children from the streets. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Chemutai -

5.00
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is about poor performance in education. For many years, we have seen some districts performing poorly and it is the same districts all the time. So, what plans do you have, Rt Hon. Prime Minister for improvement in performance in these schools?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, endeavour to put on your masks, please. 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, we all need our children to perform well in schools. The Minister of Education and Sports will come here with a statement on how Government intends to improve performance in schools. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In two weeks’ time, please.

5.01
MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is about the seed school in Rukiga District – that is in Rwamucucu Subcounty. This school was commissioned in 2019 and I have to appreciate the Ministry of Education and Sports. We received computers. 

In that subcounty, Prime Minister, we have no electricity. I wanted to know when we are going to get electricity, especially for the school to be able to run.

Secondly -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Prime Minister -

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, once again, the minister for energy is here.

5.02
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Prime Minister. I have a pending visit to Rukiga. I worked with the honourable member and I will be going with my team to see what is on the ground. She actually raised the matter with me. I am aware and planning to visit and see how many poles we need to connect the seed school and some other installations that she brought forward to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. In the Prime Minister’s time, there is no procedure. It is a very fixed time, if you read Rule 41, it is well scripted.

5.03
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank, Mr Speaker. Let me commence with giving credit where it is due. (Applause) The Prime Minister’s response to some of those written questions – the one on issuance of passports and mandate of the Ministry of Internal Affairs was spot on. It was accurately correct. (Applause)

However, the question on food reserves is a dictate of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XXII states that the State shall establish national food reserves. I will not go into the other details. 

Mr Speaker, we are the only isolated island in the region. If you go to the other partner states of the East African Community – mention Kenya or Tanzania. Kenya, for instance, has the Kenya Cereals and Produce Board. There is an equivalent in Tanzania. They always store food in silos. Of course, in plan – you are planning to have four large onsite silos, when you should have commenced with one in Karamoja. It is a shame. That question even mentioned that “to eliminate the current shame.”

This is a country that is called the “Pearl of Africa”, courtesy of a statement that was made by the late British Prime Minister, Churchill, because of the good weather and arable soils. We are about to make 40 years in power and we are a middle income economy, so to speak. 

It would be a big embarrassment to hear of people starving in the Pearl of Africa. Starving takes a long time for someone to die by the way. It can take a full month. See the number of Ugandans who have starved to death and here we are, giving a rosy picture about the construction of silos. It has become a song. Mine was to make a comment. This response by the Prime Minister is the joke of the century.

The next comment I am making – I am actually making a very brief one this time round – is on the question raised by my colleague, the Member of Parliament for Upper Madi, about the school feeding policy. It is clear – even UNATO conducted a research and it was realised that why performance is very poor in schools, not only for learners but also for the teachers, is because of UPE and USE policy of keeping parents off from participating in their responsibility of feeding. 

She read the law. One of the fundamental responsibilities of the parents and guardians is to feed their children. However, in this policy, it is actually illegal – and the RDCs are all over the schools – for parents to contribute. There are some schools that have actually defied that directive of the President and they do their thing surreptitiously. They hide and they are performing very well when they contribute for the feeding of both learners and teachers. 

Here we are. There is a draft alright, as per her response, for a National School Feeding Policy but it is taking ages. I heard of that draft about three years ago and it has never been submitted to the Cabinet. Must it wait for Jesus Christ to come back – and He is coming back soon. (Laughter)

The other question I am concluding with, Mr Speaker, is on the roads. She elaborately talked about those roads on the agricultural cluster development progress – you mentioned Butaleja. However, in Madi, where the Member raised a question of Upper Madi, the construction has not taken off at all. I am aware – he has shared it with me. The contractor is not even on site. 

The other issue, Prime Minister, is that before you came, I had raised a concern in a procedural matter pertaining to Rule 28. Is your mandate to always bring those statements? Indeed, you have made submissions – a litany of them – ever since this session started. The one-million-dollar question is: do you ever get bothered to know whether these businesses that you submit for the succeeding week are reflected on Order Paper? None of the businesses you have submitted has ever featured on the Order Paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please, you can use the word “most”. When you say “none”

MR NAMBESHE: I thank you but it is a matter of semantics.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. (Laughter) When a reader of the Hansard in future sees “none” - (Laughter) 

MR NAMBESHE: I beg to comment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO URGENTLY ADDRESS THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLY CHALLENGES IN WEST NILE REGION

5.10
MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Mr Speaker, I raise under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure on a motion for a Resolution of Parliament urging Government to urgently address the electricity supply challenges in West Nile region.

“WHEREAS Objective XXVII (ii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of the 1995 Constitution enjoins the State to promote and implement energy policies, which will ensure that the people's basic needs and those of environmental preservation are met; 

AND WHEREAS Government developed the energy policy for Uganda in 2002, with the main policy goal as to meet the energy needs of the population for socio-economic development in an environmentally-friendly manner. And later in 2007 reinforce our commitment to the development and utilisation of renewable energy resources and technologies through approval of the renewable energy policy; 

AWARE THAT the Government formulated a rural electrification policy to promote equitable rural electrification access, having special regard to those areas of the community that are currently marginalised, such as West Nile Region, which has perennially had low electricity connectivity rates in both the urban and rural averages countrywide; 

FURTHER AWARE THAT Parliament enacted the Electricity Act of 1999 with the objective of regulating the generation, transmission, distribution, sale, use, export, import and distribution of electrical energy in Uganda, among others;

RECALLING THAT in an effort to address-”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, colleagues, we are in the House. If you want to talk to each other, you can move to the canteen.

MR BIYIKA: “RECALLING THAT in an effort to address power shortage in West Nile Region, which has never been connected to the national grid. In 2003, Government through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development granted a concession agreement to West Nile Rural Electrification Company (WENRECO) to generate, distribute and sell electricity in West Nile Region for a period of 20 years;

CONCERNED THAT West Nile Rural Electrification Company failed to fulfil its contractual obligation under the concession agreement to generate, distribute and sell electricity in West Nile. And consequently, Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd  was introduced to supplement power generation;

FURTHER CONCERNED THAT even after the two companies were engaged to supplement each other in power generation, to achieve reliable, stable and affordable power supply in the region, West Nile has to-date endured unreliable, unstable, unpredictable and costly power supply, which is characterised by constant power outages, interruptions and blackouts;

ACKNOWLEDGING THAT the unstable power supply has greatly affected the economic development and service delivery in the West Nile Region and contributed to insecurity in the region;

COGNISANT of the promises made by Government, which on 13 September 2021, through the Minister of Energy, promised to have the West Nile Region connected to the national grid by September, 2022 and later revisited the date to march 2023. 

Mindful of the Government electricity access targets of 80 percent of the total population by 2040 under the Uganda Vision 2040 and 60 per cent by the year 2025, under the National Development Plan III and the Rural Electrification Strategy and Plan 2013-2022 which set the target to increase access to electricity in rural areas from 7 per cent to 26 per cent; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that: 

    i) Parliament urges Government, through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, to urgently provide funds to Uganda National Oil Company (UNOC) or to any independent body to supply fuel to Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd to generate the Lance's 8.2 megawatts of electricity to be supplied to West Nile Rural Electrification Company (WENRECO), to ensure a stable and reliable supply of electricity to the people of West Nile Region; 

    ii) The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development fast-tracks the bulk evacuation of electricity, the 132-kV line national grid to West Nile and also speeds up the works at the substations at Arua and Nebbi to enable West Nile Region get connected to the National Grid; 

    iii) Parliament urges Government to release all the required funds to speed up the completion of 6.6 megawatts at Nyagak III and replace the second turbine at Nyagak I in order to generate the 3.5 megawatts installed capacity instead of the current 1.7 megawatts being produced;

    iv) The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development upgrades the existing electricity network in West Nile Region to be able to distribute from the high voltage 132KV from the national grid transmission line once evacuated to the region by March 2023 as promised by Government;

    v) The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development intensifies the expansion of the network to rural areas to cover all the districts, municipalities, town Councils, subcounties, institutions and parishes in West Nile Region to support the Parish Development Model and reduce the high rate of environmental degradation. I think this is supposed to be the whole country;

    vi) A forensic audit in the operation of Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd be instituted to ascertain whether or not Uganda has obtained value-for-money for the period Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd has operated in West Nile.

    vii) A compliance audit be carried out on Electricity Regulatory Authority in relation to the operations of Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd and WENRECO.”

    viii) I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I can see here that is was seconded by Hon. Feta Godfrey, Ayivu East County; Hon. Musa Noah; Hon. Atima Jackson; Hon Isaac Otimgiw; Hon. Afoyochan Esther; Hon. Mamawi; the whole House.  
The issues you have raised are very clear. So, I will give you three minutes to speak to your motion. 

MR SONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of West Nile and also on behalf of all the stakeholders involved in power supply to West Nile, we thank His Excellency the President for bringing the people of West Nile back from exile and that gave us some hope. (Applause)
The people of West Nile cried, talked, held meetings and prayed for energy access but up to today, poverty is increasing - energy poverty actually worsened. When Nyagak I came, we thought there was now hope.

In 2019, Mr Speaker, you are aware – I was there in a meeting and you were a member of my committee; we decided that we take the generators from Tororo after installing 10 megawatts of power to West Nile and we took them but they started facing fuel challenges. 

A report was given by one former minister that West Nile capacity to absorb power was still low. That is why they were delaying. I can assure you when sugar was introduced in Uganda, long time ago, there was no demand until the manufacturer started giving free sugar and people tested and they found it was good. (Applause)

I know there are many classical economists in the said theory, which says that supply creates demand. So, the statement that the demand is still low does not hold water. It is an insult to the people of West Nile. Supply the electricity and factories will automatically come. 

The economy of Uganda and West Nile is agro-based. You will agree with me that in the Parish Development Model, we are talking about agro-industrialisation. How are you going to promote agro-industrialisation without electricity? (Applause) How are you going to promote the agro-industrialisation without doubling production in agriculture through solar irrigation, which also requires electricity? So, this is a challenge. It will not succeed, unless we address the challenge of energy.

Government programmes that are in place like PDM and Youth Livelihood Programme all support enterprises that require electricity. That is why they are failing. The impact is very grave on health, education, economy and security. 

Two years ago, Zombo District was attacked by some criminals because most of the young people were deceived to go to fight, just because they had been promised to earn Shs 500,000. If they had installed electricity and they were continuing with the Government programmes of doing maybe small enterprises like welding, they would not have been deceived to go to DR Congo to attack Uganda. However, after coming back from exile, the people of West Nile said, “Never again shall we go back to the bush”. (Applause) –(Member timed out.)

Can I conclude, Mr Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes but Honourable Member, you have colleagues who are also going to contribute. I want them to have some time also.

MR SONGA: Can I conclude?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, please, conclude.

MR SONGA: We said, “Never again shall we go to the bush. We just need the roads; we just need the electricity”. What is also important to note is that we have high revenue points of Vurra, Padea and Goli generating high revenue for Uganda. Even if we retained 10 per cent, we would have electricity and roads. 

So, I do not want to take all the time but I pray that fuel be provided urgently because there is an emergency to the people of West Nile, so that we have reliable electricity. Thank you very much. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Can we hear from hon. Feta? The seconders, I am giving you three minutes each.

5.23
MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament, urging Government to urgently address the electricity challenges in the West Nile region.

By 2003, West Nile and the greater Arua and Nebbi had 1,200 consumers connected to the grid. They were consuming about 1,100 megawatts. Today, the segment of consumers in three sub regions, majorly Madi, Arua and Greater Nebbi sub regions constitute about 27,000 consumers. 

The Government, through Rural Electrification Agency, extended the network to the parts of Yumbe, Koboko, Terego, Pakwach, Madi-Okollo, Moyo and Adjumani and over the years, the demand for the consumption of power has grown beyond 15 megawatts and is still growing. 

Some of the major processing plants and factories like Adriko’s Seven Hills Vodka, Aruaform, Malaika Beverages and Bread Company were forced to close due to inadequate power supplied. British American Tobacco (BAT), which used to grow leaf tobacco in West Nile, could not establish a plant due to inadequate power supply and therefore, the people in the region only grew tobacco but did not reap the benefits of processing. 

Adriko’s Seven Hills Plant, which was consuming 750 kilowatts daily, was forced to close and shift its plant to Nalukolongo, where they have now expanded to processing beverages, glucose processing and water production. They directly employ about 200 staff and indirectly engage over 600 people in the economy of Uganda. 

Today, we have Meridian Tobacco that consumes about 1.2 megawatts. That company operates on a double shift processing and running line. It has about 300 direct staff. It involves 15,000 farmers who sell their products to Meridian Tobacco.

The National Water and Sewerage Corporation plant in Arua pumps water from different drilled boreholes to the reservoirs to supply the greater Arua and Koboko. They need about one megawatt to do their job well. This means that without power, the entire region does not have water and this is likely to lead to a health crisis. Homes and hotels do not have water.

In Koboko town alone, National Water and Sewerage Corporation needs 650 kilowatts to run their plant to produce water and supply hotels and domestic use. MTN alone has over 40 masts connected to the grid of Arua and each mast consumes 15 kilowatts and in total, on a daily basis, the 40 masts consume 600 kilowatts. 

The Small and Medium Enterprises are over 400 on that network and they consume all on three-phase lines and they pay a lot of money to WENRECO. These include banks, hotels, metal fabricators, workshops, petrol stations and millers. Their demand alone on the grid is about 3.5 megawatts. If Nyagak was operating at full capacity, it would only be consumed by the Small and Medium Enterprises. 

These businesses create a lot of employment and pay huge taxes to Uganda Revenue Authority, which enables the Government to offer services to different sectors in this country. Government institutions like universities, secondary schools, tertiary institutions, all connected to three phase-lines, demand about two megawatts.

Insecurity in the central business centre of Arua has risen because in the last six weeks, security lights have not been working. Hooligans are robbing women who are coming from home to the markets. Those who board off buses are robbed. Many visitors have become victims and fear to move freely in Arua. 

An example is a staff of Parliament of Uganda who transported Members to the burial of hon. Godfrey Onzima’s father, who was robbed at the hotel corridors on Avenue Road, next to Equity Bank in Arua City. 

Service providers thrive on dishonesty and cannot be consistent in generation of supply of electricity. WENRECO has two licences; one licence to generate 3.5 megawatts of electricity from its Nyagak 1 dam plant, which has two turbines, currently only generating 1.75 megawatts because the second turbine was taken down –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, did you time hon. Feta?

MR FETA: Please, give me one minute to finish.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need other colleagues to speak. Honourable Member, you have colleagues from the region. I need them to also be seen by their people.

MR FETA: Mr Speaker, could you kindly allow me to finish?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

MR FETA: The fact of the matter is the inconsistency and the continuous dishonesty of the service providers need to be brought to light. Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd and WENRECO have been giving citizens inconsistent information. They claim that they have shifted the turbine to Nairobi for repairs but we have quotations here that indicate that these things were repaired locally. The quotation, purchase order and even payment details are here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to lay them on the Table? 

MR FETA: Exactly. I want to lay them. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR FETA: Secondly, Government contracted Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd to generate and supply to WENRECO. However, Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd does not have capacity to generate electricity. They have consistently run out of fuel. On 13 December 2021, I tabled a matter of national importance, concerning their failure to supply electricity. Today, I also want to lay this on the Table that Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd has drawn fuel for from local suppliers and failed to pay. Here is the supply sheet and the balance of Shs 252 million, which they have not paid for 17 months after they have drawn this fuel. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. As I call Dr Musa, Honourable Minister, you are going to respond but this is a straightforward matter. We have glossed over it and massaged it. I do not know what could be wrong. Everyone knows WENRECO cannot manage. 

Honourable minister, this is a matter over which some of the colleagues and I closely worked with Hon. Songa in the 10th Parliament. I remember we met at Lake Victoria Hotel, Entebbe and ERA clearly told us Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd cannot manage. 

At that time, they told us there was a deficit of three megawatts in West Nile. We said, okay, if there is a deficit, as a quick measure, let us put thermal generators. 
Thermal generators were transferred from Tororo to West Nile and they said they were for five megawatts. However, later on, we came to understand it was for eight megawatts. 

The information I have is, whereas they were charging money for eight megawatts, they were supplying only five. They will clarify but it was less than five; that is what I know. I am trying to put pieces together. Later, ERA discovered that these people were being paid for power that they were not supplying. 

Therefore, ERA started deducting from the money they were supposed to be paid because they are paid on time. The Government is paying them on time and there should not be any question. 

In the end, these people said, you are taking away all the money and they failed to buy fuel. I remember I intervened personally; I called the head of ERA and the minister at that time - I do not think it was Hon. Ruth. They agreed to help, intervened and started giving Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd money beyond what they were even supposed to be getting in advance so that they could buy fuel. 

We have installed enough capacity because I am sure if all the eight megawatts, which are alleged to be installed in West Nile, can be utilised, we would not be having these issues. However, we also have redundant thermal generators in Tororo. This is because we had around 100 megawatts of standby thermal. 

Therefore, it is a shame when I read Hon. Okaasai’s statement that we have over 1000 megawatts but we are consuming only 800. Yet. patients are dying in hospitals in West Nile because we cannot give them power. The Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa that I know, before we leave here, will give us a solution. 

Next week, I want the Committee on Natural Resources to go to West Nile. Please, go with MPs, come back and report here. We have to sort out the issue of West Nile. These are our colleagues. Honourable minister, we want to give you all the support needed by the ministry to sort out the issue of power in West Nile.
MR OTAALA: Mr Speaker, most obliged. Yes, we shall make sure that the committee moves together with the Honourable Members from West Nile so that we explore this matter and come up with a solution. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On Thursday, I will give you space on the Order Paper to come back and report here.

MR OTAALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. However, I would like to beg for your indulgence so that we get the necessary facilitation as soon as possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Speaker has directed.

MR OTAALA: Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Once the Speaker has directed, you know - Hon. Musa, it is really painful.

5.35
DR NOAH MUSA (Independent, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 60(1) of the Rules of Procedure to second the motion and I would like to speak on the impact of lack of power on social service. 

As a medical officer, I worked in West Nile about 10 years ago in Arua Hospital and Koboko Hospital. At that time, we had situations where you would get blackouts in the middle of a surgical procedure. You would finish closing a patient using the flashlight of a telephone or a fluorescent lamp.

10 years later, the same situation is still happening in West Nile. Reliable electricity is required in health facilities to enable the frontline health workers to carry out their work, to power lifesaving equipment, to run ICT equipment, to ensure that health facilities can conduct surveillance and report and to also supply or to pump water for the facilities. 

Health facilities in the whole of West Nile, with the exception of the health facility on the highway from Pakwach to Nebbi and then Moyo and Adjumani, there are only a few of these health facilities that are connected to the current electricity we have. Most of the health facilities are run on solar power and we all know that solar power has challenges of weather and storage, especially the capacities installed in these health facilities, with the exception of critical units like cold chain units, which are designed to always have power. Because of this, most of the facilities have not been able to undertake critical services. 

For example, the new referral hospital in Yumbe - it is one of the best hospitals in the country now. All the equipment is digitalised and they need the power but the people are unable to use these facilities. They have the best neonatal unit in the region but they cannot use it because it needs 24 hour power supply. They have to refer patients to Arua Hospital or to other facilities. 

This increases the cost of accessing care and receiving care for the citizens. It even increases the cost of Government providing services because these hospitals have to –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I am allowing you one minute to conclude.

DR MUSA: It is the same situation with education. The education institutions face the same challenge. Our students are unable to study overnight. They cannot access online learning and you will remember during COVID-19, online learning became a mode of learning in the country. 

The same thing applies to accessing Government services. You know that Government wants, by the end of NDP III, to have 80 per cent of services online. You cannot access these services unless you walk several kilometres to the nearby town and sometimes you will still fail because the power we receive from WENRECO and Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd is not reliable. 

Mr Speaker, I, therefore, would like to beg you to support this motion so that these issues are addressed. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I still have the seconders of the motion. Hon. Atima -

5.39
MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second this motion for a resolution of Parliament urging the Government of Uganda to urgently address the persistent, unreliable and unstable power supply of electricity in the West Nile region. 

Mr Speaker, allow me, on behalf of the people of Arua Central, the people of West Nile and on my own behalf, to thank Madam Speaker, Rt Hon. Anita Annet Among for donating solar panels to help save the situation in Arua Regional Referral hospital. I thank her very much. She is a real mother of this nation. (Applause)

There has been failure or delay to connect West Nile region to the national grid, which is industrially reliable and stable - yet it is a right of all citizens in Uganda to have access to power. I, therefore, second this motion for the following reasons:
    1. Poor supply by the service provider - that is, WENRECO and Eletro Maxx Uganda Ltd has caused serious damage in that region.

    2. Unstable supply of power has led to the closure of many businesses like welding workshops, milling machines and many others that have closed in that region, which is from the business hub of Arua Central – (Member timed out.)

Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, please, you first ask for extra time. You do not allocate yourself more.  (Laughter) 

MR ATIMA: Thank you very much. The power issue in West Nile is a threat to the socio-economic transformation advocated for through the Parish Development Model. For instance, in my constituency, Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Local Government constructed a multi-billion value addition facility in Awindiri Ward, which was commissioned by His Excellency in 2020. From that time to-date, that factory is idle yet, it has a capacity to produce four tonnes of grains or cereal in an hour. This could employ a good number of youths and women.

Equally, Muni University that has the state-of-art laboratory, well-equipped with the machines that have capacity to carry out COVID-19 tests in the region has failed because of the failure of stable high industrial voltage power. 

The continuous power outages has led to the breakdown of many production machines in that city and region. Therefore, my prayers are:
    1. Government of Uganda gives the people of West Nile -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, the prayers are in the motion. You are just a seconder.

MR JACKSON ATIMA: Okay. I second that – (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just second the prayers in the motion. You are limited to that.

MR JACKSON ATIMA: I second the prayers in the motion and ask Government to immediately restore power in West Nile region so that people can enjoy the privileges that are meant for them. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The men have spoken a lot. Let me allow two ladies. Hon. Esther Afoyochan and Hon. Ruth Lematia. 

5.43
MS ESTHER AFOYOCHAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker for this time. It is becoming increasingly difficult to be a legislator in West Nile for these reasons:

As Members of Parliament from West Nile, we do our best to ensure that our voices are heard and services delivered to our people but we are only frustrated by the quality of services that eventually arrive in our places. 

Zombo, for instance, is in the pipeline of getting a new factory for processing tea. Imagine hundreds of acres of people's land is under tea cultivation. As we talk, it is almost becoming a bush. Tea is growing into big trees. 

While we are trying to solve the factory issue and almost succeeding, now we have the power issue. I pray that this time round, we get a solution that can work for our people for the rest of the time. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, I want to assure you that as the leadership of Parliament and with the support of colleagues, we are going to work together to make it easy for you to be a legislator in West Nile. (Applause) That is why we are here to support each other from all shades. No one should even fear going to their constituency because they come from a certain area that is not having services. 

Therefore, we are going to support you and take it up more than anyone could imagine to ensure we sort out that issue. 

Hon. Lematia? Then I pick the Opposition. We need also the members of the Opposition to support it.

5.46
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. I want to bring to you the misery of our youth. There are very many of them loitering on the streets because they have nothing to do. There is no way you can say, “Engage yourself in welding.” 

Many of us in West Nile have tried to resettle these youths for some activity so that they can get money but they cannot do it because there is no electricity. In Katwe, people are flourishing because power is there. However, in West Nile, there is no electricity. 

You cannot organise the youth that you – (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I am giving you two minutes. Hon. Lematia, please, conclude. The rest are doing just two minutes. 

MS LEMATIA: My conclusion is that if this power is brought to West Nile, it will solve our problem with the idle youth. Thank you. 

5.47
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to expound on the point of skilling the youth. His Excellency is doing his best. There is a team of youth right from Pakwach up to Zombo who are undertaking the skilling programme.

These skilling programmes range from tailoring to welding, carpentry, mention them. A number of them require reliable electricity. We are not saying we do not have electricity in the West Nile but it is not reliable at all. It cannot move our people to the right socio-economic transformation that we all desire in this country. 

The other thing is that West Nile, like any other region in Uganda - when you go downtown, you will be surprised to realise that there is a particular zone in Kampala here that is known as Arua Park. This means that we are very industrious and enterprising people. 

In any other part of Uganda, you will find economic activities running up to as late as 2.00 a.m. However, in West Nile, come six o'clock, darkness has befallen you. How shall we compete with the rest of the country if our children cannot have adequate power to do preps, study online and do research? Thank you.

5.49
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion. We are lucky, the honourable Minister Ruth Nankabirwa at that time was the Minister of State for Defence when they were constructing the Karuma-Pakwach Road during the insurgency. 

Mr Speaker, how can a Government, which managed to construct a road during the Kony insurgency fail to transmit power to West Nile when there is sanity? (Applause)

Secondly, these people are not crying for free power. They want constant power so that they can pay you tariffs. I have gone to West Nile. I know that region and there is business. Once there is business, the Government will generate income. Why should they beseech you, yet above all, they are giving you votes? You are not fair to them. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, this week, I gave a number of avenues that West Nile has. What is happening – how do you tell us that an incompetent company is still continuing to produce power and it has no fuel? Then, give them fuel free of charge and people enjoy their lives. That is what you are doing to ferries crossing Lake Victoria. It is not their problem that there is no electricity. They are willing to pay but you are not giving them stable power. 

I pray that the Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa - serious as you have stated - takes this matter seriously. It is not a matter of moving a motion and you keep it. 

Mr Speaker, I am happy that you have insisted that we have to give support. The honourable members are saying that they go back to their voters and they are harassed: “Where is power?” They are saying it here. The Treasury Memoranda of Government should release facts that provide the power to the people of West Nile –(Member timed out.)

5.51
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue concerning provision of power to West Nile, at one time, I worked in West Nile in the district of Moyo. At that time, we used to get power between 7.00 p.m. and 10.00 p.m.; everything would take place at that time. 
    
However, we are happy that the stations we are talking about are improving the placement of mini grids, which are, internationally, being encouraged. This is because connectivity to the main grid may be very expensive. 

We are saying that since the region has its own stations, these mini grids must be functional. They are reducing the challenges we find in connecting people on the main grid because these days, there are speculators who come on the way and need to be compensated. At the end of it, power is generated but it cannot reach the final end-user. 

The other issue is on the payment of Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd and the intended megawatts. How are we paying these people? Are we paying them per megawatts produced or the number of days worked? It is very important that we pay them based on the megawatts produced so that the service they give to Uganda is equivalent to the expense that we meet. 

My additional prayer is to ensure that our people also protect the riverbanks so that these companies have no excuse. There is a time we went –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable chairperson of the committee, Hon. Christine is raising a very important point. In your work, we want you to study how much money has been paid to Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd. How much power have they delivered to the grid? That is very important. This business of saying “capacity charge” – it is a very important issue. 

Another thing you can do is to contact the Attorney-General. Such contracts have what we call “service level clauses.” The service level must be at a certain level – the service reliability. You must at least have 90 per cent or 80 per cent. If you do not, you should be penalised. Therefore, we would like to know whether these agreements have service level clauses. If Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd is not meeting that service level, is it being charged the liquidated damages?
    
Hon. Fox Odoi will explain to you better since he is your neighbour. These are issues we must look out for. I am really concerned about a company saying it does not have fuel - but we are buying your power. We are not taking free power. How do you say you do not have fuel? This means you are not able to deliver. If so, we should get someone else. We have a thermal plant at Namanve, which we paid for recently – 100 per cent. He should, maybe, think of transferring it to West Nile as an emergency measure for Government, if it can help sort the West Nile issue.

5.55
MR ROBERT SSEKITOLEKO (NUP, Bamunanika County, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue we are now discussing on electricity, it is just Arua that has been made a benchmark. West Nile is a benchmark because every Ugandan - wherever he is - would wish to invest where there is development. The basis of development is electricity, as a factor. When you move to Arua, they are crying for the same. The Eastern Region is also crying for the same. Where are we going to see that Ugandans are safe? We have free water and electricity. Poles are cheap. Wires can be transported anywhere. We now ask ourselves where the problem is. If the minister has a problem, let Ugandans also be part of the failure so that we do not blame anyone. 

If the ministry is working towards the success, let Ugandans also be part of that success. If it means that we need to surrender land and poles, we should do so in order to give a hand to the Government, where it has failed. They are not declaring where they will fail but they are always giving us hope. We are tired of hope –
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, are you threatening to cross over to NRM so that you become the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development? 

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Yes, in Kyagulanyi’s government. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekitoleko, you need to understand that the case of West Nile is different because it is not connected to the national grid. That is the uniqueness of it. Therefore, we should not equate it to other areas that do not have electricity. In their case, the whole region is not connected. 

5.57
MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Parliament has an oversight role to play. Oftentimes, we are lamenting. It is our role, as Parliament, first, to monitor the operations of the ministry and the Government agencies. Therefore, who has gone wrong? If Parliament appropriated money and Government contracted Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd to supply eight megawatts and it, instead, supplied less than five: where is the problem?

Are we doing our role as people supposed to do an oversight role? Have we requested for damages? Everyone has a responsibility in this. Therefore, I request for an investigation into the operations of Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd, as an additional prayer. 

5.58
MR CHARLES ONEN (Independent, Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The problem of the people of West Nile is not only electricity but also the roads. I wish you could accompany that team going there on Thursday or next week. From Kampala to West Nile or to Arua, you spend more than 10 hours. You are lucky that your car has good tires and shock absorbers, Mr Speaker. 

The electricity service providers in West Nile have not only kept the people of West Nile in darkness but they have enabled darkness to live in them. (Text expunged)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, Honourable Member.

MR CHARLES ONEN: Please, give me time, Mr Speaker. 

My prayer is: the licences of service providers of electricity in West Nile should be terminated and be given to another company, which will provide electricity to the people of West Nile. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, there is guidance, which I gave you some time back. When you are on the Floor, do not respond to voices, which are off-record because you are getting matters, which are off-record and putting them on record. This disorganises our Hansard. 

Just remain focused – may be, you can seek protection and then I am able to come in as the Presiding Officer. Hon. Judith –(Interjection) I will allow you, honourable minister, towards the end.

6.01
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, you have seen the level of emotions that have been generated by the lack of power in West Nile. 

In 2016 when I first came to this Parliament, we were called for a retreat in Kyankwanzi. Hon. Alioni Odria presented the issues of electricity and the President gave directives on the issues of electricity in West Nile. However, I still see that there is no tangible action that has been done to this effect. 

If there was electricity in West Nile, I want to say it here without fear of contradiction, that region would never be the same. It would never be the same because first of all, poverty would be reduced; there would be a number of employment opportunities for our people - the youth and even the business communities. We are still crying for the same things year in, year out.

I think affirmative action needs to be taken for the West Nile once and for all, and no region should be left behind as far as fairness and equal opportunities are concerned. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will have one of our energy experts; there after, I will pick MPs from West Nile. 

6.03
MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Coming from a background of a constituency that is very close to many things but has no electricity, when you think you have gone to rest, at midnight, you get a call that there is nothing in a health centre - about five health centres III and they are telling you to provide some kerosene for the midwives to do their job. 

Coming from that background of having schools with computers that they cannot operate; they are just there idle, Mr Speaker, I cannot agree more with the motion that the honourable colleagues have presented because I identify closely with what is going on in West Nile. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sharifah - I am just going to give each of you a minute. All West Nile MPs, I have your list here. Each one of you will speak because it is your time. (Applause) 

6.04
MS SHARIFAH AATE-TABAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This came as a petition from a very brilliant girl from Koboko called Mercy who led a team from West Nile to Parliament of Uganda; so, I want to tell her; “Thank you, Mercy.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is she around so that we recognise her? Thank you. (Applause)

MS AATE-TABAN: If it were not for her, we would not be here right now, debating about this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I want to make a clarification. The MPs from West Nile have been raising this issue several times. So, maybe in the form of a petition, it had not come, but the MPs from West Nile - I remember there was a time even Hon. Feta nearly threatened violence on me. I remember Hon. Baba and all the others. Therefore, I wanted to make that clarification before your people that MPs from West Nile have been persistent on this issue, only that we had never given it the attention we have given it today.

MS AATE-TABAN: Mr Speaker, I am not denying the fact that the Members have been doing that; I am just saying that if it were not for this petition, probably, we would not have it on the Order Paper today. We probably would not have taken seriously the way we are taking it right now. Therefore, I thank the petitioners for that. 

Mr Speaker, business equipment has been blown in West Nile. In Koboko District, we only switch on street lights on big days because we do not have enough finances to cater for lights on the streets; you can imagine the level of insecurities we have in Koboko District. 

I doubt that the petitioners wanted WENRECO to stay in West Nile. They were not negotiating for anything. They wanted WENRECO to leave West Nile. 

Mr Speaker, we have power poles in some parts of Koboko District. West and North Division are empty with no connected lines rendering my people of Koboko useless and making us appear incapable of delivering to our capacity. 

In West Nile, we use 99 per cent biomass. That means we are destroying our forests by cutting our trees just to get charcoal - not only in the villages but also in the municipality. We are using biomass. 

This matter is more than serious. We are suffering from prolonged drought in West Nile. Therefore, our people need light. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.08
MR YOVAN ADRIKO NRM, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have suffered enough with the issue of electricity in West Nile. 

Honourable minister, you promised us that 2021, 2023 and 2024; this time, our people are not happy. That is why you see that the representatives have come because when they go to the grassroots, people think that we are not working enough and yet, we have always reminded Government.

However, this time, honourable minister, we are tired of your lies. We need implementation. It is good you are near me. I do not want to hear promise after promise. 

Secondly, I want to say that your ministry is full of corruption.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, that is unparliamentary language. The minister is not a liar. The minister gives the position of Government but implementation might delay. Please, withdraw that.

MR ADRIKO: Thank you very much. I withdraw that but I need implementation. Honourable minister, this time, we need implementation. 

Yesterday but one, I got a message from Arua that two women had died in Arua Hospital. I even sent one coffin because one of them was from my constituency. 

Thirdly, all petrol stations in my constituency were closed. we are suffering. Please, help us because we want to develop.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Leku? This is another energy expert.

6.10
MR JOEL LEKU (NRM, Terego West County, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

We are here to offer immediate and long-term solutions. 

One of the problems we have with Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd is supervision by ERA. ERA has failed to supervise Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd. They are actually sleeping on the job. The question is: who actually owns Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd, because whenever we go, we attempt to talk about Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd, the question stays there. We are diverted away from issues of Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd in this country. Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd has been giving lip services. Can we decentralise the supervision of Elect Maxx Uganda Ltd to the people of West Nile?

Secondly, Olwiyo station is already energised. Can we ever create that power from Olwiyo? Olwiyo is energised right from Kampala. Can we ever create that power across the Nile and connect it to the existing network of WENRECO?

Thirdly, the connection rate of electricity in West Nile is only at 7 per cent and we are looking at achieving the highest electricity connection by 2040. This is something we cannot do with thermal power anymore. This needs a national grid. We need really urgent attention to this. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.12
MS AGNES ACIBU (NRM, District Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity once again.

First of all, us, West-Nilers, when we talk about the issue of power, our temperatures rise above the normal. Why are our temperatures rising? We have had a number of insults, and I do believe that if our leaders; the political leaders, the ministry officials, would go and talk to the local layman there, I think something wrong would happen but it is our prayer that as we talk about the issue of power in West Nile, let the concerned ministry save the image of our Government.

Mr Speaker, you are aware that West Nile is pro this Government. As I talk, even our leadership is now getting afraid. How would they talk before our voters - because all along, whatever is promised has never been fulfilled. 

It is my prayer today that whatever we are talking about, let us see it being implemented. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Acibu.

6.13
MS JENNIFER DRIWARU (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we talk about socio-economic transformation, for us in West Nile, it is a nightmare because several times, we have had engagements with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development talking about power supply, connection to the national grid, we have spoken all the English and all the Lugbara and all the other languages from West Nile. (Laughter) 

It is our prayer today – because enough is enough. Last week, I went to Maracha and I have a skilling project there. I took all the machines; the sowing machines and the computers. I spent a full week waiting for power. I have not installed those machines. 

It is our humble prayer today, for us to go and convince our voters, you need to help us as a ministry and as Government. Thank you so much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Siraji?

6.15
MR SIRAJ EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 

Mr Speaker, in 1986, West-Nilers were repatriated from Congo and South Sudan by NRM Government and they were promised that it is only this Government that could solve their issue. And sincerely, the Government did part of its endeavours and mandates. 

After realising that the Government was not living to its mandate, there were a lot of rebel activities that emerged in West Nile including West Nile, which made a comprehensive agreement with the Government in 2002. One of the fundamental issues in that agreement was the power issue. It has now stayed 20 years without being solved. Had it been the judgement day today, all the Governments that have ruled Uganda would have been sent to hell because of a sin of the problem of West Nile; of not putting West Nile in the agenda of the Government of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, it is, therefore, our cry. We do not know whether this Government is going to stay forever or it is going to come down but within the limited time of the - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otimgiw?

6.17
MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.
 
Earlier this year, under your leadership, you instructed the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Indeed, we had two field trips to West Nile. We started from Olwiyo, we actually started from Karuma, visited the forest there. We left there and went to Olwiyo and we moved. We have seen the tower being erected. In Padyere Constituency, we have seen the towers reaching almost the stations.

The only problem is that the speed is now slowing 
down. We understand the deadline of September, which we had communicated to our people, has now been moved over to March next year. 

Earlier in the year, actually before WENRECO’s contract was renewed, West Nile Parliamentary Caucus raised the concern that they should not renew the contract of WENRECO but we understand the ministry went ahead and renewed the contract of WENRECO. We carry the peoples’ concern. 

Mr Speaker, in Padyere constituency, we have already installed over 40 solar panels, because of the insecurity in some of the areas. Maybe, I should bring that Bill to the ministry so that they can pay me back that money because they are supposed to be providing light in that area. 

And when we talk about light, Mr Speaker, the connection in West Nile is only around the road. There is no connection even in one house behind the main road. That is how West Nile is connected. So, I beg that actually this issue is worked on. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mamawi?

6.19
MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, any MP from West Nile, I am reading on the list. If you have seen properly, I am reading. I have your names here. Your Whip for West Nile gave me the names. So, I am reading. 

MR MAMAWI: Thank you Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. When we talk about power in this country, sometimes, we West-Nilers feel isolated. 

In Adjumani, in our own language, they call power Aziko. “Aziko” means, it goes without saying bye. If you are talking about power in my place, people will start to fight with you because they are not seeing the importance of our own Government helping them in terms of power. 

As we are in the House here, we have Generals. During the time of Kony, they were able to evacuate Konyfrom this country. If they were able to do so, what about this small issue of electricity which is causing insecurity in the country,especially in the West Nile region? We have health centresIII and IV which are not connected to electricity. 

When we talk about electricity in the West Nile region, it is a different perception. In my district, we have power from the national grid.What we are talking about is not having power. We are talking about its reliability and the voltage that we have. During the last visit the President had in our area, he promised that he was going to upgrade power to 32 megawatts for Adjumani so that this can help to operationalize industries in the area. 

As we speak, we are still in this- We have an industrial hub which is almost complete in our area but we do not know what power we are going to use to see that these industries are put to use. It is a very big concern. Arua is a centre of West Nile. If you go –(Member timed out.)

6.21
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the idea that this petition should be debated. The issue of power has not started today. In 2018, when we realised we had followed all other avenues and failed, we thought that the best would be to meet the President. When we had the retreat at Kyankwanzi, it was time for the President to come and deliver his speech. We decided and mobilised that once he enters, we should not sit down such that we get his attention and he will definitely ask what the issue is. When he entered and we did so-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are revealing your tactics. Next time he will not. (Laughter)

MR ONZIMA: We had a meeting with the President and in that meeting, all the staff of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, including the ministers, were called. We agreed that as we wait for the power of Karuma, there should be a connection through Isimba Dam, Dokolo, Gulu andAdjumani such that the West Nile region is connected in a reverse way. 

Some time back, there used to be an argument that taking power from Jinja to Arua would be very far. However, if you can go on Google and get the distance between Jinja and Kigali, you may find that it is over 600 kilometres but power is taken up to there. We have also been exporting power to Kenya. Arua from Jinja, according to Google, is 482 kilometres but here they say, power will be lost on the way. Which kind of argument is this? 

Mr Speaker, this is a serious issue. When you look at the issue of power and road infrastructure, I am tempted to say, for us in West Nile, it seems to be a political issue. Look at the road cover in West Nile. Government develops through a road map. The development road map in Uganda is that in the National Development Plan I and II, the focus should be on infrastructural development. 

National Development Plan III should be issues of income. That is why the Parish Development Model was brought. Whereas in other areas the attention is now income, for us we are still struggling with infrastructure. You cannot talk about accessibility of markets when there is no road. You cannot talk about value addition when there is no electricity-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.24
MR JOHN LEMATIA (NRM, Ayivu Division West, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the youngest Lematia.(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you can say the male Lematia because we have the female Lematia. That would be better because we are not sure about age. 

MR JOHN LEMATIA: As people of West Nile, we have always been deceived during elections that when you elect NRM, power will be brought definitely. That is why if you see the percentage of MPs from the West Nile region, we are all NRM with the exception of two. We continue to wonder and we continue to admit that we shall continue to be deceived. Time will reach and we shall not be deceived anymore. When we went to Kyankwanzi, my-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I warned you on the issue of the language. There is failure in delivery of a promise. It is not “deceiving” because deceiving is intentional.

MR JOHN LEMATIA: I admit, Mr Speaker. When we were in Kyankwanzi, my colleague, Hon. Geoffrey Feta, raised the same issue. He was provocatively suppressed on the issue of power. I have come simply with a question from West Nile, which this House needs to answer. Is the West Nile region part of Uganda? Are we in Uganda? If we belong somewhere, can the- (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are in Uganda. That is why you are speaking in the Parliament of Uganda. 

6.26
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of power in West Nile, as all have alluded to, has been a long debate. I want to say, in the presence of the minister here, that I think partly it has been because ofmis-advice to the President and other people in the ministry. Why do I say this? In one meeting, the President asked one of the former ministers whom I am not going to mention, “You are saying that West Nile cannot consume the power if it is given to them now. Does it mean that the wires will begin to tear or what will happen if you take this power to West Nile?” The President was speaking loudly. He made a phone call on loudspeaker and everyone in the meeting heard. I think that mis-advice of the minister is one of the contributing factors.

We were with the technical team from the Ministry of Energy. There has been a very big betrayal between the service providers and some ministry officials. One of the senior engineers, in the meeting with the Speaker, was able to lie to the meeting that- This is an Engineer who has never been in Nyagak for all this time. If you go to Nyagak1, where they claim that the turbines are working, you cannot even get an access route to the power plant –(Member timed out.)

6.29
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Aringa East County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Text expunged)

Indeed, there is no industrialisation without power. Therefore, the people from West Nile are yearning for power and they are right. We are hopeful as people from West Nile, although it has taken us long, that soon it is going to be better. When you go to West Nile, apart from these administrative challenges that have been caused by Eletro Maxx Uganda Ltd and WENRECO, we have hope because we can now see poles, a sign that power is coming to West Nile. 

My wish is that we must support the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to get money so that we are connected to the national grid. Had we been connected to national grid, we would not be crying because of fuel.

The rest of the country is still stable because they are connected to the national grid. Therefore, when the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development comes here with a supplementary, we will be happy to support so that we are connected to the national grid. (Applause)Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member.  (Text expunged) I will invoke Rule 229 that that part is expunged from the record.  

6.32
MS MOSES ALEPER (NRM,	Chekwii County (Kadam), Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very grateful for this opportunity. In normal circumstances, I associate with people from West Nile, like other people in Uganda, and I can associate with West Nile given the pain they have been in, for all this time. 

I would like to take this opportunity also to tell Uganda that it is only West Nile that is not connected, as a region, to the national grid. (Applause) I implore the minister in charge of this particular sector to take this opportunity to show ownership of some of these weaknesses we have as a Government. 

This cannot continue for all this time. We know how productive West Nile is. Over a week ago, I was in West Nile but I was shocked when it reached 7.00 p.m. there was no electricity. I thought there was some other issue happening in West Nile. The bottom line is that the service providers that have been given the responsibility to handle that area are not capable of handling the issue. And this is just happening under our noses. 
	
Those of you who supervise this sector, why can’t you own this weakness and say, “Please, we know there is this problem, let us handle it squarely”, other than every time being defensive. In fact, that is why Government is blamed. If someone from West Nile talks of “deceiving, deceiving” - Mr Speaker, if something continues for over 20 years, it becomes a lie; it is no longer –(Member timed out.)

6.34
MS ANNET MUGISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The issue of electricity cuts across but the magnitude differs. I, therefore, take this time to sympathise with the people of West Nile. 

One of our colleagues this afternoon said that it is becoming difficult to legislate. In Bushenyi District, poles were put up two years ago, but up to now, they have not been connected. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In fact, it is now more than two years.

MS ANNET MUGISHA: Last week, I went to Bushenyi to attend a burial, but before I completed my condolence message, the mourners attacked me. They tasked me to elucidate why power is not connected. Now that the honourable minister is here, and that the people of Bushenyi are attentively listening, my prayers- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable member, under such a motion, you cannot bring new prayers. You only support it.

MS ANNET MUGISHA: Okay. I want to ask that those poles that are already put up be connected and they should do work systematically. 

You find that in a parish, they have put poles but again, some families have been left out moreover they have no plan for such families. I thank you.

6.36
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I only sympathise with my sister Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, but the way I know her, if she had been in this office for a long time, this would not have happened. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, we know wherever she has been -in the defence ministry, she helped us with Kony. In the fishing sector, where she was before - and when she was our Government Chief Whip here - Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, the only thing you can give the people of West Nile is power. (Applause) I have no doubt that under your leadership the people of West Nile will have power.

Failure of one part of the country to develop effects the whole country; it affects all of us. And we know how much money comes from Arua to Kampala, and to the other parts of the country. 

I was embarrassed when we went to bury the late Hon. Abiriga.Before even the President could complete his message, that was the question which was again put to the President. During the 2011 campaign, we went with Dr Kizza Besigye and in 2015, with Gen. Muntu to Adjumani, but I was surprised that the whole Adjumani District does not have power. I could not believe this was happening in Uganda. I thought it was only a few areas, but the whole region did not have power. 

This Parliament has always supported under the World Bank loan or other loans to provide power to every subcounty in Uganda, so what happened? That is the question I would ask to those ministers who were there at that time. What happened?

Mr Speaker, I think Parliament has been supportive to West Nile but those technocrats in that ministry should tell us whatever happened. Otherwise, I have hope and believe that Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, with her capable leadership can help –(Member timed out.)

6.38
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sincerely want to thank the mover of this motion and the seconders. When you asked those who were seconding the motion, I found myself standing, and I feared that one person would come from the Opposition to put me out of order. 

Sincerely speaking, I was supporting this motion because the motion is energising the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. Therefore, I appreciate all that my colleagues have put before this august House.

There are two things here, Mr Speaker: The first one is to handle the prevailing problem of Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd not having fuel. We know how Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd started; we will not continue lamenting. When I joined the ministry, I did not focus so much on Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd because I knew that when Nyagak III comes on board, with its 6.5 megawatts, Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd will be something of the past. Therefore, I am seeing Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd as - if we continue with it - a security plant. 

First of all, energy generated through fuel is too expensive. So, we are working, in the ministry, to make sure that we get a different source of supply of power. We may require to amend the contract with Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd and we will need Shs5 billion as start-up –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go on, honourable minister.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We will need Shs5 billion as start-up to make sure that we find a different route of supplying fuel to Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd. Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd has problems. Whenever we pay them on their account, money is chopped off because of the problems they have. So, we want to divert that.

The second issue is WENRECO. WENRECO will be something of the past. We are coming up with our reforms, where we are going to amalgamate the so many distribution companies in the country. The moment we make our Uganda National Energy Company, we are going to see WENRECO done away with. 

Those are two critical issues, which we are working on. Mr Speaker, there is no region that I have visited - my minister of state and I - more than West Nile. I even proclaimed that the issue of unstable power in West Nile will be done away with.

I went to Nyagak III because I was also told that it would not be able to generate; that it was abandoned. On 23 December, when people were planning to go for Christmas, I was in Nyagak III and I found work going on very well. 

I went back again last month – July - to check on the progress and I discovered that we need Shs22 billion to be able to ship in the turbines so that we begin generation. I wish that we can go by our programme of bringing on board Nyagak III in March 2023. 

I want to appreciate the pain and anxiety of the people of West Nile but I must also state that the Members of Parliament, right from the Eighth Parliament, have been on this issue and I want to appreciate them. This matter has been discussed and they have continued. The new Members of Parliament have joined those that have been in Parliament. I am seeing light at the end of the tunnel.

So – (Interjections)-  No, I don ot have time. I am clarifying –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, please, respect each other. 

MS NANKABIRWA: That is short term. I have mentioned the issue of fuel and the money that we need. However, there is also, as in short term - and I have heard the MPs testifying here that they visited Karuma. They were able to see the progress. They have visited Olwiyo substation, which is completed –(Interjection)- later, please -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let the minister conclude. 

MS NANKABIRWA:  They are seeing the pylons. We even went through the lines with some of the Members of Parliament, to see the progress. So, the good news I am bringing here, Mr Speaker, is that Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited has been availed with resources to construct a two-kilometre, 33kV power line, which will see power evacuated from Olwiyo to connect West Nile to the grid from Olwiyo substation. 

Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited is expected to complete the two kilometre-stretch of 33kV power line by the end of October this year. Since we have power now - because that line has been energised – Karuma-Olwiyohas been energised. 

Once this 33kV line is connected, there will be no reason why we do not see power being connected. I am told by the technical people that this line is going to be completed in October this year. So, this is what I am going to follow up, to see to it that it is done. 

Well, we also have to appreciate the fact that when COVID-19 came in, we reduced on the staff that were interacting with the people. My ministry interacts with people, in terms of acquiring right of way and all that. So, it sort of affected our speed.

In the long term, Madam Speaker, we expect the following programme to be done - the ongoing construction of 132kV Lira-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua transmission line and associated substations. The project sites were handed over to the contractors in August 2020 and construction is expected to be completed by the end of March 2023. 

The line will not only connect West Nile to the national grid but also provide industrial power supply to the region, as well as the Greater North. The project scope is as follows:

    1. Construction of 189-kilometre, 132kV line from Kole substation. Kole Substation is almost completed, except that we suffered vandalism recently, but we are trying to correct it.

    2. Kole-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua transmission line and the line will have capacity to supply about 200 megawatts.

    3. A substation at Kole, which I have mentioned, will be able to supply 80 megawatts.

    4. A substation atGulu with capacity to supply 80Megavolt- Amperes(MVA).

    5. A substation at Nebbiwith capacity to supply 40 MVA.

    6. 33kV short power line connecting substations to the existing distribution network. 

Here, we will be answering the question of, “When will West Nile be connected to the national grid?”

Overall, work on the transmission line is 71 per cent complete, while that of the substation is about 60 per cent complete. 

There is also a problem of acquisition of the project corridor, which was due to the difficult project-affected people. We are working on this. 

Hon. Lokeris was tasked to go and talk to these people to persuade them to allow the Government to continue with the construction of these lines, as they pursue the cases in courts. When court rules that they should be given more money then, Government will give them more money rather than putting injunctions and you put projects to stall. 

It is their right that they are given money worth their land. However, it is also the right of Government to compulsorily acquire land – given by the Constitution – provided Government is able to compensate the people.

Mr Speaker, I know that I do not have enough time but I just want to assure my colleagues that we decided in the ministry, together with my colleague Hon. Okaasai - and sometimes when I am unable to meet the MPs from West Nile, he stands in. We are committed to make sure that we remove the shame of our Government and provide power to this region. And why not? But we are seeing the light at the end of the tunnel. 

I know that we have a 132KV line from the Gulu-Agago-Aswa transmission line. There will also be associated substations; these will also help us to connect power. 

I do not know whether you will allow me to respond to the MP from Bushenyi about the poles which are erected without wires and energisation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you already talked about that. Okay, just respond quickly.

MS NAKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I must appreciate my colleagues who have written to me expressing the need for densification and the intensification of the areas where a transformer of a lesser capacity was installed, which cannot now serve the people because of more consumers coming on board. 

However, also the issue of poles which were erected; there are wires, but there is no energy and some do not have wires. We are expecting money under the electricity scale-up project, which is going to be used by the money from the World Bank. 

Already the Minister of Finance has prepared a Cabinet memo for this money and the Prime Minister authorised. We expect that money to help complete these projects - where we have poles without wires and where we have wires without energy; where we have good big installations and seed schools which do not have - under the electricity scale-up project which is coming and I already know that this august House is going to support me on that. 

That is my priority, Mr Speaker, to deal with the stalled project before any other project. Thank you, my colleagues from West Nile; we are standing together and we shall see West Nile’s issue resolved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition, I will allow you one minute because I have another item. Colleagues, I do not have the time, everything spoken here is useful.

6.52
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is to first and foremost salute the honourable members from West Nile for the solidarity that you have exhibited in the push for the electricity. In fact, I also throw my full weight behind this motion. (Applause)

However, in the response of the honourable minister, she is very ambiguous - because you cannot talk of the contract with Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd. Are you going to terminate the contract? You have not come out clearly; because if you do, you will be indirectly giving again another killing to X to go to court for breach of the contract and then get costs. 

What you should have actually supported should have been that prayer in the motion of Hon. Songa about instituting a special audit into these fellows that are misappropriating fuel, because even if we were to get a fuel waiver, and then you give to the same monsters, they will not deliver. 

I know that the Speaker forgot to mention that I was part of the team with Hon. Songa on the same committee. We fought tooth and nail in the Ninth Parliament - of course before you maliciously shifted me from that Committee on Natural Resources, honourable minister -(Laughter) - on a lighter note. 

Mr Speaker, my plea in this is that there are untouchables among the owners of that Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd; Patrick Bitature lately, was adversely mentioned and many others. These fellows should not only be investigated, but should be prosecuted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague -

MS NANKABIRWA: Yes, but, Mr Speaker, when I stand and I support the motion, I fully support it. Therefore, you should not again penalise me for not having mentioned the prayer for the forensic test because I support the motion; it speaks for itself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, over 25 of you have submitted on this motion, which we have given over two hours because we wanted, as a Parliament, to send a very strong message of support to our colleagues from West Nile. 

Secondly, the committee is required to go and hold- it should be even a hearing - so that you hear from the community in West Nile; the business community; you hear from Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd; the owners of Nyagak and all of them so that they give you- but our major aim is not condemning and lamenting; it is seeing, with the commitment of the minister, how best we can support the minister to immediately move. 

However, we would like you to study, indeed, the agreement with Electro Maxx Uganda Ltd and we want to know whether it is being implemented to the letter. Because Government has a tendency of allowing contractors to implement their part of the bargain to the letter but the Government side sleeps on the job. Therefore, we really want to scrutinise it deeply. And you can even interact with the Attorney-General to guide you on this. 

So do it quickly and bring a letter tomorrow; I will give you authorisation so that you are facilitated, as a committee and you go with MPs. And I am very sure that the honourable minister is going to give you all the necessary support needed in terms of- Parliament will facilitate you; I do not want the minister to facilitate you. Okay, Parliament will facilitate you, because this is our work as Parliament. 

Therefore, the petition is referred to the committeebut in the meantime, we have to vote on the motion. So allow me to put the question that this Parliament passes a resolution urging Government to urgently address supply challenges in the West Nile region.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution passed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, the chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights has been seated here all day to ensure that he presents his report. I will allow him to present the report but then we shall not debate it because it is a long report which we shall need to go read, comprehend, and then have a thorough debate, because these are issues that touch all of us. 

Hon. Songa, I know you want to thank the people. You can do that quickly.

6.58
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Mr Speaker, I take this good opportunity to thank you for this important discussion. I thank all the honourable members for making history. I appreciate the efforts of our two ministers and of course Government to see that West Nile gets power. 

Now that will be in the long run. The people of West Nile are ready to wait for March 2023. In the short run, let us address what we have requested and we pray that if the issue is money, we support ourselves so that we get money for the ministries to do this work. If the issue is technical issues, we get technical people.

I want to thank everybody who contributed to this debate. I want to thank the petitioners from West Nile and the Rt Hon. Speaker because she met the petitioners, and everyone on this matter. I pray that the prayers we have put forward in regard to this petition be answered. I pray that all the promises made by Government be done without corruption. God bless you all.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. You end on a doubtful note. (Laughter)

motion for adoption of the report of the Committee on Human Rights on the status of human rights and human rights violations in the country From January 2020 to date

The Deputy Speaker: Colleagues, like I told you, the chairperson is just going to read the report so that you go and also read through it. I have seen a habit in this House whereby Members read when the chairperson is presenting. I do not want this business of people saying, “You've given us a short time.” I want you to have a whole weekend to study this report, check what they have submitted for you todebate substantively.

7.00
The chairperson, committee on human rights (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. By way of preliminary issues, permit me to register the appreciation of my family and myself for the support you gave us when we lost our dear mother. (Applause)

Allow me also record our appreciation to the entire House, the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Speaker, the Prime Minister and the Vice-President. I thank you, colleagues.

Mr Speaker, the report has 150 pages. Therefore, my first prayer is that you direct that the Hansard captures the report verbatim so that I can restrict myself to only introductory matters and the recommendations.

The Deputy Speaker: Clerk, please ensure that you capture the whole report in full then the Member will do as he has requested.

(The report will appear in the Hansard monthly bound volume of the month of August 2022)

Mr odoi-oywelowo: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the following documents:

    1. All the memoranda received from different Ministries, Agencies and Departments (MDAs); and

    2. The minutes of all the meetings. 

I beg to lay.

I am at page 9 of the report. That is where you find some introductory matters that I will run through. Probably, before I go to page 6 of the report, the Committee on Human Rights is a Standing Committee of Parliament. It derives its mandate from
Rule 185 of the Rules of procedure of this House. 

The committee, among other things, is enjoined to –

    (a) track and report on human rights concerns in every business handled by Parliament;

    (b) monitor Government compliance with national and international human rights instruments to which Uganda is a party and follow up on Government periodic reports to the international human rights monitoring bodies;

    (c) examine the recommendations of Uganda Human Rights Commission reports and ensure that Government is held accountable in this regard; and

    (d) inquire into any matter relating to human rights in Uganda and carry out such other functions relating to human rights, as may be assigned to it by Parliament under these rules or in other law in force.

Mr Speaker, during the Sixth Sitting of the Third Meeting of the First Session of the 11th Parliament held on Tuesday, 08 February 2022,the House directed the committee to inquire into the state of human rights and human rights violation in the country from the period January 2020 to date. This was in response to public outcry regarding numerous allegations of enforced disappearances, illegal detentions and impunity by security forces and torture by both state and non-state actors. 

The committee restricted the scope of the inquiry to the period from January 2020 to June 2022. 

The committee also inquired into the prolonged detention of the Royal Guards of the Obusinga Bwa Rwenzururu, who have been in detention since November 2016. 

Methodology 

The committee held meetings with Ministries, Departments and Agencies, political parties, non-governmental organisations, informal groups of persons and several individuals. The Committee received memoranda from the above mentioned stakeholders.

The committee reviewed documents, including the annual reports of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Uganda reports to the United Nations, Universal Periodic Review, the resolutions and declarations passed by several legislative bodies such as the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the European Parliament, specifically relating to Uganda. 

The committee also reviewed statutory provisions governing the protection and promotion of human rights and judicial decisions in respect of human rights litigation. 

It attended workshops and seminars organised by Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Finally, the committee co-opted technical personnel from the Office of the Directorate of Public Prosecution, the Uganda Police Force, the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Uganda Law Society. The committee is heavily indebted to the personnel supplied by those bodies and the technical advice they gave the committee. 

Mr Speaker, I will not go through the list of stakeholders that the committee met. That is found at page 7 of 150. 

Findings and recommendations

Page 9 of 150: The title is “Uganda Human Rights Commission.” Article 51 of the Constitution provides for the Uganda Human Rights Commission as an independent national human rights institution with jurisdiction over all parts of the country. It is the lead agency in promoting and protecting human rights and handling cases of abuse and infringement. The body receives, investigates and hears cases of human rights violations. 

The commission is responsible for monitoring Government compliance with international human rights obligations and standards.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission has 11 regional offices and 10 field offices.

Complaints registered by Uganda Human Rights Commission from January 2020 to June 2022

Mr Speaker, in fulfilment of its mandate, the Commission under Article 52 of the Constitution during the period under review, recorded 1,205 complaints of alleged human rights violations. The alleged violations were in part due to –

    1. the COVID-19 pandemic that ravaged the country in 2020 and 2021 and the control measures instituted by Government in order to curb its spread;
    2. the enforcement of Standard Operating Procedures(SOPs) related to the mitigation of the spread of COVID-19; and

    3. the political activities related to the January 2021 general elections. 

The complaints received by Uganda Human Rights Commission fall under specific categories listed below:

    1. Torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. The Commission recorded a total of 443 cases.

    2. Deprivation of personal liberty and detention beyond 48 hours – 378 cases. 

    3. Deprivation of the right to life - 90 cases. 

    4. Perpetrators of torture/deprivation of life by security personnel - 71 cases. 

    5. Enforced disappearances of persons – 65 cases.  

Recommendations 

Mr Speaker, at this point, permit me to go straight to the recommendations of the committee. They constitute a total of 28 pages. 

The committee recommends that:

Law enforcement and security agencies should always wear name tags and identify themselves to all the suspects they arrest and detain during their operations. 

In all instances where Uganda Human Rights Commission receives complaints pertaining to the deprivation of the right to life, it should only deal with the civil aspects of compensation and refer the criminal aspects to the Office of the Director of Public Prosecution for purposes of arraigning the perpetrators in court. 

It should also follow up each case it refers to the ODPP until final disposal by the courts. 

Perpetrators of torture and the deprivation by security personnel 
It is found on page 10 of the report that you have on your iPads. I will go straight to the recommendations 

In this respect, the committee recommends that: 

    (i) Government takes deliberate steps to promote a culture of respect for human rights. It is therefore essential to educate both the leaders and citizens on their roles in ensuring that human rights are respected and protected. 

    (ii) Government should always provide Parliament with a list of persons tried for human rights violations and the punitive actions taken against them. 

    (iii) Perpetrators of human rights violations should be relieved of their public offices. 

    (iv) The liability to compensate victims of torture must be borne by perpetrators personally and Government should ensure that they are paid promptly. 

    (v) Government should put in place mechanisms for the rehabilitation of victims of torture. 

    (vi) The Uganda Police Force should conclusively investigate the cases reported under the periodic review and submit the files to the Office of the DPP for prosecution. A report of the implementation of this particular recommendation should be submitted to Parliament within a period of six months. 

    (vii) When action is taken against the perpetrator of torture, a statement should be issued in the media on the specific action taken. 

Alleged disappearances of persons 

The committee notes with concern allegations of missing persons and recommends that the Uganda Police Force should expedite the process of tracing the whereabouts of the missing persons. 

The committee further recommends that the Government should put in place measures and build capacity to account for each and every citizen and alien in its jurisdiction. 

Joint operations by Uganda People's Defence Forces, the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence, Uganda Police Force and Internal Security Organisation

The committee recommends that: 

    (i) The joint operations between Uganda Police Force, the UPDF and other security agencies should be conducted in accordance with sections 42, 43, 44 and 45 of the UPDF Act, 2005. 

    (ii) The security agencies should desist from the use of excessive force when arresting people. 

    (iii)  The 14-seater vans, commonly known as drones, used to transport agents for operations should be registered with the Uganda Revenue Authority and assigned number plates in accordance with the law. 

    (iv) The Uganda Police Force should always take the lead in all joint operations and should be accountable for the operations. 

Investigations conducted at Kitalya Prisons after the 2021 elections 

The committee recommends the following: 

    (i) Government should desist from making politically motivated arrests and prosecutions. 

    (ii) Government should cause a review of all the 87 cases and report to Parliament within a period of six months. The details of the 87 cases are found in the report. 

    (iii) Government should cause the expeditious, free and fair trial of the suspects where there is sufficient evidence of criminality. 

Alleged torture of a one Kakwenza Rukirabashaija and Mr Masereka Samuel

The committee recommends that the Director of Public Prosecutions should desist from initiating and continuing prosecution of victims of torture. 

The Uganda Human Rights Commission Tribunal hearings 

The committee recommends that: 

    (i) The appointing authority expeditiously appoints Commissioners to the Uganda Human Rights Commission and ensures that it is fully constituted to preside over the Commission Tribunal and deliver justice to Ugandans. 

    (ii) Government should raise the Uganda Human Rights Commission budget ceiling to fund its activities, including the operations of the tribunal. 

Compensation for victims of torture and other human rights violations

The committee recommends that the settlement of this award should be prioritised since the victims of human rights violations always lose their sources of livelihood and their ability to make a living. 

The committee further recommends that all human rights compensation awards should be settled within a period of one financial year from the date of the award. 

The committee recommends that MDAs should avail to Parliament a status of all human rights compensation awards annually. 

Funding for the Uganda Human Rights Commission - The Democratic Governance Facility

The committee recommends that the Government funds 100 per cent of the budget of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. 

The committee further recommends that Government clears the Democratic Governance Facility to resume operations and provide critical funding to the Commission.

Complaints registered and addressed by Kampala Capital City Authority

The committee commends Kampala Capital City Authority, the Uganda Police Force and the Office of the DPP for expeditiously and conclusively addressing the matters reported to them. 

The committee recommends that all entities should adopt similar work methods to address allegations of human rights violation. 

Complaint No. UHRC/18/2019 Nassanga Kofia Hawa v. KCCA on page 26. 
The committee commends KCCA, Uganda Police Force, Office of the Director Public Prosecution (ODPP) for expeditiously and conclusively addressing this matter. 

The Legal Brains Trust (LBT) Limited V. KCCA and the Attorney- General, Misc. Application No. 256 of 2020, arising from Misc. Cause No. 98 of 2020 – page 26  

The Committee recommends that:

    a.  The Government should adequately support KCCA and all urban authorities to provide a safe and clean environment in order to safeguard and protect the right to live. 

    b. The Government should adequately support KCCA in its efforts to implement Section 7 of the KCCA Act to construct and maintain roads and major drains in order to avert flooding, and cover open drains in the city. 

    c. KCCA should report to Parliament within a period of six months on actions taken (both planned and implemented) in response to the judgment above.

KCCA staff injured during operations on page 27. 

The committee recommends that the Government should take deliberate steps to educate the population on their rights and duties as citizens. 

KCCA operations in the gender-based violence arena, page 27

The committee commends KCCA for developing the Kampala Child Protection Ordinance, 2021 and the Kampala Capital City Prohibition and Prevention of Gender Based Violence Ordinance. 

It further commends the authority for putting in place elaborate measures for the promotion and protection of human rights within its jurisdiction. 

The committee recommends that the Attorney-General's Chambers expedite the approval of the two ordinances and that KCCA immediately effects their implementation. 

Other Government entities should be encouraged to adopt, with the necessary modifications, the measures put in place by KCCA for the promotion and protection of human rights as best practices. 

Complaints registered and addressed by Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA)

Land disputes and forceful evictions 

The committee commends Uganda Wildlife Authority for the execution of its core mandate and for their efforts targeting peaceful resolution of conflict with stakeholder communities. 

The Committee recommends the following:

    i.  The courts should expedite resolution and disposal of pending cases. 

Mr Speaker, there are cases that have been in court for the last 20 years between Uganda Wildlife Authority and several parties; the details are in the report.

    ii.  The boundary opening process initiated by the Government should be expedited and concluded.

    iii.  Electric fences should be erected around the wildlife reserves and national parks to prevent animal and human conflict, to protect life, land and property. 

Disputes over compensation 

The committee notes wildlife authority’s effort in amicably resolving land disputes and compensating the titleholders in game reserves and national parks. 

The committee recommends that Uganda Wildlife Authority should control problem animals and build the capacity of local Governments in areas outside reserves, parks, and protected areas in accordance with Section 6(i) of the Uganda Wildlife Authority Act. 

Issues raised by Amnesty International in respect of the Benet community around Mt Elgon National Park. 

Mr Speaker, Amnesty International made allegations that the Uganda Government, Uganda Police Force exterminated a substantial fraction of the Benet community in Mt Elgon National Park. The committee investigated this and found no merits in the allegations. 

Therefore, the committee makes the following note: 


The lack of detail and credible leads relating to the allegations in the Amnesty International report, and the lack of a police record of such crimes made it difficult for the committee to meaningfully interrogate the allegations. 

Torture chambers in national parks 

Uganda Wildlife Authority staff involved in human rights violation are handled in accordance with the law. In October 2020, four Uganda Wildlife Authority staff based in East Madi Wildlife Reserve were arrested and charged before the 4th Division Army Court Martial after they were involved in the fatal shooting incident while on patrol inside the reserve. Two staff were exonerated by the court martial and two staff were convicted. One of them was sentenced to 20 years in prison. 

The committee commands UWA for the interventions undertaken to prevent human rights violations in the gazetted areas and for punishing the offending officials. 

The committee recommends that UWA adopts and implements an appropriately modified version of KCCA’s interventions for the promotion and protection of human rights in their jurisdiction. 

Human rights challenges in the Rwenzori subregion: The alleged Kasese massacre of November 2016 – page 36.

The committee noted with grave concern the long periods the suspects spent on remand without trial. The committee notes that the inordinately long remand periods constitute a breach of the right to fair trial guaranteed by the Constitution. 

The Committee recommends the following: 

    i.  The ODPP and the Judiciary should strive to ensure expeditious trial of suspects that are not granted bail. 

    ii. The ODPP should submit to Parliament an updated list of all persons held on remand for a period exceeding one year with reasons for the delay to try their cases. This list should be submitted annually.

    iii.  The Government should compensate all persons who are acquitted after spending many years on remand. 

    iv. The Uganda Human Rights Commission Tribunal should dispose of all cases that are now before it and report to the House within a period of six months. 

    v.  The Government should engage in dialogue with the people of Kasese in order to find a lasting solution to the long standing, simmering conflict. 

    vi. Government should also create mechanisms to support the recovery process following the raid of November 2016 on the palace of the Obusinga Bwa Rwenzururu

Civil Society Organisation(CSO) Perspective (page 39)

The committee interacted with civil society organisations and non-governmental organisations operating in the human rights area. 

The Foundation for Human Rights Initiative (FHRI)

The committee commends the Foundation for Human Rights Initiative for a well-researched and comprehensive presentation on the state of human rights in Uganda and for their enthusiasm and efforts towards the promotion and protection of human rights in Uganda. 

The Committee recommends that the Government should: 

    i) Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture to guarantee freedom of expression, association and assembly including the media. 

    ii) Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of all persons from enforced disappearances. 

    iii) Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR to abolish the death penalty. 

    iv) Issue a standing invitation to the Special Procedures Mandate Holders to visit Uganda and appraise her human rights situation. 

    v) Conduct impartial and effective investigations into the use of excessive force, extrajudicial killing and torture and bring the perpetrators to fair trial.

    vi) Finalise and implement the National Action Plan on Business and Human rights.
 
    vii) Ratify the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance, 2007. 

    viii) Guarantee the right to freedom of expression during elections for online activists, including unblocking Facebook.

    ix) Revisit the tax or dues on internet access.

    x) Revisit the current guidelines on accreditation for election observers.

    xi) Enact the Human Rights Defenders Bill.

    xii) Implement the Human Rights Enforcement Act, 2019.

    xiii) Progressively increase funding to the health sector to meet the Abuja Declaration threshold of 15 per cent. 

    xiv) Enact the National Legal Aid Policy into law.

The African Centre for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Torture Victims (ACTV) – this is on page 47 of the report 

Mr Speaker, the committee commends the centre for the pioneer work they continue to do in treating and rehabilitating the victims of torture, training security agents, the legal fraternity and the medical personnel in handling, reporting and documenting cases of torture. 

The Committee recommends the following:

    1. The Uganda Law Reform Commission, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, First Parliamentary Counsel and Ministry of Internal Affairs should fast-track the processing of the Witness Protection Bill, National Legal Aid Bill, Human Rights Defenders Protection Bill and submit them to Parliament for consideration within a period of six months.

    2. The Government should ratify the Optional Protocol – that  has been covered.

    3. The Parliament of Uganda should increase appropriation of resources towards the investigation agencies in order to develop their capacity to gather evidence for use in courts of law to effectively implement the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act (PPTA). 

    4. Politicians and political parties should do the following: 

    i) Raise awareness to the need to report cases of torture, as stated in Section 20 of the PPTA.

    ii) Institute mechanisms that provide access to professional and timely documentation of victims of torture and violence.

    iii) Create a dialogue for political parties to address torture and political violence. 

    5. The Uganda Police Force should do the following:

    i) Investigate and institute charges using the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012 on all alleged 2021 General Elections torture cases. Mr Speaker, let me just note that we interacted with all the political parties and they all reported that their supporters had been tortured by one political party or the other. The NRM had a list of its supporters that had been tortured, allegedly, by National Unity Party (NUP). (Laughter) NUP also had a list and this is contained in the report of the committee. That is the basis of our recommendation – and I can back this with evidence.

    ii) Avail its officers implicated in the 2021 General Elections violence, COVID-19 guidelines enforcement and torture to be investigated and prosecuted, accordingly, in the criminal courts other than in the disciplinary courts –(Interruption)- Mr Speaker, I beg for your protection – 

    iii) Continuously train its officers in principles of human rights and public order management during election periods. 

    6. Uganda People's Defence Forces (UPDF) should:

    i)  Avail all its officers implicated in the 2021 general election violence, COVID-19 guidelines enforcement and torture for investigation and prosecution and these should be prosecuted in the criminal courts other than the disciplinary courts.

    ii) Continuously train its officers on principles of human rights and public order management, especially during election periods so as to avoid human rights violations.

    7. The Uganda Human Rights Commission should:

    i) Investigate and document torture-related claims and human rights violations and ensure that the survivors access justice for the violation of rights and freedoms. We make reference to Sections 7 (2) and (3) of Uganda Human Rights Commission Act, Cap.24.

    ii) Popularise the use of PPTA 2017 Regulations for effective implementation of the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act No. 3 of 2012. 

    iii) Develop a programme to fast-track receipt of the compensatory awards to torture victims and survivors in accordance with Section 7 (k) of the Uganda Human Rights Commission Act. Cap 24. 

    8. The civil society organisations should:

    i) Create awareness about the rights of freedom from torture and the importance of early professional documentation of survivors of torture.

    ii) Build a referral mechanism that can support and effectively rehabilitate victims of torture. This should include medical treatment and psychosocial support services and victims’ access to justice.

    9. The Ministry of Health should:

    i) Train health workers in effective documentation of torture, using the Istanbul Protocol, so as to increase accessibility and availability of documentation services for survivors of torture.

    ii) Develop a policy on comprehensive rehabilitation of survivors of torture, as it is stated in General Comment No. 4 to the African Charter. Uganda already has a national policy on elimination of gender-based violence. 

    iii) Institute policy guidelines on the treatment and rehabilitation of torture victims. 

    iv) Set up centres with trained personnel to treat and rehabilitate torture victims.

    v) Increase accessibility of mental health services and awareness to community so as to support the many survivors of election-related violence and the COVID-19 guideline enforcement.

    10. The local governments should:

    i) In accordance with Section 17(b) of the Local Government Act, Cap 243, work together with non-governmental organisations in safeguarding the civic space, which enables identification, documentation and referral of torture-related cases for the special care and legal support.

    ii) Mainstream human rights-based approach while monitoring the provision of Government services and any project implementation within their areas of control, leadership or jurisdiction, in accordance with Section 24 of the Local Government Act, Cap 243 and the National Development Plan III.


    iii) In accordance with Section 26(c) on assisting in maintenance of law, order and security and Section 26(e) of the Local Government Act, Cap. 43, sensitise the public on torture and human rights, identify cases and refer them for specialised care and support.
 
    11. The general public should:

    i) Report all acts of torture to the relevant institutions and also seek for professional documentation of their experience.

    ii) Always use legal means to advocate for their rights and respect each other in order to avoid violence.

Mr Speaker, we made some recommendations in respect of the media fraternity:

    1. They should continue identifying and referring torture-related cases for specialised care and support. 

    2. They should embrace the trauma-informed approach in investigations and telling stories of torture victims and survivors. 

    3. They should continue exposing torture incidents to foster torture prevention and accountability.

The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions should: 

    a) expeditiously prosecute all cases of torture during the 2021 general elections and the COVID-19 guideline enforcement using the PPTA, so that all perpetrators are individually held accountable.

The Judiciary should:

    a) insist on the non-admissibility of evidence obtained through tortures and ill-treatment of the suspects. These are the provisions of Section 14 and 15 of the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act. They should nullify all prosecution of torture victims.

The Human Rights and Peace Centre(HURIPEC), Makerere University Law School 

The committee recommends (HURIPEC) for the value addition it made to the inquiry. 

The committee recommends that Government should:

    1. Review and reform the NGO Act, 2016 to impose only demonstrably justifiable regulations on NGOs and CSOs.

    2. Protect and promote the human rights that are guaranteed in the Constitution.

    3. Support the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Equal Opportunities Commission to become more visible and accessible to the public. 

    4. Government should fully fund the Equal Opportunities Commission to execute its mandate.

    5. Improve facilitation to Uganda Human Rights Commission to undertake their core human rights protection function and conduct civic and human rights education.

    6. Ensure that those who torture and violate human rights of Ugandans are prosecuted.

    7. Ensure that perpetrators of torture are held accountable in the courts of law.

Human Rights Watch (on page 60 of the report)

The committee notes that the Human Rights Watch declined to provide identities of the alleged victims citing confidentiality and their work protocol. The committee was, therefore, unable to independently corroborate the allegations contained in the submission of the Human Rights Watch. For purposes of evidence-based reporting, the committee would greatly benefit from material disclosure in respect of every allegation. 

Mr Speaker, the Human Rights Watch appeared before the committee and they had a list of alleged victims of torture. When we asked them to provide further and better particulars, they declined. That is the basis of our recommendation. We could not proceed on the allegations without further and better particulars. 

Uganda Journalists Association (page 62)

The committee held a joint meeting with a number of stakeholders to address the concerns of journalists. The stakeholders included the Attorney-General, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs; The Ministry of Information and National Guidance; the Ministry of Internal Affairs; the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; the Ministry for Security; the UPDF; Uganda Police Force; Uganda Prisons Service; Uganda Journalists Association; and Uganda Parliamentary Press Association. 

The committee noted that in most cases raised by the association, action had been taken by these entities against the offending individuals. Compensation and apology had also been rendered. While the committee commends the entities for the remedial actions taken, it took the position that violations and abuses should never occur in the first place.

The committee recommends the following:

The Uganda Police Force and the UPDF in all their operations should create a media sanctuary for occupation and use by journalists.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance as well as Uganda Communications Commission should conduct studies into mechanisms to improve the remuneration and the working conditions of journalists and other media practitioners.
Government should desist from internet shutdowns.

Journalists should stick to professional conduct and desist from political activism throughout their operations.

The leadership of Uganda Police Force should undertake a deliberate policy to frequently educate and sensitise police officers on promoting and protecting the rights of journalists and other Ugandans.

Government should note that compensation of assaulted journalists was partially done and it should provide for compensation for all those whose payments remained outstanding. And should also compensate for the equipment that was damaged or destroyed.

Government should meet the medical bills of all journalists injured by security agents during the course of their operations.

Government should institute a minimum wage policy or Bill.

Political Parties represented in Parliament (page 67) 

The National Resistance Movement

Mr Speaker, I already stated that the committee made an effort to meet all political parties that are represented in Parliament and they provided memoranda that I have already laid on Table.

The committee observed that the level of violence and lawlessness during elections is worrying. For Uganda’s young democracy to survive and thrive, violence and lawlessness should be firmly dealt with.

The committee recommends that:

    1. All political actors should inculcate a culture of tolerance and non-violent political discourse in their ranks and among their supporters.

    2. All acts of criminality should be thoroughly investigated and the culprits prosecuted, to curb the growing culture of impunity.

The National Unity Platform (Page 69)

The committee recognises that there are a number of torture victims. The committee recommends the following:

    1. The political space should be open, sanitised and respect for political dissent should be promoted and maintained. This should be a reciprocal obligation of all political players.

    2. Government should:

a) 	Investigate each and every allegation of torture and abuse of human rights by whosoever raised and report to the House within a period of six months.

b) 	Release all political prisoners and avoid trying civilians in the military courts.

c) 	Identify and compensate all political prisoners as well as persons who are arrested and released without charge. 

d) 	Financially support Uganda Human Rights Commission to comprehensively engage all victims of human rights violations.

e) 	Empower the Electoral Commission to conduct free and fair elections and to conduct comprehensive civil education prior to every election cycle.
 
3. 	The judiciary should create a Human Rights Division of the High Court with specialised judges to deal with cases of human rights violation. 

The Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) – see page No.74, the committee commends the FDC for the submissions made – no, there are no recommendations.

Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) – see page No. 76. 

The committee commends all the political parties that appeared before it submitted memoranda. The Committee recommends that Government limits the deployment of the army to do policing work. 

Submissions made by the Leader of the Opposition

Mr Speaker, the submissions made by the Leader of the Opposition, was a mirror image of the submissions made by the National Unity Platform. The committee commends the submissions and the findings are contained under the heading, “The National Unity Platform.”

Alleged human rights violations by the Resident District Commissioners

We have the policy position of the presidency on matters pertaining to torture. And in one sentence, the President's position is that they observe and promote a policy of zero-tolerance to torture and they punish every errant officer.

The committee observed that the police investigations into the serious allegations made against a couple of Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) had dragged on for an inordinately a long period. 

The Committee recommends that the presidency and the UPDF should conclude the investigations into torture by area RDCs and take remedial actions and report back to the House within a period of six months. 

For the correctness of the record, the presidency had a policy of sacking every other RDC against whom complaints had been raised. And they demonstrated that by way of evidence, the committee's position though is that, on top of sacking them, they must be investigated and prosecuted.

Government's position on the state of human rights in the country since January, 2020 

Here let us reflect the submissions by the Attorney-General page 82. 

Uganda Prison Services and the cases of torture reported against the service at page 87.

The committee commends the Uganda Prisons Service for their cooperation and diligence with which they responded to the committee's inquiries. 

The committee also commends the Uganda Prison Services for verifiable actions taken to address the cases of human rights violations and to punish the offenders. The committee recommends the following:

    (i) That the Uganda Human Rights Commission should be supported to conduct massive civic education and sensitisation across the country and to lay a foundation for a culture of respect for human rights and create awareness of human rights and obligations.

    (ii) All Ugandans should be trained in human rights, regardless of their status, rank, gender, age and belief systems put in place to end the culture of mob justice and torture by law enforcement, security personnel and private individuals.

    (iii) That persons known as “Katikiros” should be given basic human rights training before they are signed to that position. 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs

The committee commends the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for efficiently executing its coordination on matters concerning human rights in Uganda and delivering on its mandate to ensure that Uganda meets her reporting obligations. 

The committee recommends that the ministry coordinates the preparation of all outstanding reports and ensures that Uganda's reporting obligations are fulfilled.

Submissions by the Minister for Internal Affairs 

On Uganda Police Force, the committee noted the actions taken to address the indiscipline in Uganda Police Force. 

The committee recommends that the disciplinary processes and actions against errant officers should be made accessible to the public and publicised. 

The committee further recommends that for all cases of human rights violations, errant officers should be tried in the courts of judicature and subjected to the criminal justice system. 

On review of the citizenship of the Maragoli people

The committee notes that the fear of statelessness is of grave concern and a fundamental human rights issue. 

The committee recommends that the Government should expedite the creation of the Constitutional Review Commission to conclude this issue of the Maragoli community in Uganda. 

The committee further recommends that a private Member's Bill or a committee of Parliament considers introducing a private member's Bill to address this issue in the event, that Government does not deal with it expeditiously. 

On the NGO Bureau, the committee recommends as follows: 

    (i) The NGO bureau should accord NGOs a fair hearing, and review their cases with a view of supporting them to improve their operations.

    (ii) The regulations policies and the law should achieve intended purpose of securing the sovereignty of the country and national security; without imposing an onerous and unjustifiable obligation on the NGOs; and

    (iii) The NGO bureau should strive to establish a cooperative and collaborative relationship with the NGOs. 

Offenders with children 

The committee notes with concern that there is a growing number of juvenile offenders and insufficient remand facilities. It further notes the dilapidated conditions of the existing remand facilities. 

The Committee recommends as follows:

    (i) Government invests in construction and renovation of remand facilities for juvenile offenders;

    (ii) Government invests in the recruitment and training of remand facility managers. The training should empower such personnel to rehabilitate and safely integrate the juvenile offenders;

    (iii) The remand homes should be designed and built to incorporate technical and vocational training facilities;

    (iv) Juveniles in remand homes should access formal education facilities;

    (v) In the medium to long term, Government should build separate facilities for the incarceration of offenders with children. Such facilities should incorporate Early Learning Centres for the children; and

    (vi) Lastly, Government should develop a comprehensive correctional policy, review and amend the Prisons Act in respect of juvenile offenders and offenders with children. 

On immigration – the submissions are on page 113 - the committee noted that the financial burden of keeping illegal immigrants in detention pending deportation can be reduced if removals are effected in a timely manner. 

The committee recommends the following:

    i. All travellers to Uganda must avail proof of a return ticket prior to being admitted into the country at the ports of entry.

    ii. The travel abroad budget of the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control should be increased to cater for deportation of illegal immigrants.

    iii. Government should develop robust policies, legislation and capacity to eradicate human trafficking.

    iv. The Government should establish rehabilitation centres to manage victims of human trafficking.

Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions 

The committee noted that the concerns of the ODPP are legitimate. However, the intention of the legislators in enacting section 10 of the Human Rights Enforcement Act was to provide full-proof protection against breach of non-derogable rights. 

The committee recommends that the Government should:
    1. continue training law enforcement agencies on the need to observe human rights as they execute their duties;

    2. encourage, facilitate and develop prosecution-led investigations in all cases;

    3.  train state-attorneys and judicial officers to exercise due diligence in interrogating how evidence is obtained while perusing the files and before admitting the evidence; and 

    4. expedite the enactment of the Witness Protection law.

Submission by the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs
The committee commends the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the UPDF for the institutional framework put in place to ensure the promotion and protection of human rights and the discipline of the forces. 

Mr Speaker, let me record that the UPDF has very robust systems in place for the promotion and protection of human rights. The committee was pleased to record that. (Applause)

The committee recommends that Government should desist from trying civilians in military courts.

Ministry of ICT and National Guidance

The committee noted Government’s commitment to promoting and protection of human rights in Uganda.

Judicial consideration of cases of torture

Mr Speaker, we make the following recommendations:

The committee recommends that the Judiciary should ensure that torture victims are not tried and are excluded from the criminal justice system.

Mr Speaker, the committee wishes to thank all the Ministries, Departments and Agencies that appeared before it to present their submissions and memoranda on the state of human rights and human rights violations from January 2020 to date.

I also personally wish to thank all the members of the committee for the commitment they showed throughout this inquiry; and to lastly record that 27 members of the committee signed this report. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. Colleagues, I think now you can go and read through the report.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Speaker, a last one. Permit me to lay on the Table the original copy of the report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and team, for the work well done. I know you have gone through a lot but when you look at the comprehensiveness of the report you see why indeed you took enough time. Committees of this nature really require time to do their report comprehensively.

Ministers and Members, go and study the report. I think we shall have a consolidated response by Government so the Office of the Leader of Government Business should have a consolidated response otherwise, it will be difficult for each agency to come because nearly all ministries and agencies are covered in this report.

Debate on this – No, honourable member. You cannot have prayers on this. The debate will be on Wednesday so that you are given enough time to reflect on the report. Debate will be on Wednesday afternoon.

(The House rose at 8.04 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 16 August 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 

