Tuesday, 7 August 2012

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are welcome to this sitting. Thank you for being here on time. Today, we have a lot of business and as you are also aware, it is the same time we are dealing with budgetary issues. All the matters are now before the committees. We need to find time for the committees to concentrate on their work and report back to this House so that we can finish the budget process as per the Budget Act. By 31st of this month, we should be able to complete this process by passing the Appropriation Bill. We shall take the necessary adjustments to make sure that the committees can concentrate on their work. We need to conclude with some of the debates today so that we can move forward.

I will alter the Order Paper to allow a petition by former employees of National Water & Sewerage Corporation against the National Water & Sewerage Corporation. 

Honourable members, you remember about two weeks ago when we received the good news of one of our own climbing the ranks to the top ladder of a particular institution. We also heard that yesterday, he was decorated. What an honour it is for me to allow him just make a short statement before we continue with the business of the House this afternoon. Gen. Moses Ali

2.15
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for this occasion to express my pleasure and thank the Almighty through His Excellency, the Commander-in-Chief, for promoting me to this rank of the Army. Like anybody else, I am delighted. It is an achievement in this sector. 

To briefly share with my colleagues, I want to say that it took me 44 years to come to this rank. I joined the Army in 1968, and today is 2012. So, you can subtract and find the number of years. 

Again, I am very pleased with the Almighty for guiding me throughout these years. I have worked with many governments. I joined the Army in 1968 during Obote 1 and became Second Lieutenant. In 1971, I became Major and Colonel, and Brigadier in 1974. In 1979, we all went - most of us were outside the country as refugees, but there, I became the leader of Uganda National Rescue Front, which took me 10 years. In 1986, we came and signed an agreement with NRA, which is now UPDF - NRM. Some of my soldiers joined NRA and we the political leaders joined the government. 

In 1990, I was arrested and locked up in Luzira for treason. Towards the end of 1992, I was acquitted. At that time I was a member of NRC. So, the day I was acquitted I came straight here to Parliament when it was sitting. I thanked colleagues for their prayers, but warned them that everybody sitting here except the Speaker is a potential prisoner. So, if you are in position to take a decision to improve the situation in Luzira or elsewhere, please, do not hesitate because when I went to Luzira, I found Muwanga there. I asked him what happened, when he was brought receipts for mattresses. He refused and thought that was not going to be a hotel. I told him, “I thought if you signed, it would have helped you.” He said, “You young man, sit down. You do not know what has happened.” But all in all, I came out and in 1994 was elected Member of the Legislative Council and again the President appointed me as a minister. In 1996, I stood for elections and in 2005, I lost. In 2011, I joined the House again.

Briefly, I want to say that it is not easy. At the same time, you need patience. It is good that you do not know what is ahead of you, either good or bad. That is a very good consolation for us. For example, last time when we were saying bye to our colleague, I said that should God tell us when we are going to die, I think many Members would not find it necessary to attend. It is good we do not know what is before all of us. 

I am very grateful that I am now a full General. It is one of the ambitions I have been holding. I am grateful that His Excellency the President, has finally given me that. I want to thank him again and again and thank all of you for sharing my pleasure with me. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR UNESCO BILL, 2012

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr John Chrysestom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Commission for UNESCO Bill, 2012,” be read the first time. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is accordingly received for first reading. It is committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. The 45-days rule applies and the time starts running now. The committee should act within the appropriate time and deal with that. Is the Bill accompanied with the requisite documents?

MR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, the Bill is accompanied with a certificate of financial implications and I beg to lay it. 

2.22
MS THEOPISTA SENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to present a petition under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. The petitioners are former workers of National Water and Sewerage Corporation against National Water and Sewerage Corporation. The petitioners state that:

The subject matter of this petition is mismanagement of the retirement benefits of former employees of National Water and Sewerage Corporation.

The petitioners are some of the former employees of that organisation who voluntarily retired under the voluntary retirement scheme of 1997 prescribed under the National Water and Sewerage Corporation manual.

In 1996, National Water and Sewerage Corporation was running at a loss and the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund proposed restructuring that organisation to reduce the employees in Uganda.

The proposal was that the number of employees in this organisation should be reduced by half and the Uganda Public Employees Union came with a proposal of a voluntary retirement scheme, which was agreed upon between the union, the management and the board at that time.

The major subject of contention is that the petitioners started getting their retirement benefits in 1997, but their benefits were taxed and the memo regarding that is attached on the petition. It is dated 9 January 1997 from Uganda Revenue Authority.

Taxing the retirement benefits contradicts the provision of Article 254(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda of 1995, which prohibits deduction of Pay-As-You-Earn from one’s retirement benefits and section 13(4) of the National Social Security Fund Act CAP 222, which is to the effect that it is mandatory for the organisation other than those under the pension scheme to limit contribution once they are deducted to the National Social Security Fund.

The petitioners’ NSSF contribution was not fully being remitted by the organisation yet their contribution to NSSF started when the NSSF Act was passed in 1985. This is also attached as an appendix.

The petitioners further affirm that some of them who are eligible employees have been denied getting the opportunity of getting their long service award contrary to the provisions of the human resource manual of National Water and Sewerage Corporation paragraph 22. 

Therefore, by this petition, the petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that:

a)	All the monies unlawfully deducted from the petitioners’ benefit package by the organisation and URA be refunded immediately.

b)	National Water and Sewerage Corporation pays all the petitioners’ NSSF contributions immediately with current interest rate of NSSF.

c)	The long service award to the former employees of National Water and Sewerage Corporation who left between 2005 and 2011 be paid to them forthwith. 

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray. And hitherto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. 

So, Mr Speaker, allow me to lay this petition on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the petition as such and honourable members, you are also aware that substantially, this matter is going before our own Committee of Natural Resources and they are already handling matters of a similar nature. So, I urge the committee to fix it in their timeframe and handle it quickly so that this matter is resolved quickly, than waiting for the 45-days rule, since they are already handling the matter. 

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

2.28
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to make a personal explanation in accordance with Rule 22 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, on Friday, 13 July 2012, I was apprehended by court bailiffs on my way from office to Parliament and taken to court where I was committed to civil prison for allegedly failing to pay legal fees of Ugshs 30 million to Victoria Advocates and Legal Consultants. I was released on Monday 16 July 2012 after spending three days at the Kampala Remand Prison, Luzira. 

This episode was the most embarrassing to my position in society; it was by the grace of the Lord that I, my family, constituents and the labour movement took it calmly. 

Ever since then, I have noted several attempts to misrepresent and distort facts, and malign my person. Consequently, honourable members, relatives, colleagues and friends continue to demand from me to give facts. It is for this purpose that I give this explanation to set the record right. 

Mr Speaker, allow me recount the chronology of events leading to my committal and eventual release as they speak for themselves. On 2 March 2007, I gave a notice for a motion to introduce a private member’s bill on health entitled, “The Private Health Units Regulations Bill, 2007” in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, a motion I successfully moved on 22 March 2007.

On 6 March 2007, I moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament condemning acts of undermining the rule of law and the independence of the judiciary. The motion among other things condemned the unfortunate invasion of the High Court on Thursday, 1 March 2007, and the interference with the performance of its judicial role as stipulated in the Constitution, and the motion also urged the Executive to respect the decision of the court and to enforce them fairly and effectively in accordance with the Constitution. 

That motion was drafted by honourable Members of Parliament in an informal caucus of the whole House, which I chaired. This motion of 6 March 2007 and the private member’s bill of 22 March, 2007 apparently upset the leadership of my party prompting a series of correspondences including:

1.	A letter dated 9 March 2007 by the Government Chief Whip then forwarding a complaint to the Secretary General of the party for disciplinary proceedings against me and hon. Henry Banyenzaki.

2.	My letter dated 27 March, 2007 to my party chairman seeking his indulgence in revoking all NRM caucus and party encumbrances imposed on Members of Parliament’s free expression and performance in Parliament.

3.	A letter dated 29 March 2007 from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister stating that I had acted irregularly and he accordingly reported the matter to His Excellency the President and chairman of the NRM on 3 April 2007.
 
4.	A letter dated 31 March, 2007 from the secretary general of the party requiring me to make a reply to the allegations. But I opted to instruct my lawyers, who made a reply on my behalf.

5.	I was subsequently summoned to appear before the disciplinary committee of my party, but I declined because I was already aggrieved by the decision and actions of the Leader of Government Business, the secretary general of the party and the Government Chief Whip, as their said actions infringed not only on my constitutional rights to freely debate, but also on the rights of my constituents to effective representation. 

6.	When my party leaders insisted in this reckless, blatant and unconstitutional manoeuvre, I petitioned the constitutional court on 10 July 2007 for declarations:

a)	That the determination by the Leader of Government Business in the Parliament of Uganda that it is irregular to move a motion and or a private member’s bill in Parliament unless sanctioned by the party caucus is inconsistent with various articles of the Constitution.

b)	That the decision of the NRM restraining me from moving a motion in the House is unconstitutional and contravenes various articles of the Constitution. 

c)	That the act of the Government Chief Whip in initiating disciplinary proceedings against me for moving a motion in the House is unconstitutional and contravenes various articles of the Constitution. 

d)	That the disciplinary proceedings against me for moving a motion in the House are unconstitutional and contravene various articles of the Constitution.
  
e)	That Rules 2, 4(1) and 5(d) of the code of conduct of the NRM are inconsistent with various articles of the Constitution.
 
f)	That articles 35(5) and (6) of the constitution of the NRM is inconsistent with and contravenes various articles of the Constitution.

g)	A permanent order restraining the NRM, the Leader of Government Business, and the Government Chief Whip from interfering with my constitutional rights, obligations, functions and duties.

h)	An order that the NRM and the Attorney-General meet the costs of the petition.

Mr Speaker, let me lay on Table the Constitutional Petition No.13 of 2007, for purposes of the legal arguments on the rights of honourable members or those honourable members who may be interested in that petition.

My lawyers pursued the constitutional petition for some time. However, along the way, the leadership of my party contacted me and my colleagues and we agreed to withdraw the petition in good faith, while the party was to meet the costs of the lawyers. Servant leadership is motivated by service and humility as opposed to manipulation and pride, and this was the motivation behind our consent to withdraw the petition. So, I accordingly instructed the lawyers on 14 January 2010, who immediately withdrew the constitutional petition.

However, I was surprised when about two months ago, I was summoned by the Deputy Speaker’s Office, only to find court bailiffs acting on behalf of my lawyers with an arrest warrant. It was at this time that I learnt that my party had not yet paid the lawyers as agreed, more than two years ago. I had believed and trusted the leadership of my party and had no iota of suspicion that they would betray the gentleman’s agreement. So, I again contacted the leadership of the party, who assured me that the matter was to be urgently handled. Sadly, about a month later, on Friday 13 July 2012, while walking from my office, Room W-2-13 at Bauman House to Parliament, some men, whom I learnt later to be court bailiffs, pounced on me and dragged me to court, where without any hesitation, the registrar committed me to civil prison. It was only after this sad and terribly humiliating incident that my party partially met the obligations, and partially cleared the costs leading to my release on Monday, 16 July 2012.

Mr Speaker, those are the circumstances that led me to Luzira. There has been much mention in the press that I have been begging for money and many other things, but I have the capacity to pay money if it was my obligation to have paid this money.

Let me conclude this statement by some comments on the operations at Luzira. When I went, I was led to sleep in a place where hon. Kasibante had been sleeping for some time and the youth told me that I should bring some few issues and not betray them because they had sent hon. Kasibante to deliver some issues and they do not hear him speaking. So, I do not want to betray those youth:

a)	While in Luzira, I received a petition by judgment debtors on grievances against the operations of court bailiffs who have abused the law allegedly in conspiracy with some court registrars. Parliament will have to study this matter and if possible review the relevant laws. I will be tabling this petition in accordance with the rules.

b)	I discovered that the majority of inmates on remand are unemployed youths aged below 30 years, on petty crimes. Most of these inmates take long periods on remand and even pick other very dangerous habits from hardcore criminals. Parliament might have to review the entire practice, tradition and custom of dealing with petty offenders. What could be the place of community service for instance? This year is a year of jubilee for Uganda. According to God’s principles, a year of jubilee is a year where debts are cancelled, slaves set free and all possessions are restored to the original owners. I suggest as we mark Independence this year, we unconditionally release all petty offenders from all prisons. Subsequently, we could substitute community service for this category.

c)	We need to commend the prison authorities for the excellent service by availing adequate resource allocations. One matter that needs very urgent support is the health of inmates. I witnessed inmates being forced to shave clean their hair and in the process 30 razor blades being shared among 150 inmates! This could lead to the spread of infections, especially HIV/AIDS whose prevalence rate in the prison is 30 percent. Something must urgently be done.

d)	There is need for productive utilisation of prison facilities and resources, especially human and land. The prisons have vast pieces of land and big numbers of men and women in their productive years of life. However, there has not been a productive engagement of these resources in way of, for instance, economic production of food and agro-based products for self-sustenance and skilling of inmates. I trust I will at an appropriate time proactively engage with the relevant committee of Parliament to compare notes on this matter.

Lastly, I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to present this statement and thanks to all who stood by me during this very hard time. Most of you honourable colleagues who came to Luzira, I thank you very much! But above all, let all the glory and honour return to God for His sufficient grace in all. While on the prison bus to Luzira, I was so much disturbed why an act done in good faith had become a snare and an offence to me. But the Good Lord settled it all when He led me by His Holy Spirit to His Word in 2 Corinthians 12:8-10; “Concerning this thing I pleaded with the Lord three times that it might depart from me; and He said to me, ‘My grace is sufficient for you, for My power is made perfect in weakness.’ Therefore, most gladly I will rather boast in my infirmities or weaknesses, so that the power of Christ may rest upon me. That is why for Christ’s sake, I delight in infirmities, in reproaches, in needs, in persecutions, in distresses. For when I am weak, then I am strong.” 

And indeed, Mr Speaker, true to His Word, His grace has been sufficient to me for indeed at my weakest moment even when I carried some bedbugs in that place, something most powerful happened to me, which I will not share with you at this moment. But I know that at an appropriate time, I will be able to tell you. I thank you very much and may God bless you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you, honourable member. We record our sympathies on the things that you had to go through because of those difficulties. But we thank God you are here with us now ready to embark on business. Welcome.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 28/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE

Mr Waira Kyewalabye Majegere, (Bunya County East) to ask the Minister of Defence:

“What measures has the Ministry of Defence/UPDF instituted to streamline the payment of benefits due to Army veterans in view of the irregularities that have characterized this exercise in the past?”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Defence here? Is somebody ready with an answer from the Minister of Defence?

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am giving information to the House that the ministers – I should not talk on behalf of the Frontbench, but the Minister of Defence is away. They are in a regional summit discussing regional security. We had to call off business today, as a committee, because they are not around. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was giving the House information that today they had a meeting in the committee and the minister did not appear for those same reasons. 

General Ali, do we have some information on this?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I pray that we go with the ministers who are present here and we stand over those items where the ministers are not present. There are many reasons for their absence, and some of the reasons are not known, but there are some ministers here who are ready with their reports. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Question 28/1/09 stood over. Next.

QUESTION 30/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

2.44
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Mr Speaker, question 30/1/09:
  
“(i) What is the average cost per kilometre for murram roads at district level and national tarmac roads compared to other countries in the East African region?

(ii) Does the ministry have a mechanism of checking the duplication of funding for the road infrastructure programmes in this country?”

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Hon. Waira Majegere put a question for oral answer. Mr Speaker, we sent a copy of the answer to your Office. I don’t know whether you received it, but if you have not received it, I have some copies here. 

The answer to question one is, roads in Uganda are categorised under various tiers comprising of national, district, urban, community, and access roads. Costs for works on various road categories vary depending on the scope and the complexity of the road works involved. 

Road works typically could involve the following various scopes: 
It can be periodic maintenance on both paved and unpaved roads. It can be routine maintenance, which can be routine manual maintenance and routine mechanised maintenance of paved and unpaved roads. It can be reconstruction of paved and unpaved roads. It can be upgrading from gravel to paved standards. 

Factors influencing road costs

Generally, the average costs for road construction vary depending on the following factors: Scope of works; available evidence on construction trends points that scale effect leads to longer duration projects costing less in comparison to shorter duration projects. 

Also, the extent and the range of activities comprising the works contribute to the cost spikes. Activities involving extensive earth works, ground stabilisation and bridge works, tend to cost more than the other road works with less of these high cost centre activities. 

Secondly, location of the road works. The location of the works contributes to ease of material availability, transportation, and haulage costs, labour resourcing etc. Works in remote areas with less material resources tend to be more expensive in this regard.

Thirdly, terrain of the area. Works in mountainous areas tend to be more expensive than works in flat terrain. Difficult terrain poses a number of construction challenges including rock blasting, slope stabilisation, complex soft ground treatment, especially for difficult swampy areas. 

Fourthly, market conditions. The effect of both general price inflation and changes in the prices of specific inputs, notably oil, plays a great part in construction costs. Oil prices affect road construction through two channels; the cost of direct inputs and the cost of transportation. The price of bitumen, especially asphalt, which is a key material in road construction, tracks the price of petroleum very closely. 

Globally, since 2002, international cost indices show increases of 80 to 120 percent in the price of bitumen, hot mix, paved concrete and other key materials used in road construction. 

The response to the bid adverts also plays an important element in determining costs for road construction. As most of the bidding is open and competitive, the road transport sector relies on the response of the market/bidders for which the Minister of Works and Transport has no say in checking or controlling their prices. 

Comparison with neighbouring countries. Mr Speaker, a study commissioned by World Bank in 2008 assessed the cost of road construction in Uganda, Angola, Mozambique and Burkina Faso for the tenders let out in 2006, and determined that the average cost varied from US$ 12,835 for re-graveling to US$ 613,929 for upgrading construction. 

The findings are summarised in the table. The study is here. I am happy to note that this study is in our library because it was presented in the Eighth Parliament. We have copies in the library. But for the sake of those who may not go to the library, I can lay this one on the Table. 

This is a workshop to review unit costs of road construction in Uganda, which was held on 10 February 2009 at Statistics House Kampala. I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: For the source of these figures, those who are IT compliant can also go to the website, which I have provided. It is www.euafricainfrastructure.com and for any attachments, you will get them on that website.

The costs above vary depending on each country’s comparative advantage - that is access to the sea, materials availability, maturity of the construction sector, etc. Generally, Mr Speaker, it can be seen from the study that the costs vary in the neighbouring countries and it is noted that the costs are similar to those seen in Uganda today. Contracts in Uganda for road upper grading projects are also in the above range. I am going to give a few examples. This is the stone surface road, which we tendered recently. I will talk about asphalt concrete roads later on because that is supposed to be for heavy duty. 

The Gulu-Atiak road is US$590,000 per kilometre and these civil works commenced in March. We have just awarded the Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road at US$573,000 per kilometre and the bids have come in. Maybe to note here is that, the prices are going down because of the high competition among the Chinese companies, which from an engineering point of view may also pose a danger at a later stage because it might be an intended move to kick out all other European countries and then at a later stage, push prices up. So, we are watching the trend because as we speak, there is no single European company in Uganda which can compete with the Chinese companies and most of them are actually folding their equipment and leaving Uganda. 

Costs in other neighbouring countries can also be very high. I have given the example of the 30-kilometre Nairobi-Northern Bypass, but this one is asphalt concrete - that is where the difference is - which is costing US$200 million, representing an indicative cost of about 7 million per mile but this is per kilometre. But this is a four-lane road like the one of the Northern Bypass. It is of high standard.

In summary, Mr Speaker, I would like to note that it is not a reliable indicator to have a single statistic figure representing the average price of road construction as road classes do differ. As it varies depending on a host of factors noted above, and even some which I have not indicated, it would be akin to tempting to establish the average cost of a house in Uganda or the average cost of a car in Uganda for which I believe any figure established would not be representative. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Oh, I think there is question No.2:”Does the minister have a mechanism of checking the duplication of funding for the roads infrastructure programmes in the country?” 

Mr Speaker, the answer is yes. We have a mechanism of checking the duplication of funding for road infrastructure programmes in the country. This is conducted through meetings held under the sector working groups, where all donors from development partners to the transport sector meet and discuss matters related to funding of projects within the sector. Meetings are held on a monthly basis in the ministry with representations of donors. We also hold annual sector working group workshops, and evaluate the performance of the sector in respect to implementation of projects and programmes funded by development partners. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any supplementary questions?

2.57
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Mr Speaker, I have three supplementary questions and an observation. The basic question was, what is the average cost per kilometre for murram roads at district level? That was not answered at all. Secondly, why can’t the ministry set regional average rates as it is done in the valuation of land where you can say that a piece of land at Bweyogerere should be at this cost. Why can’t the ministry set a regional average rate rather than banking more on the World Bank?

Three, on the last question, the minister is lying. Is the minister aware that the Road Fund just disburses money according to the work plan given by the district without checking whether the money was used according to the work plan, whether all the roads to be worked on exist, and also that they are duplicated?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, at a later date, I will move a motion on this. Thank you. 

2.58
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, hon. Majegere’s question was on the average cost per kilometre for the roads at district level. I listened very carefully. The honourable minister went around to neighbouring countries and gave all factors but at the end of the day, he gave us figures in dollars – US$12,000 to US$600,000 as the range. In other words, hon. Majegere is right; his question does not yet have an answer and it leaves a very serious question to any Member of Parliament who would like to know because this – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a supplementary question?

MR MAGYEZI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please ask it directly. 

MR MAGYEZI: So, given the fact that the different districts have different terrains and different factors, what is the cost per kilometre for the funds you disbursed to the districts for district roads; and secondly, what is the cost per kilometre of the funds you used to disburse to the urban councils for the urban roads?

2.59
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can the minister inform this House of the comparative cost of constructing and maintaining a murram road over a period of five years to that of constructing a tarmac road?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does that arise from the specific issue here?

2.59
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukhooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I listened to the minister –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a supplementary question?

MR OKEYOH: Yes, it is a supplementary question. Aware that I represent islands, I expected him to equally include islands. What is the cost of constructing a road on the islands where we mainly use sand?

3.01
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is in relation to the culverts, which are also used on the murram roads. Can the minister help us to know the different costs relating to culverts either in round form, the metallic culvert or the box body culvert? Secondly, maybe the minister can also help us to know the standard way of planting a culvert because some culverts appear as if they are placed on the road. Thank you.

3.01
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Can the minister consider bringing a comprehensive list of the costs of maintaining all the murram roads in Uganda, constituency by constituency? 

Two, does this cost you have quoted include the cost of UNRA supervision? Thank you.

3.02
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA MUGARRA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Mr Speaker, he told us about the costs of constructing a road in Uganda versus other countries, but he did not tell us the life span because it also varies. Constructing a road of only three years does not cost you as much as constructing a road of ten years. In most cases, in Uganda, though the prices vary, our roads last three to five years. How about other countries where they take over ten years at the same cost?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have two minutes for each question.

3.03
THE STATE MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I answered the question from hon. Majegere because when I said we have got different classes of roads, I mentioned also district roads and within district roads, different types of interventions take place. It can be full re-gravel; it can be spot murraming; and it can be light grading or routine maintenance. Therefore, I cannot say at a go unless if I am going to tell you full re-gravel of a district road is the same as a national gravel road depending on which class it falls in.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what is the average cost of each category?

MR BYAGAMBI: I can give you the categories, but this is also non-representative because of the different types of interventions.

When it comes to full re-graveling of a class two road, which is six metres wide, it ranges between Ugshs 16 million to 30 million depending on the terrain and that is per kilometre. That is both national and district roads.

We have got national murram roads and district murram roads. I talked about district roads and community access roads –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, you did not talk about amounts.
 
MR BYABAGAMBI: When we talk of interventions like spot re-graveling, it ranges from five million to 15 million depending on the type of intervention you are doing because it can be broken culverts and you are installing, or it can be spot re-graveling in areas which are critical. 

When it comes to grading, that is light grading, when you use forced account, it is Ugshs 3 million; when you use a contractor, it is Ugshs 7 million. That is the range.

Yes, Road Fund gets work plans from the district of which a Member of Parliament is a member of that committee. Therefore, Members of Parliament are members of road committees at the districts and some of you are chairpersons. Therefore, if a work plan is going to Uganda Road Fund, you get a copy as a Member of Parliament to know which road is going to be worked upon. Therefore, the onus is on us as Members of Parliament to check whether that road exists or it does not exist within our constituencies.

Tomorrow, we shall lay in this Parliament the audited list of roads by Uganda Road Fund, which is mandatory because that is statutory. You will see that we do audits of all these roads. You cannot audit 80,000 kilometres, which we have in this country. No, you take a sample of roads in different districts and you audit that and the results are good. If hon. Majegere has got a road in his district that has been worked upon but does not exist, he can pass that list to me and I will take action. I beg the honourable member to do that so that you help me to also check on those errant CAOs and district engineers who are misusing Government funds.

Figures in dollars; why we try to put them in dollars usually is because oil prices change according to the exchange rate, and using a dollar represents the real price. I have now given them in local currency.

Now, maybe when you read this book, you will find that those places with terrible terrain like Kisoro, Kanungu and Kapchorwa have a high cost per kilometre and they are indicated there.

Hon. Bintu, this is a very big topic that you have given me. I may not answer it now, but I promise that I will come back to you.There are some national roads, which are heavily trafficked and they are still murram roads and they pose a challenge of maintenance, for example, Muyembe up-to Katekekere where there is limestone. Every day they use 50 trucks and they are heavily loaded. That road has reached a level of being un-maintainable now because every three months we have to grade it because of the heavy traffic on it. Now, when you do cost analysis on that one, you may find that it is a lot cheaper to have it tarmacked than leaving it as murram.  But I can work it out scientifically hon. Bintu and I promise to bring it to Parliament.

The cost of constructing a road on the islands; the cost is almost the same. The good thing is that most of our islands have new settlements. In other words, we still have some materials there and we do not have a lot of challenges like stones or hilly places on islands. The cost falls within that average.

Culverts; I will bring the prices, but they also vary according to the size of culverts. Most of the culverts we use in this country range from 400mm to 2000mm of different types. For concrete we stop at 900mm, beyond that either we do a box culvert which is reinforced or we do metallic culverts. So, the costs differ depending on the diameter of the culvert. I can bring the costs depending on the diameter.

There are standard ways of installing culverts, which are contained in the design manual, but in some they meet challenges, especially in flat lands, and this is mostly in Northern and some parts of Western Uganda - in Ntoroko - where it is almost level, and water does not flow.  When you put a culvert, it is below the embankment and when water comes, the road creates a pool of water. So, they tend to raise the culvert, but they are supposed to back-seal the access roads.

These contractors sometimes collude with the supervisors. They do not fill those access roads even if they are raised up, and they are supposed to fill for a certain distance so that it is levelled, and has a slope so that the vehicle moves smoothly, but we have now put measures on that and I think on most of the roads that we are working on now, it is not happening any more.

Hon. Otto, I think you have given me a very big job, whereby I am going to give you the list of all costs of murram roads that we have maintained in Uganda. I think that will be a booklet and I will give it to you because those costs are there. We can give you the booklet of all the murram roads that we have maintained, the costs, where they are and the interventions that have been done on them.

Lifespan 

I do not know why people talk about the lifespan of our roads, especially tarmac roads. Our tarmac roads in Uganda are basically heavy duty roads, and fall in classes A and C, but in strength they might be the same though they might not be the same in size. When you talk of a road which is upgraded, let us say, stone-surfaced roads like Tirinyi-Mbale and Soroti-Dokolo-Lira, the design span of those roads is 15 years, on condition that they are maintained, and the interventions are done at the right time. After three years, a road which is heavily trafficked starts showing some weaknesses after you go back to maintain it. 

After seven years, which is a must, but we are not doing it in Uganda, a road is supposed to receive a seal on top, which we call an overlay. And that overlay pushes the road to a lifespan of 15 to 20 years. But in most cases in Uganda, we lack money to put overlays after seven years. What do we do? Within the budget we have, we continue patching, and we have patched these roads and they have lived up to 15 years.
 
I want anybody to stand here and say, we patched such and such a road and it never lived for 15 years so that I know where it is situated. Because to tell me that a road lasts one year in Uganda, I have never seen that road in Uganda, unless it is situated in a place where people cannot reach, but I don’t know where it is. The last road, which was worked on and the work is completenow, is Soroti-Dokolo. We have Karuma–Arua, which was done about seven years ago and should be receiving an overlay. So, that is how roads are. 

By the way, I toned to tell you that these are chemical roads, therefore, even if you were to leave them to stand, after 25 years, they would chemically  decompose, whether you drive on them or not. Those are the facts. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. 

QUESTION 31/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH

Mr Bitekyerezo Kab Medard (Mbarara Municipality) to ask the Hon. Minister of Health:
“ i) Would the minister explain to the House whether or not it is government policy to levy parking fees in Government hospitals?

ii)	If yes, what is the rationale for such fees?”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there anyone going to ask this question on behalf of the Member for Mbarara Municipality? Is the Minister of Health here? 

3.15
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Once again, Mr Speaker, I would like us to stand over this item. 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Question stood over. 

DEBATE IN REPLY TO THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT  OF UGANDA ON THURSDAY, 7 JUNE 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should be bringing this to a close now. We have debated it for three sittings and we should bring it to a close today, to allow us move to the next stage of our budget processes. I am going to allow very limited interventions today so that we can conclude this matter. The time allocated for this debate is three minutes. 

3.16 
MR WILLIAM KWEMERA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to extend my appreciation to His Excellency the President for fulfilling the constitutional obligation of being accountable to Parliament and the people of Uganda, and enhancing our oversight role as Members of Parliament. Basically, I would like to thank him for urging Members to have unity of purpose when dealing with national issues. 

I would also like to thank him specifically for the following: One, power, because we have been able to move from 50 megawatts in 1986 to 781, which I think everybody can testify; that loadshedding has considerably reduced.   

Works on the roads is quite obvious; law and order; and I would also like to appreciate the economic stability. You all remember sometime last year, around this time, prices shot up, inflation was galloping and there was a lot of economic instability, which almost led to an insurrection. But we should appreciate that things are quite normal right now. 

However, I would have been much happier if the President had come out clearly on the issue of corruption. On page 1 of his address to the nation, the President lists four areas where he is going to concentrate: Recovery of the economy; disagreement amongst us on priorities on which to allocate scarce resources; sabotage; and corruption. While he elaborates on the above three, little does he mention on corruption. It is only evident on page 18, and in one sentence, where he says that he is bringing a new law. I believe that the issue of corruption was not handled satisfactorily.

I would like to make an observation. Today, you cannot talk of eradicating poverty without talking about corruption. Public sector corruption is the single greatest factor that is hindering development. And today again, corruption is a central issue in the development discourse because it affects the poor, who largely depend on Public Service. It eats into an already tight budget and it can degrade the whole economy. I would suggest that before bringing a new law, can we make existing laws more effective? Can we make systems and procedural audits and fix the gaps? (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we were supposed to see the closure of this debate. I am now going to entertain responses from ministers on the specific issues that were raised and then we close this debate. We also have a Bill to process today. If you could bear with me, I seek your indulgence; I have the list of the order of how the ministers are going to respond. I don’t know whether they have consulted and agreed on how to proceed, but each minister will have five minutes. So, consolidate your points and make those responses in five minutes. I will start with the Minister of Works and Transport and then that of Energy and Mineral Development. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the first place, we recognise the dismal attendance of the Frontbench on the Government side. But as if that is not enough, no sooner had you declared the order of responses than I saw a number of ministers melting away. I hope they are not running away from responsibility. I beg that the Leader of Government Business prevails on the ministers to respond to questions. (Interjection) I am talking about responses to the State of the Nation Address to be done by ministers; do not mix up issues. Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. And colleagues, I would like to urge all of us to listen to each other; it is unethical to attempt to ‘boo’ colleagues when they are contributing. It is only honourable and courteous to listen to each other’s views.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The call made by the hon. Epetait stands; let us listen to one another. Civility demands that you listen to those you even disagree with. When you do that you earn your right of reply; when you don’t, you lose your right of reply. So, it is not dignified to disagree before hearing from the person you disagree with. 

3.22
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Mr Speaker. During the debate on the State of the Nation Address, Members raised several issues concerning my ministry. I would like to respond as follows:

The MP for Okoro County, the Woman MP for Zombo District and that of Maracha District, wanted to know the progress of power supply in West Nile Region. Nyagak Hydropower Project, as I speak now, is generating electricity while it is undergoing commissioning tests. I am certain that the Members who asked must have already noticed the difference. And in addition, the plan to extend the distribution network to other parts of the region, including Zombo, Zewu, Kango, Vurra, Koboko, Maracha, Yumbe, Pakwach, Parombo, Panyimur and others, is underway. Construction work is expected to begin in October this year.

The MP for Igara West and other Members wanted to know the status of the Rural Electrification Project in the constituencies. And in particular, they wanted to know Kitama, Kankozo and their environs. This and other projects in the various constituencies will be comprehensively dealt with when discussing the report on the Budget.

The MP for Nakifuma County observed that the electricity coverage had improved, but that connection charges and tariffs were still high. Government is aware of this problem, and we have a pilot project called Global Partnership Out-based Aid, which is aiming at subsidising the new connection charges and access to electricity. 

The Leader of the Opposition observed that fuel and electricity prices were high. Presently, we import all fuel and by comparison in the region, our prices compare favourably. If I may give you a comparison: Currently, petrol in Uganda goes for about Shs 3,570; in Kenya its equivalence is Shs 3,155; in Tanzania it is Shs 3,160; and in Rwanda it is Shs 4,229. When we compare diesel, we have Uganda at Shs 3,120; Kenya at Shs 2,875; Tanzania at Shs 3,056; and Rwanda at Shs 4,106.

Mr Speaker, Uganda and Rwanda being landlocked, and due to the logistical costs involved, you will realise that our prices are slightly higher than those of Kenya and Tanzania. And Rwanda being the farthest, it has the highest prices.

On the electricity tariffs, Government agreed that subsidies on electricity should be removed and as a consequence, the current tariffs tend to reflect the cost of production and delivery of service to the consumers. But again, when you compare our tariffs with our neighbours in the region, they do so favourably. For example, looking at the domestic customers – where the majority of us belong - in Uganda, a unit of electricity is 21.2c, Kenya 21.5c, Rwanda 22.3c and Tanzania 20.5c. Looking at commercial customers, in Uganda it is 19.8c, Kenya 22.5c, Rwanda 22.3c and Tanzania 16.5c per unit of electricity. When we look at medium industries, in Uganda they pay 18.6c, Kenya 18.7c, Rwanda 20.9c and Tanzania 9.9c per unit. For large industries, in Uganda they pay 12.7c, in Kenya 17.5c, Rwanda 20.9c and Tanzania 8.8c per unit -(Member timed out.)

3.29
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have an oral answer for one question raised, and also some of the issues that Members raised during the debate – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are dealing with the State of the Nation Address: Reply by ministers.

DR ONDOA: Okay, thank you. A number of issues were raised and one of them was the increasing prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the country. Members wanted to know why that is so and what my ministry is doing about it to curtail the prevalence. Coupled with that was also asked the capacity of districts to have CD4 count machines available and how we will address the inadequate health funding at all levels. There was also the issue of drug stock-outs at facilities and the involvement of other stakeholders in management of HIV/AIDS. 

I thank the Members for raising these issues and my response is thus: Concerning the increasing prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the country, it is true that I came and gave updates on that. In the sero survey we did in 2004, our prevalence rate was 6.4 percent, but the one we did last year, the incidence had gone up to 7.3 percent. And notably, the prevalence is highest among married couples. This is found to be so because of multiple sexual partners among married couples. However, the prevalence is found to be lowest among children under five years of age, which is less than 0.5 percent; and among the youth, 15 to 24 years of age, it is four percent. 

So, we are addressing this issue holistically and we are increasing on our catchment area, and also on our messages, for people to be able to realise that they need to abstain - A for abstinence; B to be faithful to one partner; and C we urge that couples, especially the discordant ones, also use condoms.

Also, for those who are unable to abstain that they use condoms whenever they have sexual intercourse. And D, in our acronym, is the use of drugs - the antiretroviral drugs. One, for those who are already infected and eligible, it has been found that when they are treated effectively and the viral load reduced, then the transmission of HIV is also reduced. 

The D part also, is for the use of drugs, especially for managing and for reducing the transmission of HIV from mother to child. Here we want to embark on the programme of no transmission at all from mother to child, and my ministry is embarking on what we call the plan B+. This way, we are going to put all the pregnant women who are HIV positive on treatment. Previously, we only used to put women, who had their CD4 less than 350 on treatment, but now all of them, regardless of the CD4 count, will be put on treatment. And, Mr Speaker, I am glad to announce that studies have shown that when we do this, then there would be zero transmission of HIV from mother to child.

Then E is the elimination part. When we combine our ABCD strategies that I have mentioned above, then we will be able to eliminate and have zero transmission, especially of mother-to-child transmission.

Concerning the capacity of the CD4 count in the districts, the Ministry of Health has strengthened capacity to conduct CD4 count enumeration in the country. We have provided capacity at national and regional levels to conduct a high volume of CD4 measurement. And in the recent past, the Ministry of Health procured and installed 250 call points of care CD4 machines for health centres IV and even to some of the health centres III. (Member timed out.)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. I have observed from the presentations of the ministers that five minutes appear to be very limited, and yet the issues they intend to respond to are very crucial. I beg that we amend the time allocated to the ministers so that they really respond to the issues; if we could make it maybe 10 minutes, it would be very helpful. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Presidency, five minutes. (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Again, Mr Speaker, I pray we stand over the item on the Presidency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Trade and Industry, five minutes.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (Dr James Mutende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Five minutes are obviously very short, but let me make the best out of it. I will respond to issues first of all raised by the Leader of the Opposition. I want to thank him for acknowledging on page 16 that Government has done quite well in terms of revenue collection. I think that is very good. 

I want to react to the issue of trade and say that whereas it is true that there was a widening of the current account deficit, which stood at 11.95 of GDP last year compared to 8.1 percent in 2008/2009, what we should note is that there was an overall increase in international trade as in total imports and exports. I would like us to note that there was a total increase in exports -(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The response to the State of the Nation Address is very important and Members of Parliament raised very important concerns. I want to thank the ministers who are present. 

The procedure I am seeking, in light of the limited time they seem to be having for response, is that wouldn’t it be better for the Leader of Government Business to direct that every minister gets a written response? There are concerns which require data and the Minister of Industry was trying to give some data from a piece of paper. Now, for us we cannot get that copy. I would like to seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that you direct that every minister responding to this important address gives us a written response. Even if they summarise it for three minutes, we can have the responses in writing. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is so ordered that the responses should be in writing, but the five minutes rule will apply. I will not change it. Whatever you have prepared in text, lay it on Table and proceed, and use the five minutes productively.

DR MUTENDE: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I was only saying that in terms of volume we have actually increased. Total exports for the financial year 2011/2012 stood at 4.1 billion, which was an improvement of 406.4 million dollars over the previous year. Total imports also increased by 10.4 percent from 4.08 billion dollars in 2010/2011 to 5.309 billion dollars in 2011/2012. In addition to this, services payments also increased and stood at 2.23 billion dollars. But we should note that part of the biggest import that created our deficit came from the increase in the oil import bill which went up by 34.1 percent. So, the overall balance of payments was positive and on account of the increased inflows of remittances, which reached 2 billion, and foreign direct investments which went up and reached 834 million dollars. Portfolio inflows also increased and reached 274 million dollars. I want to just make this clear to the House that in terms of trade, the country actually did a lot better and indeed, you will notice that over the period, the shilling has been relatively stable.

If I may again summarise other issues which were raised by Members - the lack of factories to manufacture fertilisers, which are key to the modernisation of agriculture. We agree with that, but I want to explain that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives, working in collaboration with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development are in the process of reviewing the lease currently held by private investors, which is the Madhivani Group, on the Osukuru Phosphate Deposit near Tororo. Indeed, in this regard, our ministry through Uganda Development Cooperation, which was recently transferred from Ministry of Finance to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives, shall provide the core investment into this fertiliser plant. The idea is that in the long-run Government shall, after making sure that the project is implemented, divest its shares out to the private sector through a transparent process, which is through the Uganda Stock Exchange.  

Issues were raised on food storage by many Members, and I want to state here that Government planned to set up, beginning this financial year, 60 warehouses around the country and 10 silos, which will be strategically located beginning this financial year. The aim of this is to guarantee food security, but also for price stabilisation. 

Members might wish to know that through the Uganda Commodities Exchange - and we have started a warehouse registration system on a pilot basis, which will enable farmers to take their produce to the warehouses and get receipts. With these receipts, it serves as collateral, which a farmer takes to the bank and obtains money to solve urgent problems. This will help us to overcome the problem of prices hitting the floor during bumper harvests and then when there is scarcity, we begin importing cereals from outside the country and the -(Member timed out.)

3.43
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issues raised in this House that my ministry is going to respond to are matters to do with human trafficking, drug trafficking and maybe, clarification on the activities of Police in containing terrorism.

This proposal brought by the honourable that we should have a written response is timely, but unfortunately, he just brought it at the last minute. I will only respond verbally on what our response would be on those issues raised.

On human trafficking, we are working very closely with the International Police (Interpol) and the Police of those countries like Malaysia and China, where our people are being trafficked for various evil activities like prostitution and so forth. Together with Interpol and the immigration department, we have made it now a routine to check on any young people leaving this country to make sure that they are screened, blocked and stopped from leaving our country when their mission is not very clear, except for those who are going for studies, for example, to those countries where they get scholarships, and those who move with their parents. 

We have turned away from the airport a number of young people who are destined to Dubai, Malaysia and even to China, and this will continue to ensure that we protect our young people from becoming victims of such evil trade.

We have, as a policy, set up an inter-ministerial sub-committee, which periodically reviews the methods of controlling and containing human trafficking in the country. In this committee, the Chairman is the Minister of Internal Affairs, we have the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Inspector General of Police together with Interpol, the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, the Minister of Gender and Labour - this is in light of the fact that there are some employment agencies who are taking our youths out of the country. We have them on board to ensure that the labour that is offered to our people outside will not fall in that category of prostitution or human trafficking. The immigration department is there, the Ministry of Justice is also part of it, the Ministry of Education and the security agencies - ISO and ESO - are part of this, to ensure that we protect out youths from falling prey to these activities.

To do with the drug trafficking, we have intensified investigations and we have actually arrested a few of those perpetrators of drug trafficking, and one of those involved in this act is currently in exile in Brazil. I think he was a Member of this House and we are still looking for him. (Interjections) It is in the papers. So, that is an indication that we are really very serious, and we are going to stop this practice -(Member timed out.)

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITIES (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker, under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, hon. Gerald Karuhanga raised issues to do with unemployment for the youth. The Ministry of Gender together with the ministries of Trade and Education are developing a strategy of creating employment through Skilling Uganda Project. That is, transforming education from mere theory to real skills. That is one strategy which is being addressed.

In addition to Skilling Uganda Project under the Ministry of Education together with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, there are other ways of raising employment in this country by introducing what we call externalisation of labour despite the challenges that we face. This unit created under Ministry of Gender is able to export a number of workers that are in organised agencies. There are cases of exploitation by some groups that are not given licences. We would like to stamp this one out together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Otherwise, all issues to do with externalisation of labour are helping a number of youths get employment outside this country. Thank you very much.

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Alex Onzima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the Ministry of Local Government, the main issue that we captured as a ministry was the facilitation of other districts, sub-counties and village leaders. These are people who monitor Government programmes, maintain security in the villages and in some cases, adjudicate cases, yet they have been getting little or no facilitation at all. There is a provision of about Shs 20 billion per annum to cater for these two groups, provided creation of new villages and sub-counties stops. 

In appreciation of the contribution of the local government political leadership to the country’s service delivery and governance, Government decided and approved payment of salaries and gratuity from the Consolidated Fund. The categories of political leaders so far covered include district chairpersons, members of the district executive committees, district speakers, chairpersons of district service commissions, municipal mayors, chairpersons of city divisions and local council III chairpersons. 

Effective July 2010, however, the following categories of political leaders were also considered for payment as follows:

•	A monthly allowance of Shs 200,000 for deputy speakers available;
•	A monthly allowance of Shs 100,000 per district councillor; and
•	An annual ex-gratia payment of Shs 120,000 per chairperson of the village parish/ward.

In line with His Excellency the President’s pronouncement during the State of the Nation Address, however, the Ministry of Local Government is developing a proposal to effect payment of the main categories of local government political leaders, which once finalised in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Public Service, will be communicated for consideration and approval by Government. 

We are also in consultation with the responsible agencies of Government to relieve taxation on ex-gratia payment because this is such a small amount of money yet it is taxed. 

As for the creation of new lower level administrative units, the Ministry of Local Government wrote a circular to all local governments advising them that the creation of new lower local government units has been halted. A memorandum to this effect was also presented to Cabinet and attracted consensus among all members. 

In addition, as the country prepares to conduct the national population census, any creation of new district units will render enumeration maps already produced by UBOS useless. 

With regard to facilitation earlier on, Government procured motorcycles for the Local Council III chairpersons to facilitate monitoring of Government programmes -(Member timed out.)

3.55
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Mr Speaker, a number of questions were raised. The first question was on NAADS, and a number were raised on organisational, structural and operational issues of NAADS. I am glad that following this question, a paper was written for review, submitted to Cabinet and a sub-committee of Cabinet and the Minister for the Presidency is putting his hands on this. 

The second question was on relocation of Ministry of Agriculture from Entebbe to Kampala. Again, Cabinet has pronounced itself on this matter because Cabinet directed that those ministries which have homes go back to their homes and stop renting. However, they have to be careful so as not to break contracts entered into. Therefore, those without homes will also be accommodated in their homes gradually by building with time.

There was a question on cotton prices and performance. I am glad to report that cotton performance was very good. Production rose from 7,300 bales to 253,000 bales. However, the price of cotton fluctuated a great deal and this was due to three reasons: One, was a drop in the world market prices; two, fluctuation of the exchange rate; and three, high interest rates.

The third question was on extension of the oil project to Buvuma. Following the success of the oil project in Kalangala, there was need to extend this facility to Buvuma Island. The Ministry of Lands and I, visited Buvuma to sensitise the people. I am glad to report that following our visit, 4,000 hectares of mailo land and 800 hectares of public land are likely to be available for that project. 

The next question was to do with animal diseases, especially Foot and Mouth Disease and East Coast Fever. A paper was presented to this House by the Minister of State for Fisheries, but I am glad to report that we are doing our best to contain these diseases.

On crop diseases, especially Banana Bacterial Wilt, again this is being handled, but the biggest remedy is to cure fertility of the soil because when we harvest crops, we make the soils weaker. It is like a child suffering from kwashiorkor. Something is being done along this line. 

Finally, I want to report that agriculture is on course and last year we registered a three percent growth. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Water and Environment, five minutes. Lands, Housing and Urban Development, five minutes.

3.59
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Members raised quite a number of issues to do with land. The first one was raised by hon. Latif Ssebagala. This was in regard to compensation for land acquired in order to construct the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline. The facts are that this land was valued and the land owners have not been compensated. There is likely to be a delay due to the fact that the company, which had been procured to undertake this work, was a Libyan company. Due to the unfortunate political developments in Libya, we found that the work has been slowed down. As a result, we are likely to have a delay in the compensation of those affected. 

There was the issue of the land information system and computerisation of the land registry. I would like to assure the House that this work is on course. Construction of the various facilities, in particular, that one in Kampala on Lourdel Road, is about to be completed. The equipment to be utilised under the computerisation project for the ministry has already arrived in the country. Our view is that this financial year, we should be in a position to see the operationalisation of the National Land Information System. The various zonal centres in the country will also be operational. 

There has been the issue of land grabbing in the country. Our Constitution protects all citizens in regard to their rights on the land. This Government is concerned about the various reports, which we have received in regard to land grabbing. It was in regard to this that Government enacted the Land (Amendment) Act, 2010 so that the rights of our people could be clearly taken care of. What my ministry is trying to do right now is to popularise this Land (Amendment) Act. We have a programme of meeting the various district land boards, area land boards and local councils so that we can be in position to bring out the basic tenets of this law so that it can be utilised to protect our people from being harassed by land grabbers. 

We have also come up with a statutory instrument where the rates for Busuulu are clearly stated. Once this Busuulu is paid by Bibanja owners, their rights on this land are protected. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Mukitale raised the issue of delays in valuation of the various projects that are being pursued by Government. It is true we have been experiencing some delays and these delays are due to the fact that during its term in office, the NRM Government has come up with too many projects which had ordinarily not been foreseen. As a result, we find that the manpower requirement in order to be in position to execute this work in good time has become a challenge. Nevertheless, we have taken a decision to outsource so that we can bring on board services of competent valuers whom our ministry can be able to supervise. 

Nevertheless, there is a problem of shortage of this calibre of manpower; land valuation professionals. We have had a problem of competing with the private sector on terms, which we cannot easily outmatch. We have nevertheless agreed with the Ministry of Finance, and Ministry of Public Service that we must do whatever it takes to recruit more and retain more land valuation officers in order to cope with the huge amount of projects that the NRM Government intends to undertake -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Education and Sports; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Works?

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This round, I did not receive a lot of questions, which is an indication that the Ministry of Works and Transport is doing very well. 

Mr Speaker, the Kabale Member of Parliament asked about the 2.9 km connecting Kabale to Katuna Road to the new Kisoro Road. Those 2.9 km will be tarmacked. We are going to cause a valuation order in the existing contract; it will be tarmacked. 

Then, on the roads in Karamoja; most of the roads in Karamoja have already been advertised. These include Muyembe – Namaru – Nakapiripirit; then Moroto – Nakapiripirit. The documentation is now with the Solicitor General awaiting signing. I hope within one month we might sign this contract. Then, we have got Moroto – Kotido, then Lokitanyara to Katakwi – Soroti; those have been advertised. 

Then on accidents, it is true that the new roads we have tarmacked have come with accidents. Usually, good roads come with accidents because people tend to over speed. So, I call upon every leader to sensitise the population about this; we shouldn’t leave this job only to Ministry of Works and Transport. It is terrible that people should perish on such beautiful roads, with all road signs, just because of over-speeding. We have tried to put humps; and as I said before, this is the only country where you construct beautiful highways and end up putting mountains on the way. 

Apac – Kitgum; part of this road was also advertised and it is in the manifesto that it will be upgraded. 

On bridges, we have a challenge. Most of the bridges were constructed about 50 years ago. And as I talk now, we have embarked on an ambitious plan to reconstruct almost all the bridges in the North West and North East of Uganda under the funding of BADEA. The process is in advanced stages; we are about to award contracts. I think in total, more than 35 bridges will be worked on. 

On the Uganda Road Fund, we have got the constraint of the Uganda Revenue Authority Act amendment. But of now, the Cabinet has directed the Minister of Finance to bring the amendment to the Act of URA to conform to the Act of Uganda Road Fund so that user fees, which are charged, go directly to the account of Uganda Road Fund. 

The Members of Parliament from Arua want to open up the road joining West Nile through Yumbe up to Kitgum. I think we shall consider that at a later stage because we wanted to concentrate on the roads connecting our borders, which we are working on now; that is Arua – Vurra – Koboko – Oraba and Gulu – Nimule – Atyaka. Those contracts are currently ongoing. But connecting them with another will come later. 

For the Karamoja region, they want a road connecting Lira through Otuke to connect Lango region with Karamoja region – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. For the honourable ministers who are not here, we will not have an opportunity to have them respond because we will need to conclude this debate. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have a timeframe, so I am going to give you seven minutes.

4.10
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I was negotiating for ten. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to give a government rejoinder to the response of the Opposition to the State of the Nation Address. 

If we are pressed by time, because I think it is important for us as government that we respond to the issues that the Opposition raised, maybe we can do what is urgent so that we have enough time later to respond to the issues that were raised. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, most of the issues that we are debating at the moment are going to come up again when we deal with the budget; that is why I did not want to give the Prime Minister a lot of time. They are going to say the same things when we come to discuss the committee reports. 

So, I was using this time very productively because I am aware that in the gallery today we have older persons who have come to see how we proceed with an urgent Bill that they have been pressing for a long time. This Bill is the National Council for Older Persons Bill that was moved in this House. It is ready for Second Reading and that is why I was insisting that we need to move quickly, and deal with this Bill and finish it also before we agree on how we are going to give the committees time to deal with the budget so that we do not again violate our own law - the Budget Act - by extending the time beyond 31st of this month. That is why I was making this plea, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

I wanted to take the vote on the state of the nation debate and then we proceed from there. Excuse me?

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, it is normal practice that the Leader of Government Business sums up on behalf of Government and tries to clear any issues that may not have come out clearly in regard to what Government is doing, more so those that were highlighted by the Leader of the Opposition. This is not only to the benefit of the Members of Parliament, but also to the general population. I am sure that the entire Ugandan population are on their screens and radios to see how the NRM leadership responds to the many issues that the Opposition raised. It is not the usual way of doing things; that when a Prime Minister is supposed to speak, a person at my level can come up and make such a plea. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just received a 15-page, size font 12, single-spaced submission from the Prime Minister and if he is to go through it, it will take quite some time. I am conscious of the presence of the people who have travelled from far to come and see how we proceed with this Bill. That is the reason. These issues of the state of the nation will keep coming back when we start the budget and so. we will be saying the same things again. Unless we defer this particular reply by the Prime Minister – clarification from me?

DR EPETAIT: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot do a clarification from the Chair. It is not clarification for sure!

DR EPETAIT: I beg your guidance –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

DR EPETAIT: We have just received this 15-page document from the Leader of Government Business in reply to the response by the Leader of the Opposition. One would wonder whether if this is read on the Floor the Leader of the Opposition would also be accorded time to make a rejoinder on this very response of the Leader of Government Business. I do beg your guidance because a 15-page document is another thing more like another State of the Nation Address. I beg your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the President delivered a State of the Nation Address. A motion was moved to thank the President for the proper elucidation of the issues affecting this country, the past, present and his projections for the future in term, to proposed policies and legislative programmes for this House.

The Leader of the Opposition replied to that statement and the Members have debated for the fourth day today. It is certainly within the right of the government to make a reply. The Leader of Government Business has the right to make replies, but we now need to agree on how we are going to proceed. 

If the Prime Minister can do it in 10 minutes, I will allow. If it is more than that, then I do not have the time – no, I am not being unfair, honourable members. I am being very fair because the ministers have responded on specific issues, and so let us use 10 minutes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, there is always a first time. This is the first time that the Leader of Government Business is being given 10 minutes against a presentation of more than an hour by the Leader of the Opposition, but let me try. I have jumped page 1. I just want to make a few points.

Government respects and welcomes the response by the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. I wish to repeat and emphasise what I have said previously in this House that we regard the Opposition as a useful and necessary component of democracy, especially in ensuring a transparent and accountable government that serves people’s interests. The Opposition is an essential component of a well-functioning democracy.

The Opposition should offer credible policy alternatives to those offered by the government in power. In democracies where there exists serious opposition, the Opposition reciprocates this respect when dealing with issues of national concern.  Our country Uganda, the people of Uganda, the pains and joys of the people and their expectations are the same, when the NRM is in Government, or in the unlikely event that another group was in Government in Uganda.

I propose, for the consideration of this august House, the adoption of guidelines on the rights and responsibilities of the Opposition in our democratic Parliament in order to help develop a culture of full democratic behaviour by our colleagues in the opposition.

Mr Speaker, in his response, the Leader of the Opposition chose to use isolated points in the President’s State of the Nation Address and did not appreciate the fact that what we have today in Uganda is a result of 26-years struggle. I personally see no point of contention when the President refers to the state of the nation, Uganda, as is after 26 years.

The Leader of the Opposition presented 16 issues, which he preferred that the President should have considered in his address. When you analyse these issues, you will notice that those are some of the issues the President addressed in his speech. The only difference is that they were not presented in the sequence and articulation, which the Leader of the Opposition would have preferred. In my view, I think it is better to concentrate on content rather than on form.

Last year, around this time, I stood before this House and decried the unparliamentary language that the Leader of the Opposition had opted to employ.  Unfortunately, he is at it again. In paragraph 6 of his presentation, hon. Nandala-Mafabi deliberately quotes ex-President Bill Clinton out of context. He quotes the famous statement of Clinton, “Being President is like running a cemetery; you’ve got a lot of people under you and nobody’s listening.” President Clinton made that statement during his grand jury testimony in the Monica Lewinsky case.  When you read the whole statement you would not fail to realise that my dear colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, failed to contextualise that statement. 

For the Leader of the Opposition to allude to the above quotation and liken the whole 34 million Ugandans who listen to the President, dialogue with him - either directly or through their leaders and representatives - to the dumb bodies in a cemetery is very unfortunate! Indeed, if hon. Nandala-Mafabi intended this statement to be a joke, it was a bad joke.

It is important to make distinctions between several economic indicators. The technical economic indicators of the country’s economic growth and development are not the same as the social economic indicators. One results into the other. 

In paragraph 7 to 10, the Leader of the Opposition was labouring a very important point that our people in the rural areas are very poor but then lost the argument when he mixed the two. This is where I want to make this point very clear. I have heard it said several times on radio stations and in newspapers that you cannot talk about a growing economy when there is somebody in the village who slept at 6.00 p.m. because he or she could not afford paraffin. The former is a technical economic indicator and the latter is a social economic indicator. In economic growth and development, the former precedes the latter and the latter eventually strengthens the former in a vicious cycle. 

What I mean is that in one year or two, there can be recognisable change in an economy - for instance, inflation can drop and GDP can rise – and these are technical indicators and the change they cause in the economy may not be immediately transformed to the life of the last person in the village. Therefore, to say that, and I quote my brother Mafabi, “one who does not understand the fundamentals of economics will ask you what you are talking about when you start telling him or her that the economy is doing well compared to the previous months when he or she slept early because she could not buy paraffin”, to say the least, intimates that your comprehension of these matters is not different from theirs.

Leaders and representatives of people are chosen because they have expressed ability to digest matters for their people. It is therefore unfair for the Leader of the Opposition to say that when there are people in the village who cannot afford paraffin and soap, then the President should not say anything positive about the economy even when positive indicators are present.

The Leader of the Opposition spent a lot of time deliberating on fundamental human rights. Indeed, paragraphs 14 to 24 elucidate the point he is trying to make, that the fundamental human rights of the Opposition are unfettered rights. In paragraph 15, hon. Nandala-Mafabi states, “…the Constitution commands the President to guarantee unfettered political space for party activities. All he has done is to misuse state power by curtailing multiparty activities.”  My response to my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, is that it is him who may be the problem because his imagination is unfettered by the laws of logic. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I arise on a point of order with regard to parliamentary language and unparliamentary language. The statement just read by the Rt hon. Prime Minister, hon. Patrick Amama Mbabazi, says that, “My response to my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, is that it is him who may be the problem because his imagination is unfettered by the laws of logic.”   

Mr Speaker, does this not amount to unparliamentary language? Is it in order for the Prime Minister to use unparliamentary language when he is talking about someone who holds a constitutional office? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which particular term does the honourable member refer to as unparliamentary?

MR ODONGA OTTO: “unfettered by the laws of logic.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is very parliamentary. Please proceed. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was simply speaking the English language. (Laughter) If there is a party whose party activities are only understood by staging riots, burning tyres and digging trenches in the middle of roads, stoning policemen and stealing commodities of shopkeepers; if there is a political party whose activities are to incite the public to join the party in its activities of hooliganism; if by such activities such a party hopes to convince the masses to support it and win power, then that party may never move a single step from its office to State House. (Applause)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, there is a very unfortunate statement on page 5 that the Rt hon. Prime Minister has just read. I belong to the party, Forum for Democratic Change. We have a constitution and we have a manifesto. The Rt hon. Prime Minister is alleging that in Forum for Democratic Change, our party activities include staging riots - (Interjections) - because he is talking about a party to which the Leader of the Opposition belongs! He says that our party activities include staging riots, burning tyres, digging trenches in roads, stoning policemen, stealing commodities of shopkeepers. 

Mr Speaker, I belong to the Forum for Democratic Change and I am totally not aware of activities of this nature in the constitution of FDC. Is the Prime Minister therefore in order to start alleging issues and attributing them to a party, when actually the very acts that lead to this are out of incitement by the security personnel, when others air out their dissenting views and then security personnel cause irritation and provoke people? Is he in order to attribute this to a registered political party as having these as part of their activities? Is the Rt hon. Prime Minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have listened to the statement in issue. I have read it again and I will read it again before I make my ruling: 

“Rt hon. Speaker, if there is a party whose party activities are only understood by staging riots, burning tyres and digging trenches in the middle of roads, stoning policemen and stealing commodities of shopkeepers; if there is a political party whose party activities are to incite the public to join the party in its activities of hooliganism; if by such activities such a party hopes to convince the masses to support it and win power, then that party may never move a single step from its office premises to State House.”

Honourable members, the statement I have just read is wondering if there is such a party. That is what it is saying, - (Applause) – wondering if there is such a party, and it is my sincere hope that there is no such a party in Uganda. It is the sincere hope of the Speaker that the Prime Minister’s wishes or anxieties are in vain, that there is no such political party. If there is no such political party, then the Rt hon. Prime Minister is just making a passing statement. It does not affect any particular political party. (Laughter) No party is mentioned here. 

Honourable members, my ruling is, no order has been violated for the following reasons: If there is a party whose party activities are only understood by staging riots - [Mr Sseggona: “But this is a response.”] – Well, but this is the statement.  No, honourable, do not argue with me. This is the statement. I have to rule on the statement. 

“If there is a party whose party activities are only understood by staging riots”; is there a political party whose activities are understood by staging riots? - (Interjections) - Can my attention be drawn to such a political party so that I can properly rule? Draw my attention to that particular political party which falls in this description and then I can rule on it. What it is saying is that if there is such a party, then that party has a long way to get to State House. Please, let us not debate this. I have ruled on this matter; let us proceed. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I wish to spend some time and talk about these fundamental rights. According to Justice William Douglas, one of the acclaimed proponents of human rights, “A right is a moral principle defining and sanctioning a man’s freedom of action in a social context. If some men are entitled by rights to the products of the work of others, it means that those others are deprived of rights and condemned to slavery. Any alleged right of one man or one group which necessitates the violation of the right of another is not and cannot be a right.” He also said, “The liberties of none are safe unless the liberties of all are protected.” (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, your time was taken up. You have five more minutes. Please wind up. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: From the wisdom of that scholar, Mr Speaker, it is not fair for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to claim rights of his people without looking at the rights of those other people who are disturbed and hindered from carrying out their businesses because of those riots. Those whose properties are stolen or destroyed, the innocent children who suffer teargas effects and the policemen on duty who are clobbered, stoned and even killed, as the case was for AIP Ariong; does hon. Nandala-Mafabi want us to believe that rights are an exclusion of some people?  

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, it has come out very clearly that when the hon. Prime Minister talked about rioting, stoning and stealing, he was referring to hon. Nandala-Mafabi who belongs to the Forum for Democratic Change. He does not have any evidence of activities planned by the Forum for Democratic Change in terms of rioting, stoning and stealing other than the corrupt tendencies of the NRM. 

Is it in order for the hon. Prime Minister, without any evidence of conviction of members of the Forum for Democratic Change, to allege that the FDC plans the stealing of shops, the rioting, the teargas and the digging of trenches on the roads? Is it in order for him to completely damage the reputation of the Forum for Democratic Change as a party?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter raised by the honourable member is similar to the issue I have already ruled upon. Please conclude in five minutes. 

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I am forced to rise on a point of procedure. We have been given a statement, which we have been religiously following, but when it came to point 2.7, the first paragraph was not read and yet that was the introductory aspect of the quotations he came and talked about. So, is it procedurally right for a statement to be given and then part of that statement is jumped? That first paragraph is an introductory core issue; the other paragraph he read is explanatory to the first paragraph. Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I first gave the Prime Minister 10 minutes. We had points of order and exchanges in-between. I have given him an extension of five minutes because I know that to read this word per word would take more than 40 minutes. So, please, skip as much as you can, hon. Prime Minister -(Laughter)- and conclude this in five minutes. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me now address the question of security. The Leader of the Opposition talked about political events in the Great Lakes region but he did not help matters when he failed to emphasise that the Uganda government has strongly protected its people and its sovereignty, and that all the internal insurgencies have been defeated. Uganda is peaceful from corner to corner. It is because of this security assurance that our brothers and sisters who do not feel safe in their own countries flock to Uganda in search of peace and safety. 

I cannot leave this point without mentioning the constant terror threats we are living with. It is common knowledge that our country and our neighbours have been at various times subjected to terrorist attacks. It is also common knowledge that we have, on several occasions, received terrorist attacks and threats and several suspects have been apprehended. 

We must applaud our security organs for the resilience and alertness that they have exhibited. It is such matters that lead the security organs to require adherence to certain standards of behaviour by those who want to exercise their democratic rights to demonstrate. I can assure you that the country is in unison in the struggle and fight against terrorism and for the protection of all inhabitants of Uganda. When they defy the law and start demanding for their “unfettered rights”, they subject the country to being a soft target for these terrorists.

The State of the Economy
If the Minister of Finance had been here, she would have used five minutes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; the state of the economy will be dealt with in the budget. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay, Mr Speaker. I have abandoned that one. However, on poverty, the Leader of the Opposition has made a point which I want to appreciate. He says that the country’s poverty level has more than halved under the NRM Government over the past two decades but he shoots himself in the foot when he says, “in terms of sheer numbers, more Ugandans now live in poverty than in 1986 when President Museveni took power.” I would have expected that instead of stating the obvious, hon. Nandala-Mafabi would have made comparisons in terms of percentages. Comparing a population of 12.6 million in 1986 with that of 34 million today would be missing the point. 

Again, to say that the recovery from poverty should have ended in 1989 is to culpably claim ignorance of the hindrances and hurdles that the government had to surmount in order to restore peace and tranquillity before we could talk of economic recovery. Those who would criticise us for heights we have reached would do well to remember the depth from which we started. This country belongs to all of us despite the different ideologies we may cherish. We should therefore combine our efforts for development rather than distractively criticising every effort by Government.

Before I conclude, I just want to make one point on the media. We cherish the freedom of the media. We only call on the media to behave responsibly as they enjoy those freedoms. 

I wish to thank the President for fulfilling his obligation and for directing the destiny of the nation through his State of the Nation Address. It was a true, correct and adequate exposition of the state of our nation. 

I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament and his group for the pain he took in recognising and appreciating the positive direction that the President has steered the nation. At the same time, I would like to remind him that the criticisms with which he reacted to most of the issues raised by the President is not a constructive way of debating issues of national interest.

Let me assure you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that Government is very grateful to this Parliament for the great interest with which honourable members have addressed issues raised by the President. We welcome constructive criticism, which is legitimately delivered for improvement of government performance in service delivery. Many of these issues have been responded to or will be responded to gradually by the various ministerial statements along with the other government policy documents that constitute our roadmap towards stability, growth and development. I thank you for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issues are clear. The discussions have been very elaborate. We have had five days of debate and now we have come to the conclusion. The motion is that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of government policy contained in the address on the state of the nation by H.E the President to this Parliament on Thursday, 7 June 2012. That is the motion we have been debating. I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR OLDER PERSONS BILL, 2010

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2010” be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It has been seconded by hon. Migereko and the hon. Nyira. Please proceed.

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, the old persons in this country have a lot to offer in terms of wisdom, economics, politics and conflict resolution. More so, the population of older persons throughout the world is increasing at a very rapid speed. It is projected that the world population of older persons will be, by 2050, for the first time in history, greater than the population of children under the age of 14 years, and half of them will be in developing countries.

Older persons are one group of the many groups that are marginalised. When we look at our Constitution, under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, it is the responsibility of the State - Under VII, “The State shall ensure that there is reasonable provision for the welfare and maintenance of the aged”. Under XI, it says, “The state shall give the highest priority to the enactment of the legislation establishing measures that protect and enhance the right of the people to equal opportunities in development.”

We note that older persons have missed out in the political arena in terms of local council representation. Under the Local Government Act, Cap II (43) Section 10 1(f), it is provided for that older persons shall be represented by two councillors, female and male. This has not been possible because we have been missing an enabling law. It is now long overdue that this Parliament takes its responsibility to enact a law that will provide for the representation of older persons in the councils.

I, therefore, appeal to colleagues - this law is straightforward and therefore I call for your support. The issues of older persons cut across all political affiliations, religions and all other issues. Therefore, my appeal is that colleagues in Parliament support this Bill. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is urgent and it is a matter of great concern to older persons of this country. We all know where we will be, hopefully, and we should be congratulating them for getting there. Mr Chairman, would you like to report on this matter?

4.49
MR WILSON NOKRACH (NRM, PWD Representative, Northern): Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I stand here to present the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the National Council for Older Persons’ Bill, 2010. The Bill was read for the first time on 7 March 2012 in the Ninth Parliament and was referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development in accordance with rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The objects of the Bill are as follows:
a) 	To provide for a National Council for Older Persons’ Bill to act as a coordinating body between government departments and other service providers.

b) 	To provide a structure through which free and fair elections of representatives of older persons may be conducted at all levels. 

c) 	To set standards and regulations to guide Government, civil society and the private sector on the availability of services provided to older persons with a view to redressing the bottlenecks encountered.

d) 	To provide a platform for older persons and stakeholders to meet regularly, at least once a year, to review the performance of the council.

e) 	To provide for monitoring and evaluation of the extent to which Government, civil society organisations and the private sector meet the needs of older persons in planning and implementing programmes.

f) 	To perform all other things as are incidental or conducive to the attainment of the foregoing objectives of the Bill.

In handling the Bill, the committee used the following methods: 
The committee discussed with the following stakeholders: 
•	the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which is actually the owner of the Bill; 
•	Uganda Reach the Aged Association; 
•	Uganda Network for Support of the Aged; 
•	The Aged Family Uganda; 
•	HelpAge International; 
•	Nkore Older Persons Association; 
•	Happy Lives of Elderly; 
•	Unite for the Aged; 
•	Matunda ya Wazee; 
•	Kampala Prisoners’ Cooperatives; 
•	National Network for Older Persons of Uganda; and 
•	50+ YEO (Uganda Chapter). 

The committee made the following observations: 
The proposed law will facilitate the inclusion of older persons in plans and programmes to share their knowledge, values and life experiences for promotion of integration linkages. 

The proposed law will ensure that issues of older persons are included in planning, budgeting and implementation of programmes. The elderly do not have a central body that coordinates their affairs and there is need to form one. 

The Bill considers older persons to be 60 years and above and yet older persons who are 50 years equally need support. The traditional extended family and community based social support systems which used to support older persons have weakened due to economic hardships and breakdown of the community’s value systems. 

The composition of the executive committee members at the district level will comprise five people, one third of whom should be women. However, the committee observed that the elements should change to “of which two should be older women”. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law subject to proposed amendments. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion before the House is that the National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2012 be read the second time. That calls for analysis of the principles of this Bill. If you are agreeable with the principles, at this stage we would do well to move straight and deal with the actual provisions that we may need to have some discussions on. If we agree with the principles, I will put the question to the motion for second reading. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on whether the leading questions you are asking will not take us to the committee stage before having debate. I ask this because I have very strong reservations that I want to raise now, which attack the principles of the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This would be the right time. 

4.56
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would be the last to oppose anything in this Bill because I am growing older as day follows night. I came here at 23 and I am now 35 and I still think I am doing very well. 

When I read the objectives of the Bill, I ask myself, what do the old people deep down in Kansanga, Kaliro, Pader and Amuru need from this Parliament? If you read the objectives of the Bill, it talks of including the older people in decision-making in council at a local level. My personal belief is that what is of concern to the elderly people is their pension.  

I am yet to be advised how this law would help all of us, the MPs, to answer the endless questions that the old people who have worked for this country continue asking us about their pension. Bringing another piece of legislation here and yet there are teachers, nurses and doctors who have worked and have not received their pension, I do not see it as helping anything to do with the elderly in this country. 

At this particular point, I would like to raise a preliminary concern. Would it be prudent for this Parliament to resolve that the issues of pension are disposed of before we pass this law? I do not see how any of the objectives would be of interest to my old man who worked in Foods and Beverages for so many years; he would not even be interested in being on the council at the district. Their concern is their pension. 

Ministry of Public Service, you know how many elders are coming there endlessly following up their pension. So, since the Prime Minister is here, Mr Speaker, we could be advised. Some have even died without receiving their pension. We should be advised in concrete terms that before we pass this law, their pension is assured. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the member for giving way. I am seeking clarification from you. I thought by passing this law, we would give the older persons a critical mass to push for their interests including pension. How do you consider that? If you do not pass this law, they will remain disunited, but by passing this law they are forming a council and becoming united so as to push for their interests.
 
MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I would like to advise members of Parliament that we have the mandate; we all have pensioners in our constituencies. There is a time in this Parliament where we refused to pass the benefits of the former presidents until the benefits for our Speaker and Deputy Speaker were provided for. We told Government to take back that law and we were not out of order. They were telling us to allow them first finish with what we were doing and then revisit it, but we rejected it until they brought it and we comprehensively passed a law that catered for all the high profile people. 

I think it will be in order for this Parliament to put a caveat and say, “for today maybe we are moving so fast; how much time does the Prime Minister or the Minister of Public Service need to bring a comprehensive statement and work plan on how pensioners would be paid?” Otherwise, to put this Bill on shelves as laws of Uganda and yet the old man just needs his pension would not be helping the process. We do not need painkillers now; I think it is about time we may have to start thinking of a major surgical operation. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, just to guide; this Bill is to provide for the establishment of the National Council of Older Persons. Do we have a law on pensions in this country? Can we be guided on this particular aspect so that we can see how to move forward? 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a matter of fact, we have a law governing pensions in this country and courts have pronounced themselves on this. First, it is the Constitution which guarantees pension as a right. We have also got the Pensions Act and different legislations that make provisions for different establishments in this country. 

I think the question raised by hon. Odonga Otto goes to the will. When somebody presents this, hon. Odonga Otto and I, and I am sure many, want to see how this law is going to help the elderly we have in this country in terms of welfare. When you talk about, for example, participation in elections etcetera, they are there. I mean, they have been participating and that is why we have hon. Kajura in this House and hon. Moses Ali – (Laughter) – and they are covered in this definition, but ultimately – Oh, by the way, I congratulate him upon his elevation to the new rank. But you see, the point is, it must not look at elections per se; we are looking at welfare and that is the question I am sure my colleague wants answered. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have a clear response to this issue so that the debate is guided? If we sorted out this particular issue, we would move forward faster. 

5.05
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Mr Speaker, the issue of the older persons should not be limited only to pension because that is for those who have had some gainful employment and retired. There are a number of older persons who have not had such an opportunity. 

Government even started carrying out a pilot programme of giving support to the older persons, to the tune of about Shs 23,000 per month. This is information for Government – even the older persons in those districts where the pilot programme is going on are in agony because not all of them are considered. So, the issue raised by hon. Odonga Otto about the social support given to the older persons is not only limited to those who have retired from jobs. Older persons need support and the law ought to address the issue of social support to the older persons, not just representation. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank Dr Epetait for accepting this information that I am going to give. When we talk about services to the older persons in this country, we are not reinventing the wheel. There is a document known as Sessional Paper No.4, to which I want Government engaged to find out if there is no adequate provision under which the older persons of this country are supposed to be served. This paper is there in the archives and also in the Parliament Library. I invite you to look for that document because there is an existing framework under which we can still assist the older persons in this country.  

MR TANNA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague for accepting this information. If I understood hon. Odonga Otto well, the matter that we are now seeking clarification on, especially from the movers of the motion is: Is this piece of legislation appropriate or is it encompassing? Is it answering the question that we have at hand? 

After reading and listening to the chairperson of the committee and the minister, this law is just giving the old people rights to participate in LC meetings. However, if we looked at it comprehensively - All of us or most of us are widely travelled; if you go to Europe, the old people there have designated homes that cater for their needs. They do have support in terms of use of transport; for example, they may have subsidised transport at all stages. As long as you hold a senior citizens card, you have special access to certain services. 

Aren’t we rushing this without putting into consideration what hon. Epetait has also just talked about, that there is a pilot programme to give out Shs 23,000 per month? But together with this, are there added services that we can offer? I disagree with hon. Epetait when he refers to Gen. Ali and hon. Kajura; these people are above the needy bracket – (Laughter) - but I am talking about the rural old persons in Tororo. You find a young person who cannot even have the courtesy to offer an old person a seat in a health centre. So, I would request that this law is passed for posterity. Let us not answer the question for today – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating or just giving information.

MR TANNA: I am giving information. (Laughter)

DR EPETAIT: I would like to thank my two colleagues for the rich information they have given. Hon. Tanna, I did not at any one time refer to hon. Kajura and Gen. Ali as being in the needy bracket. I was talking about older persons in general. 

The information I was giving to Government was that even in the districts where Government is piloting the programme, like Katakwi and Kaberamaido in Teso sub-region, not all the elders are considered. A majority of them have been left out to the extent that they are jittery about the discriminatory approach that Government is taking in identifying beneficiaries. 

Indeed, this law as it is may not address the social needs that the older persons require. If it is just about representation, it has been happening; some local councils have older persons. As long as we do not address the social needs of the older persons in totality, this law may not be that urgent. We first need to start with the issue of addressing the social needs of older persons lest we should be misconstrued as having given them hot air. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, could somebody help me with clause 4 - the object of the national council. Somebody could help me with a debate along that line.

5.10
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If I heard you right, you posed a question on whether the House is in agreement in principle. You also asked us to dispose of that issue first. That is where I am starting from. 

In principle, what this committee report is seeking is the establishment of the National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2010. This is in conformity to Article 32 of our Constitution. I want to read it verbatim: 

“Affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom for the purpose of redressing imbalances which exist against them.” Now, this report is trying to address one of those issues. 

“(2) Laws, cultures, customs and traditions which are against the dignity, welfare or interest of women…” The welfare bit is what hon. Odonga Otto and other colleagues are talking about. “...or any other marginalised group to which clause (1) relates or which undermine their status, are prohibited by this Constitution.” 

I want to support this motion because what they are seeking is to have these elderly persons not discriminated against in participation, and even their welfare and the social needs can be addressed within this Bill. We can raise them. However, I urge my colleagues that we agree in principle that we need this. There is the National Council for Women, National Council for Youth, National Council for Children and National Council for People with Disabilities; what is wrong with this one? (Applause) It is overdue. 

I am speaking now as the chairperson of the equal opportunities committee. These elderly people are senior citizens and that is where we are going. That is where our parents and our forefathers are. We should really respect them and not marginalise them. We should instead create laws that will take care of their welfare as they have been stipulated. I want to call upon my colleagues that in principle we agree. Let us include welfare and agree that these are senior citizens who need this and it should have been done long time ago. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us proceed. I want us to go to the level where we deal with the specifics, if it were possible. 

5.13
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I simply do not understand why the Opposition team should not be happy with the proposition by Government that we enact this law. As hon. Kawooya has said, first we are complying with the constitutional command. The Constitution of the Republic commands us, as Parliament, as a nation, and as a Government to provide for those who in the past have been marginalised on account of age. This is what we are attempting to do in this Bill. 

The aged are members of our society. It is a category that we know exists but does not enjoy recognition of the law. This Bill seeks to provide a forum for them to express their interests, to champion their interests as a social group. It seeks to establish a mechanism by which the State is bound by law to provide financial resources for them. Nothing like that exists at the moment. 

So, to argue that because we have a Pensions Act and not all pensioners have been paid, therefore those who have not been recognised and whom we are seeking to recognise and give the force of law should not be recognised is, as I said in my previous statements, obviously an argument that defies logic. What this Bill seeks to do, as the chairman of the committee says, is to create institutions for the elderly of this country to have a voice, to champion their own interests, their own rights. (Applause) When it comes -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have no rule that gets me to have order in the gallery but I will be forced to call for order in the gallery. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  These are the elderly. So, the simple point I am making is that even if one of the points being made by my brother, Dr Epetait, was to be handled, it would not be a reason for stopping the adoption of the principles behind this Bill. When we come to the details of the Bill, then one could come up with amendments in order to bring about improvement. 

However, the principle that we create a forum for the elders of this society, a forum to which they belong and which the State is under obligation to support, is a principle that I thought we should note. Really, Opposition, I seek your understanding and indulgence on this. I wish you good understanding so that we move to the details. I will take clarification from my honourable brother, Wadri, the one who came from the other side.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the super minister by the names of John Patrick Amama Mbabazi alias Karya buro talks, we always have to make friendship on the Floor of the House. So, really, Rt. hon. Prime Minister, we are not in disagreement with you in as far as the provision of the legal framework is concerned. That is not what the Opposition is about to say. 

We do appreciate that the elderly are one of the marginalised groups in this community, but what we are saying is that here is a situation where we have provided for other marginalised groups. We have provided for the youth of this country, we have provided for the persons with disability in this country, we have provided for women, we can now see even hon. Kawooya is here in this Parliament. So, what we are saying is, can you as Government be more proactive? 

I have got a lot of old people in my place and by the way, sooner than later we will be in that age bracket, and look at the number of the people that we are talking about. Do we have anything tangible? If you went to my village, the elderly people who are there are not going on about whether there is a forum for them in the village at the parish level, at the sub-county and the district. They are more interested in what Government can put on their table. That is the issue - (Interjections) - No, leave alone those who have worked for it. Those who have worked for it may demand it as their right in form of pensions, but – (Interjections) - Don’t worry, I am building my foundation, Rt hon. Prime Minister. With you, we always do it that way. 

The point I am making is that, Rt hon. Prime Minister, can you convince this House that there is a provision in this law that is in the offing, which will put the welfare of this marginalised group on the table so that that they are able to have it? Otherwise, if it is like these other groups that I have mentioned, the likes of the Kawooyas, the likes of Gen. Moses Ali and all those of those age brackets will all be here. So, clarify and put us on the right track. We are not against the law but we want something tangible for the elderly people. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I am glad you are taking a new direction - (Interjections) - that is most welcome. You are welcome aboard. (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, in Parliament you will always have people like my honourable friend, and that is a reflection of the wider society. 

I thought when we are debating a matter like this we should not be reading “the Opposition” in this and in a way incite a particular group against us. All we are telling the Prime Minister and the Government side is that while you want to improve it at a later stage, what is wrong with improving it now. So, by inciting that group of elders to which we are attached by blood and many other factors, is the Rt hon. Prime Minister, who is also moving into that bracket, if he is not already there, in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, mobilising, demobilising, bringing together, dispersing, wooing; it is all politics. It is the whole point of politics - how to persuade people to be on your side. I thought that was the cornerstone of politics. If I say it is not, I would have ruled this entire Parliament out of order because that is what we do here. Our business is trying to persuade the country to join us.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad that we are now together on this. All I urge my colleagues from the Opposition to do is to say so clearly without any ambiguity. The question the Speaker asked was: do we support the principles of this Bill? That is the question. If we do, let us say so and then we go to the details. If there is anything that you feel needs to be put in, that is why you are here, that is the way - (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, we are limited under the Constitution to move motions or Bills that have financial implications. By the time Government came up with this Bill, a certificate of financial implications was presented. In the first place, we are not against the Bill. Our point of concern is that the Bill ought to address, among other things, the welfare needs of the older persons. If the Prime Minister is suggesting that we should now come up with proposals to enrich the Bill, such proposals will basically be on welfare and therefore have a financial implication that will not meet the certificate that was laid on the Table. 

Procedurally, wouldn’t it be better that Government puts that welfare component into the Bill right away rather than demanding it to come from the back bench or from the Opposition, which would substantially affect the Bill and in fact affect the certificate of financial implications that was earlier issued? We would require that the welfare need be incorporated right away so that we pass the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a Bill of this nature has a short title and a long title which provides for its objectives. The particular objective of this Bill is as it is in the Act, “to provide for the establishment of the National Council for Older Persons.” It provides for the objects, composition and functions of the national council. It provides for a secretariat of the national council and the executive secretary and other staff. It provides for lower councils for older persons to provide for elections of representatives of older persons, to provide for financial provisions of the national council and to provide for other related matters. This is the object of the Bill and that is why I was asking that if somebody could allow us address clause 4 of the Bill.

The objects of the National Council are;
a) 	To act as a coordinating body between Government departments and other service providers and older persons;

b) 	To provide a structure through which free and fair elections of representatives of older persons will be conducted at any level of local government;

c) 	To set standards and regulations to guide Government, civil society organisations and the private sector on the quality of services provided to older persons with the view to redressing any bottlenecks encountered;

d) 	To act as a platform for older persons and stakeholders to meet regularly at least once in a year to review the performance of the national council;

e) 	To monitor and evaluate the extent to which Government, civil society organisations and the private sector meet the needs of older persons in planning and implementing programmes designed for equality and full participation of older persons”.

This is what the Bill is about. Can the Bill go beyond this? As a professional draftsperson, I know it cannot go beyond what it is meant to achieve. This is what it is meant to achieve. So, in the circumstances, these are the principles contained in this. That is why I posed a question: is there any opposition to the principles contained in this Bill as it is?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I would then want to get an assurance, which of course will be extracted by the relevant committee, that other than what is being addressed in the Bill, which the short and long titles clears, all the other good concerns we have raised about the elderly persons will be attended to at a later time even when this Bill is passed the way it is. Those concerns will remain. The issues of pension will remain, the issues of centres for the elderly will remain and the issue of the Shs 23,000 will remain. 

We can pass this law - we shall do it - but even the issues of health for the elderly will remain. Can we get an assurance, which we shall follow up at a later date, that all the other issues subsequently, will also be attended to so that we are not seen to be frustrating this Bill? I am talking as the chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this a kind of a faceoff between the two honourable members?

MR SSEGONNA: No, we love each other, Mr Speaker. Before the minister comes, may I seek your guidance; you guided very well, and I am grateful that this Bill cannot go beyond these objects. However, picking from hon. Odonga Otto, is it therefore not the time to amend the objects and include those welfare issues that we have raised, because we do not want to come back here? So, - (Interjections) - To my friend the engineer, I respect my honourable colleague when it comes to roads and when I am talking about these issues of law, I deserve some respect. (Interruption)

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am the vice-chairperson of the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development. This Bill we are passing today is long overdue. The older persons have been waiting for this Bill because persons with disabilities have their council, women have their council and children have their council. If men want, they can have theirs, but older persons today are going to have their council. 

This council, as you have seen, has clear objectives of coordination, participation and representation. If you would like to find out the issues - what will be done for the welfare of the elderly persons - you will find that Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is providing a programme to give some money to older persons. So, the council will now ask: is this money enough? Will it reach everybody? Can it help them? So, it is this council which will monitor the programmes. 

If we want, another Bill will come, that will be the Older Persons Bill. It will be like Older Persons Act where we can include all the issues of welfare in future. Maybe we need to ask the minister if he can assure us that he will bring that Bill. Thank you very much.

MR SSEGONNA: I have taken that information, Mr Speaker. Let me emphasise that we are not in disagreement. We are only saying because the Bill has objects which provide four corners out of which we cannot make amendments, can’t we provide for those welfare issues right now before we go beyond the objects? It is as simple as that; otherwise, we stand together. Actually, this minor disagreement in strategy is the only one I think I have had with the Prime Minister. He is somebody who has always agreed with me. Thank you.

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, I would like to assure this Parliament that another comprehensive law to deal with the welfare of older persons will be brought. Why? First of all, this is not a new thing for vulnerable groups. We created the Council for Persons with Disability in 2003. Thereafter, we came out with a law for persons with disability in 2006. We created a law on the National Council for Women and later, we had a law on women. We also had a law on National Council for Children but we have an Act for children. The purpose of this Bill is to establish a council and comprehensive welfare will be addressed in subsequent laws. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I also express gratitude to the minister for this. He has given us more information which we need. Unfortunately, he is quoting wrong precedents. Is it going to be the procedure of this Parliament to enact a smaller piece of law today then come up with another piece of legislation the next day? I thought the proper procedure would be to bring a comprehensive law so that we have one point of reference. Guide me, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is a much bigger institution; it might not have that focus on elderly persons. They are trying to create an institution which will focus on that so that the details can be handled by these people, just like the National Council for Children, the National Council for Women and so on and so forth. That is what they are trying to do, so that the council can look at it in a more clear way and come back to the House when it is clearer.

Honourable members, I will put the question to the motion. I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2010,” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR OLDER PERSONS BILL, 2010

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2 

MR NOKRACH: Mr Chairman, we had proposed an amendment to clause 2 sub clause (3), but after a serious discussion with the mover of the Bill, I want to withdraw that amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR NOKRACH: Mr Chairman, under clause 4 paragraph (a), we propose that we insert immediately after the word “department” a comma and then we delete the word “and”. The justification is for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the justification for that particular amendment is for clarity in drafting. Is that amendment accepted? I put the question that the amendment proposed by the committee be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, chairperson, for giving me the opportunity. I am a member of the committee and the vice-chairperson. There was an amendment which we made and maybe because of a typing error, it was deleted. It regards the composition of the council. We have all the numbers there, but we need to add, “older person with disability”. This is because we, people with disability, as we grow old we have our own problems which other older persons do not experience. So, after saying, “at least two women”, we can then say, “at least one older person with disability”. That is the amendment, which I would like you to add. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is a council for disability. Honourable minister, do you want to deal with this? Was this amendment considered by the committee? Hon. Irene Muloni, do you want to make a contribution on this subject? 

MR NOKRACH: Mr Chairman, the committee considered that amendment but it was not reflected due to a typing error.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what is the amendment? 

MR NOKRACH: The amendment was to include at least one older person with disability. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: How would the drafting then be, because this is the composition of the national council? Would this same composition go into all the other councils? Can somebody help with the drafting? “The older persons, male and female, from each region elected by the district executive committees of older persons”; which particular one are we talking about? 

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairman, in the youth council, people with disability are represented and in the women council, we are represented. Disability is a cross-cutting issue. I support the issue which has been brought by the members of that committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where is it going to be located and how is it going to be drafted? 

MS ASAMO: It is in the composition that one person-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I am not talking about specifics, where it is going to go.

MR NOKRACH: Mr Chairman, in 5(1) (a) - “Two older persons, male and female, from each region elected by the district executive committee of older persons one of which one shall be a person with disability.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the proposal. I put the question to that proposed amendment. Honourable minister, is there any danger to that? 

MR MADADA: I beg to disagree because if you say, “one of the two from each region”, that means the dominance of this council will be for persons with disability. Already, we have a council for disability and if you say “one in every two”, then you are making this council another council of persons with disability.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by – (Ms Baba Diri rose_) – It is justified already. We have already conceptualised it, but we now want to take a vote on it. 

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. At the end, if you read the list there, they say that they would pick on two older women. Let us add after that: “one older person with disability”. They say two women should be represented but at least one person with disability should be reflected at the end of that composition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by the hon. Baba Diri to the inclusion of one person with disability. 

(Question put and negatived).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 5 stands part of the Bill

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR NOKRACH: Mr Chairman and honourable members, the committee proposes that in clause 12(3) we substitute the words, “not more than one month before the resignation” with the words “provided that such notice shall not be tendered more than one month before the date due for resignation.” The justification is for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ruhindi, you want to take a look at this? Does that serve the purpose for which the original drafting was intended? Are you putting an upper limit - a minimum or a maximum? 

MR KIWALABYE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In my view, the original drafting seems to be clearer. With the proposed view, it does not come out clearly that somebody should give at least one month’s notice before resigning, yet that is the aim. So I prefer the previous drafting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, what is intended to be achieved by this? 

MR RUHINDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The proposal by the committee is a proviso because they say “provided”. You substitute by providing a proviso, and a proviso without anything before it. In other words, it is not even a proviso in the real sense of drafting. They are saying that: “provided that such notice…” It is as if they are maintaining what is there and putting this, which is not the case. So they are not providing anything substantive. 

I would rather that they concede and we maintain the provision as it is because it is very clear that the notice should be given not more than one month before resignation. What they are providing for is very vague. So chairman of the committee, please concede and drop this. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Should it be “not more than” or “not less than”?

MR NOKRACH: Mr Chairman, we concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I need you to look at this again; is it “not more than” or “not less than”? The period intended is at least one month. You need at least one month’s notice. Can you achieve that by saying, “at least not more than one month”?

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, my opinion is that you are right. It should be, “not less than one month before resignation”. You will mean that the individual should give you a minimum of one month’s notice. So the wording should be, “not less than one month before resignation.” 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, we may have to leave the original text the way it is. By the time you say, “not less than one month”, it means you are subjecting that person to forced labour – (Interjections) – Yes! If I do not want to be in Parliament even for one more day and you put a condition that I should give it at least 30 days, it still amounts to abrogation of the Constitution. So, maybe we should leave it the way it is; if someone wants to go, he should go at the earliest possible convenience. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 12 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MS LOWILA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to propose an amendment to clause 16(1) (a) on the composition of the five members. Considering the fact that women live longer than men, I am sure among the older persons women are more than men. So I want to propose that instead of saying “one third”, we say, “at least two”. This is following the proposal that was also made by the committee.  I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the honourable member for Pader. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to
.
Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR NOKRACH: Under clause 31 sub-clause (1), we want to move an amendment by substituting the word, “of” with the word, “or”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, on line 3, it says, “borrow by way of overdraft of otherwise...” They want to take out “of” and put “or”, which will make it proper. So it will be, “borrow by way of overdraft or otherwise.” I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR NOKRACH: We are proposing a substitution for the entire clause 33 as follows: “The financial year of the National Council shall be prescribed in the Interpretation Act.” The justification is for clarity and uniformity with the laws of Uganda.

MR DOMBO: When you look at the provisions as initially provided in the Bill, that the financial year of the national council shall be the same as that of Government, and when you look at the proposed amendments, would this not therefore require that even that Interpretation Act shall at one time have to be amended in order to provide for this one? This is because it was not initially provided and yet this is a new law that is being made. 

In this case, I want to seek the wisdom of the chairperson as to why he would make a proposition like this and yet this council is going to be funded by Government. When you look at previous articles we have already passed, they show that the minister responsible for the council shall, three months before the expiry of the financial year, provide estimates which must be provided to the Minister for Finance. So if we are going to use Government for funding the council and Government has an existing financial or calendar year, what is the wisdom then of this proposition? I strongly propose to the chairperson that he should concede so that we go back to the original proposition, unless he can convince us otherwise. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You know, the provision of Article 257 (1) (i) defines “financial year”. That same definition is in the Interpretation Act. So, I think they wanted to make a cross reference that it should be as defined in the Interpretation Act, but that is a very obvious statement to make in legislation because those definitions are already made. As it is, I think it would be okay. Mr Chairperson, would you like to concede?

MR NOKRACH: The wisdom was definitely hidden but I now concede. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 33 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.


The First Schedule

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am required to put the question to the schedule as the schedule. Is it one by one or it is a whole schedule? Okay, let us do it one by one. 

I now put the question that the First Schedule to the Bill stands as the First Schedule of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: My initial understanding was that you put the question to the whole schedule. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports there to.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.01 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House did consider the National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2010 and considered it fully with some amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FOR THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR OLDER PERSONS BILL, 2010

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2010” be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you should have given us notice of your recommittal. That is what the rules say. You cannot just show up at this stage.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you know the procedure. You give notice that we will be asking for recommittal of this clause. 

DR EPETAIT: When the Committee of the whole House sat, we started immediately with the interpretation clause, Mr Speaker, which I thought should have come last. Otherwise, I had some amendments to the interpretation clause because it was even raised by the committee - (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the matter?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I beg to refer members to the last page of the observations of the committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just proceed with what you want to recommend. 

DR EPETAIT: My recommittal is to redefine the definition of older persons and substitute 60 years with 50 years - (Interjections) - and I beg to give my justification. 

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, the definition of older persons is provided for in the United Nations Charter. It is also provided for in the National Policy for Older Persons of Uganda as 60 years. Is it in order for an honourable member to amend the United Nations Charter and the National Policy for Older Persons of Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is certainly not in order and I ask him to withdraw his attempt. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, in the circumstances, I was earlier persuaded by the argument of the committee but with that guidance, I withdraw. 

However, there were two other amendments. On the definition of “Minister”, I beg that we delete the last word, “Affairs” and leave the definition as “Minister means the minister responsible for older persons”, just for purposes of clarity and conformity to the title of the Bill instead of again introducing older persons affairs. I thought it would be logical to delete “Affairs”, just for clarity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for Third Reading. Has the motion been moved for Third Reading? What was the motion again? (Laughter)

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2010” be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled “The National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2010” be read for the third time and do pass. 

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR OLDER PERSONS ACT, 2012”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations! Thank you, honourable minister, and thank you, Mr Chairman, for this outlook. Thank you, honourable members, for sitting up to the end and the conclusion of this. 

Honourable members, as you are aware, there are some two issues that we need to deal with before we adjourn. I will allow hon. Majegere, the honourable member for Kyenjojo and the honourable member for Busiro South. They have some matters to raise. You have two minutes. 

6.07
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue is about an Ebola suspect in my constituency. I have a brief statement. 

We had an Ebola suspect, the late Balonde Sharif Dan, in my village, Mpumu, Wairama Parish, Mpungwe Sub-County, Bunya East, Mayuge. The Ebola suspect, the late Balonde Sharif Dan, aged 32 years, survived by four children and a widow, Hajira, was a resident of Bugoto Landing Site in Bukaboli Sub-County –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, why don’t you just deal with the subject of the death instead of all those details? They may not be necessary. Deal with that specific information of the death. 

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, I thought we cannot know about the death without knowing the person. The deceased died of a short illness. He was vomiting blood and had bloody diarrhoea. Within less than six hours, he had died and was buried at Mpumu. Burial was done by Buluba Hospital, which is strange. This has caused a lot of panic and fear within the community. Besides, the relatives would like to exhume the body and give it a decent burial. 

People have been giving me information that there are other immediate family members in bad condition. I contacted the district health officer, Dr Isiko Paulo, who managed to give me an update as per the attached. What is crucial in the report is that it is true the body was buried by Buluba Hospital. The cause of death is not disclosed. They sent the blood sample for testing to the Uganda Virus Research Institute and there are no results yet. 

I have also called the widow of Dan and the LCI chairman and they have confirmed that nobody is in a bad condition. I have allayed people’s fears using local radio stations. However, there is still a lot of panic within the community. I therefore would like to appeal to the Minister of Health to:

One, quickly move to contain the panic and fear in the community at Bugoto Landing Site, Mpumu village and Mayuge as a district. 

Two, quickly follow up the investigations at Uganda Virus Research Institute to establish the actual type of disease. 

Three, quickly find out if it is not Ebola why Buluba Hospital carried out the burial and not the relatives.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course you said they are waiting for the results. 

MR MAJEGERE: Fourthly, let the minister quickly tell this nation, if it is not Ebola why the vomiting of blood and bloody diarrhoea. If relatives want to exhume the body for a decent burial, is it the right time? We need to advise these people. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister will deal with all those details, honourable member. 

MR MAJEGERE: Why didn’t Buluba Hospital management tell the people the cause of the death of the late Dan Sharif Balonde?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have just said they have sent the samples to Uganda Virus Research Institute. Let the minister respond to those issues. 

MR MAJEGERE: Lastly, what is there for the widow and the four children of the deceased Ebola suspect? 

6.11
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thanks so much, Mr Speaker. In relation to the Ebola virus, last week I visited a health centre IV, which is a district hospital, and I found out that there are no gadgets to handle even a single suspect in the whole district. The equipment, which is said to be available, is in Kibaale. The nurses and doctors in the districts are not trained and for that matter, the equipment cannot be delivered to the district. 

Mr Speaker, we are at the border of Kibaale. Although there are no patients or people that have been affected by Ebola in the district, the nurses and doctors and the people in the district are terrified by the situation. The nurses and doctors are in a state of panic. When the DHO contacted the Ministry of Health and the people concerned with training about Ebola in Kibaale, they said they were unable to do anything like training because there were no resources. So, I request that at least resources be availed to train the nearby districts to handle Ebola cases, and Kyenjojo is a special case. 

In Kyenjojo, even when there is a small itch of a mosquito, they do not touch that person because there is a lot of sensitization and information on the radios. Nurses and doctors are called but there is no way they can handle those patients that they are called for. Malaria is affecting people but then they are calling the doctors to come and handle Ebola.

In relation to that, my fear was that it was congestion on the borders that is causing Ebola. Could it be the people coming from Congo? I do not want to be quoted as saying that they are from Congo but probably, they are suspects. Could we carry out some research to find out about that? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to respond to some of these issues?

6.14
THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the two honourable Members of Parliament who have raised these issues. As you are aware, on 28th July, we declared an outbreak of Ebola in Uganda, specifically in Kibaale District. Following that, we put an alert for the whole country and we encouraged the population to report any suspicious cases that resemble Ebola cases. We also listed down the signs and symptoms that are likely to present as Ebola haemorrhagic fever which include fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, sore throat, measles-like rash, red eyes and bloody discharge from the orifices. So, because of this wide range of the case dimension, we have been receiving very many alert cases, which we are happy about because we do not want to miss any case in the countryside. 

I want to say that we will follow up the two cases that have been reported in Mayuge and Kyenjojo very closely. Already, the samples from Buluba Hospital have been received at the Uganda Virus Research Institute. Usually, it takes 24 hours to run the test and then another 24 hours for confirmation, because we want to be very certain. However, as soon as we get these results, we will let the honourable member know and also the community.

I am also glad to report that we had received very many alert cases from different districts of Mbarara, Amuria, Ntungamo and other parts of the country but so far, all the tests we have carried out outside Kibaale have been negative. So, for now, we only have the Ebola outbreak confirmed in Kibaale District. 

I also want to take this opportunity to update members that when we have suspected cases like the case was in Buluba, we take every precaution and take care of that patient. If they unfortunately die, we also take all the necessary precautions because at that time we have not yet confirmed whether it is Ebola or not. 

Also at this point, we will not encourage the body to be exhumed since we do not know what we are dealing with. We have promised that we will take up this case as I said. We will contain the panic and also assure the people of Mayuge and Kyenjojo and the whole country that we will handle this situation. So far, it is under control.

Mr Speaker, allow me take this opportunity to also update the House on the general situation of the outbreak. So far, we have accumulated cases totalling to 60 and out of these, only six are confirmed Ebola cases. The rest have been alert cases that we have been informed about. By yesterday, we still had only 16 deaths from Ebola and 30 admissions in Kibaale. I am also happy to announce that we have so far discharged a total of 29 people and these ones were watched and followed up for 21 days. They had no symptoms and their specimens were negative. So, they have been discharged and many more are getting better. 

On Saturday, 4th of this month, I visited the place and also visited the ward where the cases are admitted and only three of them are critical. The rest, I am happy to report, are well and doing fine. This morning, even the three that were critical, I am glad to report that a lot of improvement has been registered. So, I urge the honourable Members of Parliament and also the country at large to stay calm as we are doing everything possible to contain the infection. 

Two of the health workers in Kibaale were referred using an ambulance to Mulago. Unfortunately, one of them, the clinical officer, died on 20th July but this was before we confirmed that we were dealing with Ebola. At that time, the medical superintendent referred her as a case of fever of unknown origin because the laboratory tests could not confirm any bacterial infection. 

The second case was a midwife in one of the private clinics in Kibaale. We discovered her after tracing the contacts. She had previously handled two of the persons who died as Ebola suspects in Kibaale. Her blood samples for what we call the IGM and IGG were positive for Ebola but the PCR was negative. So now we are handling her as a case of somebody recovering from the Ebola infection and she has been isolated and is also being followed closely. None of the contacts in Mulago has fallen sick so far and we are following them very closely. Mr Speaker, this is the update we have for the House today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

6.21
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance in regard to the computerisation process that is on-going in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Whereas it is a very good process having land titles within the ambit of Buganda region and having blocks and plots in other areas entered into the computer, we people serving as advocates and lawyers are sincerely having a very big problem. The real estate dealers are having the same problem. Financial institutions that register mortgages and caveats are having a similar problem. Uganda Revenue Authority, who levy revenues, are also having a similar problem. Our clientele as lawyers, selfishly I would say, are having problems. 

Why are they having these problems? You find that this process started with the blocks in Kibuga but unfortunately, I do not know why within the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development they came up with the decision to have all land titles from Wakiso, Masaka, Kibuga, Mawokota and all those done at the same time. This has brought about a lag in the day-to-day business of advocates, in the day-to-day business of financial institutions, and it is giving leeway to bad practices, and some lawyers are taking advantage.

A case in point was at Kajjansi in Nakigalala where because of such practices that are on-going within the Ministry of Lands, people were evacuated from an area, and they were more than 100 families. They were beaten and evicted. All this is happening because of what is at Ministry of Lands. 

We call upon the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and all his technical staff to come up with a statement on what is really going on. You lodge a caveat and it is not registered after five months; are you going to protect your client’s interests? So it has been an on-going process. Can the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development come up with a thorough statement on how we, as advocates of all courts of judicature, are going to operate in such a scenario; how financial institutions are going to protect their interests where mortgages and caveats are registered after a very long period. 

When you are working on issues that touch land transactions, the matter of time is of required importance. So, we call upon the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to come up and give a very good statement on what is really going on and when he expects to have this project complete, because it has become a never ending song.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter raised by the honourable member is clear and the honourable minister is here.

6.24
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the honourable member for raising this matter. First of all, I must say that we are sorry for the inconvenience that many of us have suffered as a result of the various undertakings in the Ministry of Lands in order to computerise land registration, not only at headquarters but all over the country.
It has taken a bit of time but I would like to request that I be given an opportunity to come here and provide a clear update in regard to the various stages that we have gone through, what we are doing right now and what still remains to be done in order to realise full computerisation of the land registry.

We have made a lot of progress. The equipment has arrived in the country, and it is true the scanning should have been phased, but that was not done in the manner that it should have been done. However, I will be able to provide a clear explanation and remedial arrangements so that all of us are not hurt in the process. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think meanwhile you are preparing for that statement you need to take some interventions to deal with the actual things that are going wrong while we wait for this particular statement.

Honourable members, I thank you very much for sitting up to this time. By last week, we should have adjourned for committees to allow them handle all the budgetary issues and ministerial policy statements and also handle business that has come from the Opposition in the relation to the ministerial policy statements provided by the Government. The timeframe for passing all these reports and the proposals and recommendations of the committee, which culminates into the passing of the Appropriations Bill, should be by the 31st of this month.

My earlier communication and directives on the operations of committees still stands. Standing committees, the order still stands that they should cease, with the exception of those that have been excluded from this rule to allow them finish with some other urgent business. We need to give the committees full time operation to allow them complete the public hearings according to the guidelines provided. Accordingly, we expect that the committees should complete public hearings by the 20th to 21st and by 24th all the reports should be submitted to the Office of the Clerk for reproduction. The House will resume debate on these policy statements from Monday 27th from 10 O’clock. This will allow ample time for all the committees to finalise their work. 

Last year, we were given the indication that reports were going to be ready by the 26th but by the 29th, no committee was ready with any report and we ran into a crisis. We have given you ample time; by the 24th, all the chairpersons of the committees should file their copies of their reports for reproduction with the Clerk. That will take about four days for reproduction and on Monday 27th at 10 O’clock we will begin the debate on those statements. We will start with the statement from the shadow minister of finance to open the process of those debates.

This House therefore is accordingly adjourned to Monday, 27 August 2012 at 10 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.29 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 27 August 2012 at 10 a.m.)

